LITTLE RIVER-ACADEMY, TEXAS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Local legislation current through Ordinance 110923A, passed 11-9-2023
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   CITY STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.18   Altering or tampering with code
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Little River-Academy,
Texas, shall be designated as the Code of Little River-Academy and may be so
cited.
Statutory reference:
   Authority of municipality to codify ordinances, see Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code,
Chapter 53
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the
following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of
the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires and act to
be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (B)   Except as provided above, or by law or implication required, the same
rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Little River-
Academy, Texas.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COUNTY. Bell County, Texas.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Texas.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in a section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this municipality exercising the powers, duties
or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this municipality for the transaction of all
municipal business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of that act or the giving of that notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   (A)   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication, including, but not limited to, the following types of ordinances:
      (1)   Any ordinance guaranteeing or promising the payment of money for
the municipality or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the municipality
or any evidence of the municipality’s indebtedness;
      (2)   Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for an annual
budget or prescribing salaries for municipal officers and employees;
      (3)   Any ordinance annexing territory to the municipality or
discontinuing territory as a part of the municipality;
      (4)   Any ordinance designating or otherwise relating to municipal
depositories;
      (5)   Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right;
      (6)   Any ordinance approving, prescribing or otherwise relating to rates
to be charged by private utility companies;
      (7)   Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any
contract or agreement;
      (8)   Any ordinance accepting, dedicating, vacating or otherwise relating
to any easement; and
      (9)   Any ordinance establishing or amending the zoning designation of
land.
   (B)   All such ordinances mentioned in division (A) above are hereby
recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set
out at length herein.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force,
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, § 54.001) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-1985)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
         § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
            This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection
or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
         Statutory reference:
            Inspection of public records, see Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, §§ 552.001
et seq.
§ 10.18 ALTERING OR TAMPERING WITH CODE.
   It shall be an offense for any unauthorized person to change or amend, by
addition or deletion, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or delete
pages or portions thereof, or to alter or to tamper with this code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause a law of the city to be misrepresented
thereby.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or whenever in the code or ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of
this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by:
      (1)   A fine not to exceed $2,000 in all cases arising under municipal
ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning and public health and sanitation;
      (2)   A fine not to exceed $4,000 for violation of laws or city
ordinances regulating dumping of refuse; or
      (3)   A fine not to exceed $500 in all other cases; provided, however,
that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same
or a similar offense under the laws of the state.
   (B)   Each day any violation of this code or of any ordinance shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that any such violation is
designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, the nuisance may be
summarily abated in accordance with state and local law.
Statutory reference:
   Municipal penalties, see Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, § 54.001
   Nuisance abatement, see Tex. Loc. Govt’ Code, § 217.002
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   Metes and bounds
§ 11.01 METES AND BOUNDS.
   The incorporation limits of the city is as follows.
   Being a portion of the Maximo Moreno 11 League Grant lying in and situated
in Bell County, Texas, and being one tract more particularly described as
follows.
   Beginning in the northwest corner of the Schalenbeck and Pritchard tract as
described in Volume 992, Page 134 of the deed records of Bell County, Texas;
said starting point also being the centerline of Pondelily Road at the curve
where it begins to bear S57°37’E; thence along the west line of said tract
S18°44’W, 323.6 feet and continuing along that line S19°9’W, 760.5 feet to the
southwest corner; thence S71°E along a straight line that encompasses the south
line of the Schalenbeck and Pritchard tract, crossing the J.C. Glover tract as
described in Volume 920, Page 165 of the deed records of Bell County, Texas,
crossing the W. Wilson tract as described in Volume 1079, Page 173 in the deed
records of Bell County, Texas; crossing the A.C. Martin tract as described in
Volume 806, Page 92 of the deed records of Bell County, Texas; and crossing
State Highway 95 to the east right-of-way of that highway (also being a point
on the west line of the W. Unberhagen tract as described in Volume 967, Page
263 of the deed records of Bell County, Texas; thence southeasterly along the
beforementioned right-of-way to the southwest corner of said Unberhagen tract;
thence easterly along the south line of that tract to the southeast corner;
thence northeasterly along the Unberhagen east line to the southeast corner of
the E.B. Evans tract as described in Volume 394, Page 567 of the deed records
of Bell County, Texas; thence easterly along an extension of the said E.B.
Evans south line, crossing the C.L. Blaylock tract as described in Volume 317,
Page 617 of the deed records of Bell County, Texas; to a point on the east line
of same tract; thence along said Blaylock east line northeasterly, crossing FM
436 to the north right-of-way of said road; thence northeasterly along the FM
436 north right-of-way to the southeast corner of the G. Johnson tract as
described in Volume 528, Page 481 of the deed records of Bell County, Texas;
thence northerly on the Johnson east line to the northeast corner; thence
westerly to the northwest corner of said Johnson tract; to the most southern
corner of the G. Swaim tract as described in Volume 700, Page 93 of the deed
records of Bell County, Texas; thence westerly 200 feet more or less to an
interior point on the Swaim tract; thence N2°47’W 900.4 feet to the middle
northeast corner of the Swaim tract mentioned before; thence N75°46’W to an
interior point on the said Swaim tract; thence N70°14’E 247.8 feet to the most
northerly northeast corner of the Swaim tract; thence N70°0’W 578.3 feet along
the Swaim north line to a point 500 feet east of the east right-of-way of State
Highway 95; thence northerly along a line that is 500 feet from and parallel to
said Highway 95, crossing the F.S. Walker tract as described in Volume 341,
Page 89 of the deed records of Bell County, Texas; the James Hejl tract as
recorded in Volume 639, Page 452 and Volume 573, Page 118 of the deed records
of Bell County, Texas, and the C.A. Smith tract as described in Volume 573,
Page 586 of the deed records of Bell County, Texas, to a point on the south
line of the D. Phillips South tract as described in Volume 826, Page 125 of the
deed records of Bell County, Texas; thence northerly, cross the Phillips South
tract and a county road to the most southeast corner of the D. Phillips 27.4-
acre north tract (said corner being S71°0’E and 277 feet from the east right-
of-way of Highway 95 on the south line of said 27.4-acre tract and on the west
right-of-way of before mentioned county road); thence northeasterly along said
county road right-of-way to the Phillips 27.4-acre northeast corner; thence
N63°0’W crossing Highway 95 and continuing along same line to a point that is
500 feet from west right-of-way of Highway 95; thence S9°9’W (still 500 feet
and parallel to Highway 95) to an interior point that is 650 feet northeast of
the south line of the O.J. Grossman tract as described in Volume 554, Page 264
of the deed records of Bell County, Texas; thence N71°0’E 1264.4 feet to an
interior point; thence S19°0’W 650 feet to the south line of said O.J. Grossman
tract; thence S71°0’E 1,359 feet to a point; thence southwesterly 500 feet from
and parallel to Highway 95 crossing C.A. Smith tract as described in Volume
573, Page 556 of the deed records of Bell County, Texas, the D.O. Thompson
tract as described in Volume 705, Page 57 and the F.S. Walker tract as
described in Volume 341, Page 89 of the deed records of Bell County, Texas, to
a point on the north line of the KMG, Inc. tract as described in Volume 1366,
Page 893 of the deed records of Bell County, Texas; thence N71°31’W 664 feet to
northwest corner of KMG, Inc. tract; thence southwesterly along the west line
of KMG, Inc. tract to a point 500 feet north of the FM 436 right-of-way; thence
northwesterly along a line that is parallel to and 500 feet from FM 436,
crossing the T.H. Daniels tract as described in Volume 753, Page 387 of the
deed records of Bell County, Texas, to a point on the R.N. Allison 94.66-acre
tract as described in Volume 794, Page 336 of the deed records of Bell County,
Texas; thence northeasterly along the east line of said Allison tract to the
northeast corner; thence northwesterly along the Allison north line to the
northwest corner, said corner also being the northeast corner of Lot #17 of the
North Park Addition as recorded in a plat in Volume 419, Page 532 of the deed
records of Bell County, Texas; thence northwesterly across the north line of
said Lot #17 to a point on the east right-of-way of State Highway 28 (same
highway also being known as Old Highway 95); thence northerly along the Highway
28 east right-of-way to the northwest corner of Lot #21 of the beforementioned
North Park Addition; thence on a straight line that is an extension easterly of
the R.J. Daniels tract as described in Volume 630, Page 202 of the deed records
of Bell County, Texas, cross Highway 28 in a westerly direction, cross the
north line of said Daniels tract, and cross the MKT Railroad to a point on the
west right-of-way of that railroad; thence along the MKT railroad right-of-way
southerly for 600 feet to the north line of the G. Daniels tract as described
in Volume 1166, Page 168, of the deed records; thence northwesterly along the
same Daniels north line to a point that is the intersection of said north line
and the northerly continuation of the west line of the A.S. Stone tract as
described in Volume 584, Page 538 of the deed records of Bell County, Texas,
same point being 750 feet north of and parallel to the north right-of-way of FM
436; thence along the same continuation of the Stone west line southerly 450
feet to a point on that line 300 feet north of FM 436 north right-of-way;
thence on a line northwesterly that is 300 feet north of and parallel to the
north FM 436 right-of-way cross the beforementioned G. Daniels tract and enter
the J. Tomastik first tract as described in Volume 496, Page 608 of the deed
records of Bell County, Texas, to an interior point that is N1°30’W 300 feet of
a point on the south line 1,600 feet southwesterly of the southeast corner of
said Tomastik first tract; thence southerly to a point on the FM 436 north
right-of-way S88°30’W of said southeast corner of Tomastik tract; thence
westerly along FM 436 north right-of-way crossing a county road to the
intersection of said county road west right-of-way and FM 436 north right-of-
way; thence following the county road west right-of-way as it loops
northwesterly, turns more westerly, and turns southerly and becomes the east
right-of-way of that same county road to a point where the said right-of- way
joins again with the north right-of-way of FM 436 (same county road right-of-
way following portions of the north lines of the V. Cortese tract as described
in Volume 945, Page 525 of the deed records of Bell County, Texas, and the H.D.
Hartrick tract as described in Volume 490, Page 617 of the deed records of Bell
County, Texas) as it loops; thence cross FM 436 to south right-of-way; thence
easterly along the FM 436 south right-of-way to the centerline of a creek that
is also the northwest corner of the E.M. Harris triangular tract as described
in Volume 1063, Page 459 of the deed records of Bell County, Texas; thence
southeasterly as the creek meanders to a point that is parallel to and 300 feet
west of the west right-of-way of the Wilson Valley, Little River Road; thence
southwesterly (still 300 feet and parallel to said road) to a point on the J.W.
Watts tract as described in Volume 904, Page 417 of the deed records of Bell
County, Texas, that is 300 feet west of the Wilson Valley - Little River Road
west right-of-way and a continuation of the south line of the C.B. Screws tract
as described in Volume 684, Page 131 of the deed records of Bell County, Texas;
thence S71°E to the said C.B. Screws southeast corner; thence N19°E 213 feet
along said Screws east line to the northeast corner of same tract, being also a
point on the south line of the Brookman Subdivision tract; thence S71°E on said
Brookman south line and the Sunshine Meadows Subdivisions 1 and 2, Volume 1140,
Page 272 and Volume 1352, Page 271 of the deed records of Bell County, Texas,
to a point on the C.T. Goodnight south line as described in Volume 1137, Page
781 of the deed records of Bell County that is 300 feet more or less west of
the west right-of-way of an northerly-southerly road; thence S19°0’W 300 feet
to an interior point on the A.J. Lanham tract as described in Volume 558, Page
314 of the deed records of Bell County, Texas; thence S71°0’E 625 feet to
another interior point on said Lanham tract; thence N16°45’W 1,566 feet to a
point on the south line of the C.H. Buckley tract as described in Volume 730,
Page 585 of the deed records of Bell County Texas, that is 300 feet easterly of
the east right-of-way of the before mentioned northerly-southerly road; thence
easterly along the said Buckley south line to the most southeast corner of the
same Buckley tract, also being the most southerly southwest corner of the T.R.
Russell tract as described in Volume 1000, Page 771 of the deed records of Bell
County, Texas; thence along the said Russell south line to a point that meets
the second northwest corner of the D.G. Jones tract as described in Volume 530,
Page 466 of the deed records of Bell County, Texas; thence on a straight line
from said Jones northwest corner to the southeast corner on the same Jones
tract, said southeast corner being S19°0’W 1,403 feet from centerline of FM
436; thence easterly along a straight line cross the A.J. Lanham tract as
described in Volume 558, Page 314 of the deed records of Bell County, Texas to
beginning, and containing 1,280 acres more or less.
(Ord. passed 8-12-1978)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
      
31.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
      
32.   MUNICIPAL COURT
      
33.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
      
34.   POLICIES AND PLANS
CHAPTER 30: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
   
30.01   Police reserve force
   
30.02   Fire Marshal
Cross-reference:
   Building Official, see
Chapter 151
§ 30.01 POLICE RESERVE FORCE.
   (A)   A police reserve force is hereby established in the city (herein the
“non-paid police force”).
   (B)   (1)   The non-paid police force, an auxiliary police force, shall be
composed of licensed peace officers from the state who hold at least a basic
peace officer’s license. Application for the force shall be processed in
duplicate manner as that of the regular police force. It shall be composed of
not more than ten members. The non-paid police force shall be an entity of the
Police Department. The non-paid force shall be headed by the Chief of Police.
Members of the non-paid police force must adhere to the principles, policies
and beliefs of the paid force with no compensation for their duties.
      (2)   The members of the non-paid police force shall be under the
authority, control and command of the Chief of Police of the city, subject to
all the provisions of ordinances of the city. Members of the non-paid police
force shall be appointed by application process and are considered on probation
for a period of one year from commission date.
   (C)   Each non-paid officer is to be issued an identification card which
shows he or she as a member of the police force. The card is to be signed by
the Chief of Police and must be carried by each member of the non-paid force at
all times. Pursuant to Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, the non-paid officer, commissioned
as a full peace officer, is vested with all the rights and privileges that
accompany peace officer status in the state. Upon termination or separation
from the Department, the non-paid officer is to surrender his or her
identification card and badge of office. There is no expectation of tenure. A
non-paid police officer may be terminated from duty for violation of any of the
policies and procedures of the Police Department or city, and/or failure to log
the minimum hours of time required of a non-paid police officer. A member of
the non-paid police force may resign at any time he or she wishes, however, it
shall be his or her duty to notify the Chief of Police in writing as stated by
policy.
(Ord. 01122023B, passed 1-12-2023)
§ 30.02 FIRE MARSHAL.
   (A)   The office of Fire Marshal is hereby created. Such office shall be
independent of other city departments. The Fire Marshal reports directly to the
Mayor and City Council. Such office shall be filled by appointment by the
Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council, within 30 days after this
section shall take effect. The said Fire Marshal shall be removed only for
cause. He or she shall receive an annual salary of $1, payable in monthly
installments, as full compensation for his or her services.
   (B)   The Fire Marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances
of every fire occurring within this city by which property has been destroyed
or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was
the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within
24 hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The Fire
Marshal shall keep in his or her office a record of all fires, together with
all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and
the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required
by this section.
   (C)   The Fire Marshal, when in his or her opinion further investigation is
necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all
persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in
relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be
reduced to writing; and if he or she shall be of the opinion that there is
evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the
attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal
conduct in connection with such fire, he or she shall cause such person to be
lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them, and shall
furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the
names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him or her, including
a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case.
   (D)   The Fire Marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him
or her to testify in relation to any matter which is by the provisions of this
section a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production
of any book , paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The said Fire Marshal
is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any
persons appearing as witnesses before him or her.
   (E)   Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or
testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of said Fire Marshal, or who fails or
refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under
examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the
proceedings of the Fire Marshal in the matter of said investigation or inquiry,
after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under
investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and it
shall be the duty of the Fire Marshal to cause all such offenders to be
prosecuted. Any person being convicted of any such demeanor shall be fined in a
sum not exceeding $25; provided, however, that any person so convicted shall
have the right of appeal.
   (F)   All investigations held by or under the direction of the Fire Marshal
may, in his or her discretion, be private, and persons other than those
required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation
is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not
allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined.
   (G)   The Fire Marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or
night, when necessary, in the performance of the duties imposed upon him or her
by the provisions of this section, to enter upon and examine any building or
premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises
adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason
and good discretion.
   (H)   The Fire Marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in
any building or property adjacent and without any complaint, shall have a right
at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon
all building and premises within the city, and it shall be his or her duty,
monthly or more often, to enter upon and make or cause to be entered and made,
a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings,
together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he or she shall find any
building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or
dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and
which is so situated as to endanger other buildings of property, or so occupied
that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he or she
shall find an improper or dangerous arrangements of stoves, ranges, furnaces or
other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues and
pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of
lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives,
compounds, petroleum, gasolene, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable
products, ashes, combustible, inflammable and refuse materials, or other
conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote
fire or create conditions dangerous to the firefighters or occupants, he or she
shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be
forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of said building or premises;
provided, however, that if said owner or occupant deems himself or herself
aggrieved by such order, he or she may, within five days, appeal to the Mayor,
who shall investigate the cause of the complaint and unless by his or her
authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be
forthwith complied with by said owner of occupant. At the end of each month,
the Fire Marshal shall report to the State Fire Marshal all existing hazardous
conditions, together with separate report on each fire in the city during the
month.
(Ord. 05-80, passed 12-1-1980)
CHAPTER 31: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
   
31.01   Eastern Central Texas Sub-Regional Planning Commission
   
31.02   County Board of Health
§ 31.01 EASTERN CENTRAL TEXAS SUB-REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Authorization. The following actions are hereby authorized.
      (1)   The creation of a commission pursuant to Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code,
Chapter 391, to be known as the Eastern Central Texas Sub-Regional Planning
Commission (the “ECTSPC”) is authorized and approved.
      (2)   The city limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be included
with the Commission’s jurisdiction.
      (3)   The Mayor, and his or her designees, are authorized to take all
steps necessary or required under Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, Chapter 391, to
establish the ECTSPC, including cooperating with other municipalities of less
than 20,000 east of IH-35 and governmental units effected by the plans of such
municipalities.
   (B)   Purpose. The ECTSPCs goal is to coordinate with governmental units
sharing similar needs to plan for the rapidly expanding population of the state
and the unique needs of governmental units east of IH-35. Municipalities of
less than 20,000 population east of IH-35, have a culture carrying forward the
rural values of the state which requires consideration in planning for
development which impacts the unique character of the municipalities and the
other governmental units touching or effected by the municipalities joining
ECTSPC. The ECTSPC is intended to plan for the development of the sub-region
and make recommendations concerning major thoroughfares, streets, traffic and
transportation studies, bridges, parks, recreation sites, public utilities,
land use, water supply, sanitation facilities, drainage, public buildings,
population density, open spaces and other items relating to ECTSPCs general
purposes. The general purpose of governmental units participating in ECTSPC is
to:
      (1)   Join and cooperate to improve the health, safety and general
welfare of their residents; and
      (2)   Plan for the future development of communities and effected areas
within the sub-region
so that:
         (a)   The planning of transportation systems is improved;
         (b)   Adequate street, utility, health, educational, recreational and
other essential facilities are provided as the communities develop and the
areas within the sub-region grow;
         (c)   The needs of agriculture, business and industry are recognized;
         (d)   Healthful surrounding for family life in residential areas are
provided;
         (e)   Historical and cultural values are preserved; and
         (f)   The efficient and economical us of public funds is commensurate
with the growth of the communities and areas within the sub-region.
(Ord. 89-07, passed 8-9-2007)
§ 31.02 COUNTY BOARD OF HEALTH.
   (A)   A member shall be nominated and appointed to the County Board of
Health.
   (B)   The nominated member shall provide city representation to the Board of
Health on health matters as set forth by Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Article 4436-A1.
   (C)   Such member shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council for a
period of three years.
   (D)   Upon the death, resignation or removal of the said member of the
County Board of Health, the city shall nominate and appoint a successor as a
member of the Board who shall then hold his or her membership until he or she
shall resign or be removed from said Board. In the event that the best interest
of the city may require the removal of the member of the Board, his or her
removal shall be effected by the appointment of his or her successor by
unanimous vote of the City Council.
   (E)   No salary or compensation of any sort shall be paid to the members of
the County Board of Health for their services.
(Res. passed - -)
CHAPTER 32: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
   
32.01   Established
   
32.02   Jurisdiction
   
32.03   Municipal Judge
   
32.04   Clerk of Court
   
32.05   Fines and court costs
   
32.06   Local rules
   
32.07   City Attorney to represent city
   
32.08   Cases to be tried in open court
   
32.09   City employee not to represent defendant
§ 32.01 ESTABLISHED.
   Under state law, a municipal court is established under Tex. Gov’t Code,
Chapter 29. The Municipal Court shall have the full powers as set forth in Tex.
Gov’t Code, Chapter 29, as amended from time to time. The City Council may
prescribe such additional rules as are not inconsistent with the law creating
the Municipal Court, or in conflict with the general laws of the state.
(Ord. 51221, passed 5-12-2021)
§ 32.02 JURISDICTION.
   The Municipal Court shall have concurrent jurisdiction within the limits of
the city, in criminal matters, with the courts of the justices of the peace, as
is provided by statutes of the state. The rules of procedure for justice courts
and the rules of evidence, as provided by the state statutes for the county
court, shall be the rules of procedure and laws governing the different
subjects tried in the Municipal Court.
(Ord. 51221, passed 5-12-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Court procedures, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Chapter 45
   Evidence, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Article 4.15
   Generally, see Tex. Gov’t Code, § 29.003 and Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Article
4.14
§ 32.03 MUNICIPAL JUDGE.
   (A)   Council to appoint. The office of Judge of the Municipal Court shall
be filled by appointment by the Council. The Judge shall be at least 18 years
of age and shall not have been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral
turpitude.
   (B)   Duties. The Judge of the Municipal Court shall perform the duties as
prescribed by the laws of the state. The Judge shall be responsible for setting
the time for the trial of cases.
   (C)   Term of appointment; compensation. The Judge shall be appointed for a
term of office running concurrently with that of the Mayor. He or she shall
receive such compensation as the Council shall fix by ordinance or resolution,
and shall furnish such surety bond as may be required by the Council, the
premium to be paid by the city.
(Ord. 51221, passed 5-12-2021)
§ 32.04 CLERK OF COURT.
   The City Secretary, or other person appointed by the Council, shall be ex
officio Clerk of the Council and is hereby authorized to appoint a deputy with
the same powers as the Secretary. The ex officio Clerk shall hold office during
his or her term as City Secretary, or as otherwise prescribed by the City
Council. The Clerk shall keep minutes of the proceedings of the Municipal
Court, issue all process and generally perform the duties of the clerk of a
county court, as prescribed by law for a county clerk insofar as the same may
be applicable. It shall be the further duty of the Clerk to make a monthly
report of all fines and collections and the disposition of all cases, and file
the same with the Council.
(Ord. 51221, passed 5-12-2021)
§ 32.05 FINES AND COURT COSTS.
   (A)   Fines. The fines imposed in the Municipal Court may be the same as are
prescribed for like offenses by the penal statutes of the state, but shall
never be greater. Where any offense is covered solely and alone by ordinances
of the city, such ordinance shall control. All fines assessed by the Municipal
Court shall be paid to the Clerk of the Municipal Court or some officer
designated by her to receive the same.
   (B)   Fines and punishment. The Court is authorized to establish policies
and procedures for setting and assessing fines that are consistent with the
appropriate policies and procedures set forth by the state in the Tex. Code of
Criminal Procedure and applicable to the particular offense alleged. Punishment
and fines may be assessed and include all remedies available under the state
law for the particular offense alleged fines and punishment under any ordinance
of the city shall be set forth in the ordinance and include any additional
remedies that would be available under state law.
   (C)   Clerk may tax costs. The Clerk of the Municipal Court may tax costs in
each case the same as is allowed in the justices’ courts of this state to the
Justice of the Peace and County Attorney and the constable for like services.
Such costs and fines may be collected by the Clerk and turned into the city
treasury, taking the receipt of such treasurer for the same.
(Ord. 51221, passed 5-12-2021)
§ 32.06 LOCAL RULES.
   The Judge may from time to time adopt local rules and procedures for
administration of the Court which are not inconsistent with the procedural
requirements of the state.
(Ord. 51221, passed 5-12-2021)
§ 32.07 CITY ATTORNEY TO REPRESENT CITY.
   The City Attorney, either in person or by deputy, shall as required by the
City Council from time to time, represent the city in the prosecution of each
and every complaint, and for such representation there may be taxed and
collected as cost by the Clerk of the Municipal Court the same fees as are
allowed in a like case to the County Attorney by the state statutes. Such fees,
when collected, are to be paid to the City Secretary by the Clerk of the
Municipal Court.
(Ord. 51221, passed 5-12-2021)
§ 32.08 CASES TO BE TRIED IN OPEN COURT.
   All cases coming before the Municipal Court shall be tried and disposed of
in open court.
(Ord. 51221, passed 5-12-2021)
§ 32.09 CITY EMPLOYEE NOT TO REPRESENT DEFENDANT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who receives a salary form the city to
be in any way, directly or indirectly, interested in the defense of any person
charged with the violation of any ordinance of the city or any of the criminal
laws of the state, except so far as may be necessary, to give evidence on
behalf of persons so charged with violating any of such ordinances or criminal
laws.
(Ord. 51221, passed 5-12-2021) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 33: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
   
33.01   Bingo games tax
   
33.02   Authorized signers on all accounts
§ 33.01 BINGO GAMES TAX.
   Pursuant to Tex. Tax Code, Article 179d, there is hereby imposed a 2% gross
receipts tax on the conduct of bingo games held within the city.
(Ord. 05-82, passed 5-13-1982)
§ 33.02 AUTHORIZED SIGNERS ON ALL ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   Authority to designate signatories. The City Council shall, by this
section, designate the parties who are authorized to sign for withdrawals and
to sign checks and other negotiable instruments on behalf of the city, for city
bank accounts with the Cadence Bank. This section shall be provided to the
official depository within 48 hours of any changes of designated parties. Any
modifications, addendums or additions thereto shall be recognized by the
official depository only upon duly signed resolution in a form similar to this
section fully executed by the Mayor and attested to by the City Secretary.
   (B)   Authorized signatories.
      (1)   Cadence Bank (also referred to herein as the “Bank”) is authorized
to recognize the signature of the following individuals as signatories for all
accounts for the city with Cadence Bank as set forth in this section:
         (a)   Mayor;
         (b)   Mayor Pro-Tem; and
         (c)   Police Chief.
      (2)   The signature of any one of the above designated signatories must
be countersigned by the signature of the Mayor.
   (C)   Designation of authorized signatories. The Mayor and the city
employees identified in division (B) above are hereby designated as the
authorized signatories for all accounts for the city with Cadence Bank, and
such designations as set forth in this section, shall be effective immediately
and shall continue in effect until another is so designated or such
designations are otherwise changed.
(Res. 060823, passed 6-8-2023)
CHAPTER 34: POLICIES AND PLANS
Section
Generally
   
34.01   Personnel policy
   
34.02   Public records policy
   
34.03   National Incident Management System
Investment Policy
   
34.15   Purpose
   
34.16   Scope
   
34.17   Definitions
   
34.18   Objectives
   
34.19   Responsibility and control
   
34.20   Reporting
   
34.21   Investment portfolio
   
34.22   Selection of brokers/dealers
   
34.23   Safekeeping and custody of insurance or collateral
   
34.24   Investment policy adoption
   
34.25   Investment strategy
GENERALLY
§ 34.01 PERSONNEL POLICY.
   The personnel policy is hereby adopted by reference. A full copy of the
policy can be found in the City Secretary’s office.
(Ord. 1-6-21, passed 1-6-2021)
§ 34.02 PUBLIC RECORDS POLICY.
   (A)   Definition. All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs,
sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media or other
information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and
regardless of whether public access to it is open, or restricted under the laws
of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or
employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby
declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained and
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this section or authorized by
it and in no other manner.
   (B)   Records declared public property.
      (1)   All records as defined in division (A) above are hereby declared to
be the property of the city. No official or employee of the city has, by virtue
of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even
though he or she may have developed or compiled them.
      (2)   The unauthorized destruction, removal from files or use of such
records is prohibited.
   (C)   Policy. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide
for efficient, economical and effective controls over the creation,
distribution, organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all records of
this office through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the
management of records from creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent
with the requirements of the Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code and accepted records
management practice.
   (D)   Records management officer. The City Secretary will serve as records
management officer for the city as provided by law and will ensure that the
maintenance, destruction, electronic storage or other disposition of the
records of this office are carried out in accordance with the requirements of
the Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code.
   (E)   Records control schedules. In lieu of establishing record control
schedules, the records management officer of the city, with the approval of the
City Council, shall see that all records of the city previously described in
this section will be kept permanently on file in the city hall.
(Ord. 1-95, passed 1-12-1995)
§ 34.03 NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM.
   The National Incident Management System dated March 1, 2004 is hereby
adopted by reference. A full copy of the plan can be found in the City
Secretary’s office.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 8-11-2005)
INVESTMENT POLICY
§ 34.15 PURPOSE.
   It is the policy of the city to invest public funds in a manner which will
provide the highest investment return with the maximum security while meeting
the daily cash flow demands of the city and conforming to all state and local
statutes governing the investment of public funds, including the Public Funds
Investment Act as adopted and codified in Tex. Gov’t Code, Chapter 2256, and
subsequent amendments thereto.
(Res. 04132023A, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 34.16 SCOPE.
   This subchapter applies to all transactions involving the financial assets
and related activity for all the foregoing funds. However, this policy does not
apply to the assets administered for the benefit of the city by outside
agencies under deferred compensation or retirement programs. The funds to which
this policy applies are accounted for in the city’s comprehensive annual
financial report (CAFR) and include:
   (A)   General fund;
   (B)   Special revenue funds;
   (C)   Debt service funds;
   (D)   Capital project funds;
   (E)   Enterprise funds;
   (F)   Trust and agency funds; and
   (G)   Any new fund created by the legislative body unless specifically
exempted.
(Res. 04132023A, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 34.17 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENCIES. Federal agency securities.
   ASKED. Price at which securities are offered.
   BID. Price offered for securities.
   BOOK VALUE. The original acquisition cost of an investment, plus or minus
the accrued amortization or accretion.
   BROKER. A broker brings buyers and sellers together for a commission paid by
the initiator of the transaction or by both sides; he or she does not position.
In the money market, BROKERS are active in markets in which banks buy and sell
money and in interdealer markets.
   CAPITAL RATIO. Indebtedness covers all money owed to a firm, including
margin loans and commitments to purchase securities, one reason new public
issues are spread among members of underwriting syndicates. Liquid capital
includes cash and assets easily converted into cash.
   CERTIFICATE OF DEPOSIT (CD). A time deposit with a specific maturity
evidenced by a certificate. Large-denomination CDs are typically negotiable.
   COLLATERAL. Securities, evidence of deposit or other property which a
borrower pledges to secure repayment of a loan. Also refers to securities
pledged by a bank to secure deposits of public monies.
   COMPREHENSIVE ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORT (CAFR). Official annual report for the
city which includes five combined statements and basic financial statements for
each individual fund and account group prepared in conformity with GAAP.
   COUPON. The annual rate of interest that a bond’s issuer promises to pay the
bondholder on the bond’s face value and a certificate attached to a bond
evidencing interest due on a payment date.
   DEALER. As opposed to a broker, acts as a principal in all transactions,
buying and selling for his or her own account.
   DEBENTURE. A bond secured only by the general credit of the issuer.
   DELIVERY vs PAYMENT. There are two methods of delivery of securities:
DELIVERY vs PAYMENT and delivery versus receipt (also called free). DELIVERY vs
PAYMENT is delivery of securities with an exchange of money for the securities.
Delivery vs receipt is delivery of securities with an exchange of a signed
receipt for the securities.
   DISCOUNT. The difference between the cost price of a security and its value
at maturity when quoted at lower than face value. A security selling below
original offering price shortly after sale also is considered to be at a
DISCOUNT.
   DISCOUNT SECURITIES. Non-interest bearing money market instruments that are
issued at a discount and redeemed at maturity for full face value, such as,
U.S. Treasury bills.
   DIVERSIFICATION. Dividing investment funds among a variety of securities
offering independent returns.
   FEDERAL CREDIT AGENCIES. Agencies of the federal government set up to supply
credit to various classes of institutions and individuals, such as, savings and
loans, small business firms, students, farmers, farm cooperatives and
exporters.
   FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION (FDIC). A federal agency that insures
bank deposits, currently up to $100,000 per deposit.
   FEDERAL FUNDS RATE. The rate of interest at which federal funds are traded.
This RATE is currently pegged by the Federal Reserve through open-market
operations.
   FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANKS (FHLB). The institutions that regulate and lend to
savings and loan associations. The FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANKS play a role
analogous to that played by the federal reserve banks vis-a-vis member
commercial banks.
   FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION (FNMA). Like GNMA, was chartered under
the Federal National Mortgage Association Act in 1938. FNMA is a federal
corporation working under the auspices of the Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD). It is the largest single provider of residential mortgage
funds in the United States. Fannie Mae, as the corporation is called, is a
private stockholder-owned corporation. The corporation’s purchases include a
variety of adjustable mortgages and second loans in addition to fixed-rate
mortgages. FNMAs securities are also highly liquid and widely accepted. FNMA
assumes and guarantees that all security holders will receive timely payment of
principal and interest.
   FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE (FOMC). Consists of seven members of the
Federal
Reserve Board and five of the 12 Federal Reserve Bank presidents. The President
of the New York Federal Reserve Bank is a permanent member, while the other
presidents serve on a rotating basis. The COMMITTEE periodically meets to set
Federal Reserve guidelines regarding purchases and sales of government
securities in the open-market as a means of influencing the volume of bank
credit and money.
   FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM. The central bank of the United States created by
Congress and consisting of a seven-member Board of Governors in Washington,
D.C., 12 regional banks and about 5,700 commercial banks that are members of
the system.
   GOVERNMENT NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION (GNMA or GINNIE MAE). Securities
guaranteed by GNMA and issued by mortgage bankers, commercial banks, savings
and loan associations, and other institutions. Security holder is protected by
full faith and credit of the U.S. government. GINNIE MAE securities are backed
by FHA, VA or FMHM mortgages. The term pass-throughs is often used to describe
GINNIE MAES.
   LIQUIDITY. A liquid asset is one that can be converted easily and rapidly
into cash without a substantial loss of value. In the money market, a security
is said to be LIQUID if the spread between bid and asked prices is narrow and
reasonable size that can be done at those quotes.
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT POOL (LGIP). Aggregate of all funds from
political subdivisions that are placed in the custody of the State Treasurer
for investment and reinvestment.
   MARKET VALUE. The current face or par value of an investment, multiplied by
the net selling price of the security as quoted by a recognized market pricing
source quoted on the valuation date.
   MASTER REPURCHASE AGREEMENT. To protect investors, many public investors
will request that repurchase agreements be preceded by a MASTER REPURCHASE
AGREEMENT between the investor and the financial institution or dealer. The
MASTER AGREEMENT should define the nature of the transaction, identify the
relationship between the parties, establish normal practices regarding
ownership and custody of the collateral securities during the term of the
investment, provide remedies in the case of default by either party and clarify
issues of ownership. The MASTER REPURCHASE AGREEMENT protects the investor by
eliminating the uncertainty of ownership and hence, allowing investors to
liquidate collateral if a bank or dealer defaults during the term of the
AGREEMENT.
   MATURITY. Date on which the principal or stated value of an investment
becomes due and payable.
   MONEY MARKET. Market in which short-term debt instruments (bills, commercial
paper, bankers’ acceptance and the like) are issued and traded.
   OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS. Purchases and sales of government and certain other
securities in the open market by the New York Federal Reserve Bank as directed
by the FOMC in order to influence the volume of money and credit; sales have
the opposite effect. OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS are the Federal Reserve’s most
important and most flexible monetary policy tool.
   PORTFOLIO. Collection of securities held by an investor.
   PRIMARY DEALER. Group of government securities dealers that submit daily
reports of market activity and positions and monthly financial statements to
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and are subject to its informal oversight.
PRIMARY DEALERS include the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC),
registered securities broker-dealers, banks and a few unregulated firms.
   PRUDENT PERSON RULE. An investment standard. Investments shall be made with
judgment and care, under circumstances then prevailing, which persons of
prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in the management of their own
affairs, not for speculation, but for investment, considering the probable
safety of their own capital as well as the probable income to be derived.
   QUALIFIED PUBLIC DEPOSITORIES. A financial institution which does not claim
exemption from the payment of any sales or compensating use or ad valorem taxes
under the laws of this state, which has segregated for the benefit of the
commission eligible collateral having a value of not less than its maximum
liability and which has been approved by the Public Deposit Protection
Commission to hold public deposits.
   QUALIFIED REPRESENTATIVE. A person holding a position with a business
organization, who is authorized to act on behalf of the business organization
and who is one of the following:
      (1)   For a business organization doing business regulated by or
registered with a securities commission, a person who is registered under the
rules of the National Association of Securities Dealers;
      (2)   For a state or federal bank, savings bank or state or federal
credit union, a member of the loan committee for the bank or branch of the
bank, or a person authorized by corporate resolution to act on behalf of and
bind the banking institution;
      (3)   For an investment pool, the person authorized by the elected
official or board with authority to administer the activities of the investment
pool and to sign the written instrument on behalf of the investment pool; or
      (4)   For an investment management firm registered under the Investment
Advisers Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. §§ 80b-1 et seq.) or, if not subject to
registration under that Act, registered with the State Securities Board, a
person who is an officer or principal of the investment management firm.
   RATE OF RETURN. The yield obtainable on a security based on its purchase
price or its current market price. This may be amortized yield to maturity on a
bond or the current income return.
   REPURCHASE AGREEMENT (RP or REPO). A holder of securities sells these
securities to an investor with an agreement to repurchase them at fixed price
on a fixed date. The security buyer in effect lends the seller money for the
period of the agreement are structured to compensate him or her for this.
Dealers use RP extensively to finance their positions. Exception is when the
fed is said to be doing RP, it is lending money, that is, increasing bank
reserves.
   SAFEKEEPING. Service to customers rendered by banks for a fee whereby
securities and valuables of all types and descriptions are held in the bank’s
vaults for protection.
   SEC RULE 15C3-1. See UNIFORM NET CAPITAL RULE.
   SECONDARY MARKET. A market made for the purchase and sale of outstanding
issues following the initial distribution.
   SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION. Agency created by Congress to protect
investors in securities transactions by administering securities legislation.
   TREASURY BILLS. Non-interest bearing discount security issued by the U.S.
Treasury to finance the national debt. Most bills are issued to mature in three
months, six months or one year.
   TREASURY BOND. Long-term U.S. Treasury securities having initial maturities
of more than ten years.
   TREASURY NOTES. Intermediate-term coupon bearing U.S. Treasury securities
having initial maturities from one to ten years.
   UNIFORM NET CAPITAL RULE. Securities and Exchange Commission requirement
that member firms as well as non-member broker-dealers in securities maintain a
maximum ratio of indebtedness to liquid capital of 15 to one; also called net
capital rule and net capital ratio. Indebtedness covers all money owed to a
firm, including margin loans and commitments to purchase securities, one reason
new public issues are spread among members of underwriting syndicates. Liquid
capital includes cash and assets easily converted into cash.
   YIELD. Rate of annual income return on an investment, expressed as a
percentage.
      (1)   Income YIELD is obtained by dividing the current dollar income by
the current market price of the security.
      (2)   Net YIELD or YIELD to maturity is the current income yield minus
any premium above par or plus any discount from par in purchase price, with the
adjustment spread over the period from the date of purchase to the date of
maturity of the bond.
(Res. 04132023A, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 34.18 OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   The city shall manage and invest its cash with four objectives,
listed in order of priority: safety, liquidity, yield and public trust. The
safety of the principal invested always remains the primary objective. All
investments shall be designed and managed in a manner responsive to the public
trust and consistent with state and local law.
      (2)   The city shall maintain a comprehensive cash management program
which includes collection of accounts receivable, vendor payment in accordance
with invoice terms and prudent investment of available cash. Cash management is
defined as the process of managing monies in order to ensure maximum cash
availability and maximum yield on short-term investment of pooled idle cash.
   (B)   Safety. The primary objective of the city’s investment activity is the
preservation of capital in the overall portfolio. Each investment transaction
shall be conducted in a manner to avoid capital losses, whether they be from
securities defaults or erosion of market value.
   (C)   Liquidity. The city’s investment portfolio shall be structured such
that the city is able to meet all operating requirements which might be
reasonably anticipated.
   (D)   Yield. The city’s cash management portfolio shall be designed with the
objective of attaining a rate of return throughout budgetary and economic
cycles, commensurate with the city’s investment risk constraints and the cash
flow characteristics of the portfolio.
   (E)   Public trust. All participants in the city’s investment process shall
seek to act responsibly as custodians of the public trust. Investment officials
shall avoid any transactions which might impair public confidence in the city’s
ability to govern effectively.
(Res. 04132023A, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 34.19 RESPONSIBILITY AND CONTROL.
   (A)   Delegation of authority and training.
      (1)   The City Manager is designated as investment officer of the city
and is responsible for investment decisions and activities. The investment
officer shall exercise the judgement and care, under prevailing circumstances,
that a prudent person would exercise in the management of the person’s own
affairs. This does not prohibit an investment officer from using the entity’s
employees or the services of a contractor of the entity to aid the investment
officer in the execution of the officer’s duties under this policy.
      (2)   The investment officer shall attend at least one training session
containing at least ten hours of instruction relating to the officer’s
responsibility under the Public Funds Investment Act as adopted and codified in
Tex. Gov’t Code, Chapter 2256, within 12 months after assuming duties. An
investment officer also shall attend a training session not less than once in a
two-year period and may receive not less than ten hours of instruction relating
to investment responsibilities from an independent source approved by the City
Council. Such training must include education in investment controls, security
risks, strategy risks, market risks, diversification of investment portfolio
and compliance with state law pertaining to investment of public funds.
   (B)   Internal controls. 
      (1)   The City Manager is responsible for establishing and maintaining an
internal control structure designed to ensure that the assets of the entity are
protected from loss, theft or misuse. The internal control structure shall be
designed to provide reasonable assurance that these objectives are met. The
concept of reasonable assurance recognizes that the cost of a control should
not exceed the benefits likely to be derived; and the valuation of costs and
benefits requires estimates and judgements by management.
      (2)   Accordingly, the City Manager shall establish a process for annual
independent review by an external auditor to assure compliance with policies
and procedures.
   (C)   Prudence. 
      (1)   The standard of prudence to be applied by the investment officer
shall be the prudent investor rule which states: “Investments shall be made
with judgement and care, under circumstances then prevailing, which persons of
prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in the management of their own
affairs, not for speculation, but for investment, considering the probable
safety of their capital as well as the probable income to be derived.” In
determining whether an officer has exercised prudence with respect to
investment decision, the determination shall be made taking into consideration:
         (a)   The investment of all funds, or funds under the city’s control,
over which the officer had responsibility rather than a consideration as to the
prudence of a single investment; and
         (b)   Whether the investment decision was consistent with the
investment policy of the city.
      (2)   The investment officer, acting in accordance with written
procedures and exercising due diligence, shall not be held personally
responsible for a specific security’s credit risk or market price changes;
provided that these deviations are reported immediately and that appropriate
action is taken to control adverse developments.
   (D)   Ethics and conflicts.
      (1)   City staff involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activity that could conflict with proper execution of the
investment program, or which could impair the ability to make impartial
investment decisions. City staff shall disclose to the City Manager any
material financial interests in financial institutions that conduct business
with the city; and they shall further disclose any large personal financial/
investment positions that could be related to the performance of the city’s
portfolio, particularly with regard to timing of purchases and sales.
      (2)   An investment officer of the city who has a personal business
relationship, as defined by state law, with a business organization offering to
engage in an investment transaction with the city shall file a statement
disclosing that personal business interest. An investment officer who is
related within the second degree by affinity or consanguinity to an individual
seeking to sell an investment to the city shall file a statement disclosing
that relationship. A statement required under this division (D) must be filed
with the State Ethics Commission and the governing body of the entity.
(Res. 04132023A, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 34.20 REPORTING.
   (A)   Quarterly reporting. The City Manager shall submit a signed quarterly
investment report that summarizes investment transactions for all funds covered
under this policy for the preceding reporting period.
   (B)   Methods. The quarterly investment report shall be prepared in a manner
which will allow the city to ascertain whether investment activities during the
reporting period have conformed to the investment policy. The report must:
      (1)   Describe in detail the investment position of the city on the date
of the report;
      (2)   Be prepared by investment officer of the city;
      (3)   Be signed by investment officer of the city;
      (4)   Contain a summary statement prepared in compliance with generally
accepted accounting principles of each pooled fund group that states the:
         (a)   Beginning market value for the reporting period;
         (b)   Additions and changes to the market value during the period; and
         (c)   Ending market value for the period.
      (5)   State the book value and market value of each separately invested
asset at the beginning and end of the reporting period by the type of asset and
fund type invested that has a maturity date;
      (6)   State the maturity date of each separately invested asset that has
a maturity date; and
      (7)   State the account or fund or pooled group fund in the city for
which each individual investment was acquired.
   (C)   Annual audit. If the city invests in other than money market mutual
funds, investment pools or accounts offered by its depository bank in the form
of certificates of deposit, money market accounts or similar accounts, the
above required reports prepared by the investment officers shall be formally
reviewed at least annually by an independent auditor, and the result of the
review shall be reported to the City Council by that auditor.
(Res. 04132023A, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 34.21 INVESTMENT PORTFOLIO.
   (A)   Investments. Assets of the city may be invested in the following
instruments; provided, however, that at no time shall assets of the city be
invested in any instrument or security not authorized for investment under the
Public Funds Investment Act as adopted and codified in Tex. Gov’t Code, Chapter
2256, as amended.
   (B)   Authorized instruments. The following instruments are hereby
authorized:
      (1)   Obligations, including letters of credit, of the United States of
America, its agencies and instrumentalities;
      (2)   Direct obligations of the state and agencies thereof;
      (3)   Other obligations, the principal of and interest on which are
unconditionally guaranteed by the state and having received a rating of not
less than A or its equivalent;
      (4)   Obligations of the states, agencies thereof, counties, cities and
other political subdivisions of any state having been rated as investment
quality by a nationally recognized investment rating firm and having received a
rating of not less than A or its equivalent;
      (5)   Certificates of deposit of state and national banks or savings
banks domiciled in the state, or state or federal credit unions in the state,
guaranteed or insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance or its successor or
secured by obligations described divisions (B)(1) through (B)(4) above, which
are intended to include all direct agency or instrumentally issued mortgage-
backed securities rated AAA by a nationally recognized rating agency, or by
Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Article 2529b-1, and that have a market value of not less
than the principal amount of the certificates;
      (6)   Fully collateralized direct repurchase agreements with a defined
termination date secured by obligations of the United States or its agencies
and instrumentalities pledged with a third-party, selected by the City Manager,
other than an agency for the pledgor. Repurchase agreements must be purchased
through a primary government securities dealer, as defined by the Federal
Reserve, or a bank domiciled in the state. Investments in this type of
instrument may not exceed $20,000 in total;
      (7)   Joint pools of political subdivisions in the state which invest in
instruments and follow practices allowed by current law; and
      (8)   (a)   No-load money market mutual funds registered with and
regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission with a dollar-weighted
average stated maturity of 90 or fewer days and included in its investment
objectives the maintenance of a stable net asset value of $1 for each share.
         (b)   No-load mutual funds are also authorized if they are registered
with the Securities and Exchange Commission, have an average weighted maturity
of less than two years, and are invested in obligations authorized in this
section. Such mutual funds must be continuously rated as to investment quality
by at least one nationally recognized investment rating firm of not less than
AAA or its equivalent and conform to the requirements set forth in current law
relating to the eligibility of investment pools to receive and invest funds of
investing entities.
   (C)   Unauthorized instruments. The city’s authorized investments options
are more restrictive than those allowed by state law. State law specifically
prohibits investment in the following investments securities:
      (1)   Obligations whose payment represents the coupon payments on the
outstanding principal balance of the underlying mortgage-backed security
collateral and pays no principal;
      (2)   Obligations whose payment represents the principal stream of cash
flow from the underlying mortgage-backed security collateral and bears no
interest;
      (3)   Collateralized mortgage obligations that have a stated final
maturity date of more than ten years; or
      (4)   Collateralized mortgage obligations, the interest rate of which is
determined by an index that adjusts opposite to the changes in a market index.
   (D)   Existing investments. The city is not required to liquidate
investments that were authorized investments at the time of purchase.
   (E)   Holding period.
      (1)   The city intends to match the holding periods of investment funds
with liquidity needs of the city. In no case will the average maturity of
investments of the city’s operating funds exceed two and one-half years. This
dollar weighted average maturity will be calculated using the stated final
maturity dates of each security.
      (2)   Investments in all funds shall be managed in such a way that the
market price losses resulting from interest rate volatility would be offset by
coupon income and current income received from the volume of the portfolio
during a 12-month period.
   (F)   Risk and diversification. The city recognizes that investment risks
can result from issuer defaults, market price changes or various technical
complications leading to temporary illiquidity. Risk is controlled through
portfolio diversification which shall be achieved by the following general
guidelines.
      (1)   Risk of issuer default is controlled by limiting investments to
those instruments allowed by the Public Funds Investment Act as adopted and
codified in Tex. Gov’t Code, Chapter 2256, which are described herein.
      (2)   Risk of market price changes shall be controlled by avoiding over-
concentration of assets in a specific maturity sector and avoidance of over-
concentration of assets in specific instruments other than U.S. Treasury
securities and insured or collateralized certificates of deposits.
      (3)   Risk of illiquidity due to technical complications shall be
controlled by selection of securities dealers as described herein.
      (4)   The following maximum limits, by instrument, are established for
the city’s total portfolio:
         (a)   U.S. Treasury securities: 100%;
         (b)   Certificates of deposit: 100%;
         (c)   Agencies and instrumentalities: 90%;
         (d)   Authorized pools: 50%;
         (e)   Other obligations described: 90%;
         (f)   Repurchase agreements: 5%; and
         (g)   Money market mutual funds: 50%.
   (G)   Monitoring. Market price of investments acquired with public funds
will be based on values listed in The Wall Street Journal.
   (H)   Settlement. All transactions, except investment pool funds and mutual
funds, are to be settled on a delivery versus payment basis.
(Res. 04132023A, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 34.22 SELECTION OF BROKERS/DEALERS.
   (A)   The City Council shall at least annually review, revise and adopt a
list of qualified brokers authorized to engage in investment transactions with
the city.
   (B)   All financial institutions and broker/dealers who desire to become
qualified for investment transactions must supply the following as appropriate:
      (1)   Certification of having read the city’s investment policy signed by
a qualified representative of the organization; and
      (2)   Acknowledgement that the organization has implemented reasonable
procedures and controls in an effort to preclude investment transactions
conducted between the city and the organization that are not authorized by the
city’s investment policy, except to the extent that this authorization is
dependent on an analysis of the makeup of the entity’s entire portfolio or
requires an interpretation of subjective investment standards.
(Res. 04132023A, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 34.23 SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY OF INSURANCE OR COLLATERAL.
   All deposits and investments of city funds in certificates of deposit or
repurchase agreements shall be secured by pledged collateral. In order to
anticipate market changes and provide a level of security for all funds, the
collateralization level will be 102% of market value of principal and accrued
interest on the deposits or investments less an amount insured by the FDIC or
FSLIC. Evidence of the pledged collateral shall be maintained by the City
Manager or a third-party financial institution. Repurchase agreements shall be
documented by a specific agreement noting the collateral pledge in each
agreement. Collateral shall be reviewed monthly to assure that the market value
of the pledged securities is adequate. Collateral will be registered in the
city’s name and held by third-party custodian.
   (A)   Safekeeping agreement. Collateral pledged to secure deposits of the
city shall be held by a safekeeping agreement which clearly defines the
procedural steps for gaining access to the collateral should the city determine
that the city’s funds are in jeopardy. The safekeeping institution, or trustee,
shall be the Federal Reserve Bank or an institution not affiliated with the
firm pledging the collateral.
   (B)   Collateral defined. The city shall accept only the following
securities as collateral:
      (1)   FDIC insurance coverage;
      (2)   Direct obligations of the United States of America, its agencies
and instrumentalities, which have a liquid market with a readily determinable
market value;
      (3)   Obligations the principal and interest on which are unconditionally
guaranteed or insured by the state; or
      (4)   A bond of the state, or of a county, city or other political
subdivision of the state, having been rated as investment grade (investment
rating no less than A or its equivalent) by a nationally recognized rating
agency with a remaining maturity of ten years or less.
   (C)   Subject to audit. All collateral shall be subject to inspection and
audit by the City Manager or the city’s independent auditors.
(Res. 04132023A, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 34.24 INVESTMENT POLICY ADOPTION.
   The city investment policy shall be adopted by resolution of the City
Council. The policy and strategies shall be reviewed on an annual basis by the
City Council. The City Council shall adopt a written instrument by rule, order,
ordinance or resolution stating that is has reviewed the investment policy and
investment strategies; and the written instrument so adopted shall record any
changes made to either the investment policy or investment strategies.
(Res. 04132023A, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 34.25 INVESTMENT STRATEGY.
   The city maintains portfolios which utilize four specific investment
strategy considerations designed to address the unique characteristics of the
fund groups represented in the portfolios.
   (A)   Investment strategies for governmental and proprietary fund types,
other than debt service and capital projects funds, will have as their primary
objective to assure that anticipated cash flows are matched with adequate
investment liquidity. The secondary objective is to create a portfolio
structure which will experience minimal volatility during economic cycles. This
may be accomplished by purchasing high quality, short- to medium-term
securities which will complement each other in a laddered or barbell maturity
structure.
   (B)   Investment strategies for debt service funds shall have as the primary
objective the ability to generate a dependable revenue stream to the
appropriate debt service fund from securities with a low degree of volatility.
Securities should be of high quality and, except as may be required by the bond
ordinance specific to an individual issue of short- to intermediate-term
maturities.
   (C)   Investment strategies for capital projects or special purpose fund
portfolios will have as their primary objective to assure that anticipated cash
flows are matched with adequate investment liquidity. These portfolios should
include at least 10% in highly liquid securities to allow for flexibility and
unanticipated project outlays. The stated final maturity dates of securities
held should not exceed the estimated project completion date.
   (D)   For pooled fund groups, the maximum dollar-weighted average maturity
allowed, based on the stated maturity date, for the portfolio may not exceed
365 days.
(Res. 04132023A, passed 4-13-2023)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   WASTE DISPOSAL
CHAPTER 50: WASTE DISPOSAL
Section
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Licensing procedure
   
50.03   License requirement
   
50.04   Termination of license
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COUNCIL. The governing body of the city.
   CUSTOMER. Any person who pays to have their residential waste picked up and
disposed of.
   DISPOSAL. The collection and transportation of waste to an authorized
landfill.
   GRANTEE. The person, company, partnership or organization who has been
licensed under this chapter.
   LICENSE. The document issued by the city granting the barer to right to
operate in the city.
   LICENSING FEE. The annual fee paid by grantee for the right to operate.
   RESIDENTIAL. All non-commercial or agricultural property.
   WASTE. Any organic or inorganic matter.
(Ord. 01-91, passed 12-12-1991)
§ 50.02 LICENSING PROCEDURE.
   The city hereby sets forth the following regulations and requirements to be
licensed to operate a residential waste disposal service within the city.
   (A)   Applicant must pay a yearly licensing fee of $15.
   (B)   Each license must be renewed annually prior to January each year.
   (C)   Applicant must agree not to use any truck, trailer or any vehicle that
exceeds 12,000 pounds when loaded on any street maintained by the city.
   (D)   Applicant must agree not to use any truck, trailer or any other
vehicle with more than one axle on streets maintained by the city.
   (E)   Applicant must have a valid sales tax number.
   (F)   Applicant must sign license agreement when applying.
(Ord. 01-91, passed 12-12-1991)
§ 50.03 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   No person, corporation or other entity shall operate a residential waste
disposal service in the city without a license granted under the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 01-91, passed 12-12-1991) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 TERMINATION OF LICENSE.
   The city has the right to terminate any licensee’s license immediately if
the licensee uses any truck, trailer or any other vehicle on streets maintained
by the city that exceeds 12,000 pounds when loaded or that has more than one
rear axle. In the event of violation, the city may terminate a license after
giving five days’ notice. The City Council may, but has no obligation to
reinstate any previously terminated license, providing the violation which led
to the termination has been corrected.
(Ord. 01-91, passed 12-12-1991)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of this chapter shall be a Class C misdemeanor.
(Ord. 01-91, passed 12-12-1991)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
70.01   Exhibition of acceleration
   
70.02   Speed limits
   
70.03   State Uniform Act regulating Civil Statutes
   
70.04   Motor assisted scooters
   
70.05   Trucks
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 EXHIBITION OF ACCELERATION.
   (A)   Authority. This section is adopted pursuant to the authority given to
the city by the police powers and authority of the city under state law, the
State Constitution and the codes and the laws of the state, including, but not
limited to, Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, Chapter 51 and Tex. Transportation Code,
Chapter 311.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EXHIBITION OF ACCELERATION. The acceleration of a motor vehicle in such a
manner as to cause the tire of the vehicle to excessively spin or lose
traction, or the sudden deceleration of a motor vehicle in such a manner as to
lose traction.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor driven or propelled vehicle as defined in Tex.
Transportation Code, Chapter 501.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access, and includes, but is not is not limited to, streets,
highways, parking lots and common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment
houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.
      UNSAFE EXHIBITION. Intentionally causing the front wheel or wheels of a
motor vehicle to leave the driving surface (commonly known as a “wheelie”), or
otherwise driving a motor vehicle in an unreasonable and unsafe manner under
the conditions at the time.
   (C)   Prohibited acts.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for an operator of a motor vehicle to engage
in any exhibition of acceleration, as defined in division (B) above, in a
public place within the city.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for an operator of a motor vehicle to engage
in any unsafe exhibition, as defined in division (B) above, in any public place
within the city.
   (D)   Enforcement. The Chief of Police and members of the Police Department,
both regular and reserve officers, are empowered and authorized to enforce the
terms of this section.
(Ord. 110923A, passed 11-9-2023) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.02 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   General. The maximum reasonable prudent safe speed on all streets and
highways within the city limits shall be, from and after the adoption of this
section is 25 mph.
   (B)   Exceptions. The section of highway beginning at the west city limit on
FM 436 and proceeding to the east for a distance of 1.099 miles, the speed
limit shall be 55 mph, then for a distance of 1.628 miles, the speed limit
shall be 45 mph except for time of ingress and egress to the school a 0.282-
mile portion of the zone shall be 30 mph, then for a distance of 0.349 miles
(to the east city limit), the speed limit shall be 35 mph, is hereby regulated
as to the speed of motor vehicles traveling within said section, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed
so declared in this section when signs are in place giving notice thereof.
(Ord. passed 12-14-1995; Ord. 05-08, passed 12-8-2005) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 STATE UNIFORM ACT REGULATING CIVIL STATUTES.
   There is adopted the Texas Civil Statutes which shall be controlling in the
regulation of traffic in the city.
(Ord. 05-08, passed 12-8-2005)
§ 70.04 MOTOR ASSISTED SCOOTERS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MOTOR ASSISTED SCOOTER. The same meaning assigned by Tex. Transportation
Code, § 551.301(2), as it exists or may be amended, and includes any self-
propelled devise with at least two wheels in contact with the ground during
operation, a braking system capable of stopping the device under typical
operating conditions, a gas or electric powered motor 40 cubic centimeters or
less, a deck or seat designed to allow a person to stand or sit while operating
the device and the ability to be propelled by human power alone.
      PUBLIC WAY or PUBLIC PROPERTY. Real property owned, leased or controlled
by a political subdivision of the state, a governmental entity or agency, or
similar entity, or any property that is publicly-owned or maintained or
dedicated to public use, including, but not limited to, a path, trail,
sidewalk, alley, street or highway and a public park facility.
   (B)   Restrictions upon the use of motor assisted scooters.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride a motor
assisted scooter other than during the period from 30 minutes after sunrise
until 30 minutes before sunset.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride a motor
assisted scooter unless he or she is wearing a proper helmet.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride a motor
assisted scooter on any paths, jogging trails, walkways and other trails
located within any public park or on trails, paths and walkways designed as
part of a public pathway system within the city.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride a motor
assisted scooter upon or crossing over Highway 95 and/or Highway 436 in the
city.
(Ord. 05-01, passed 3-10-2005) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.05 TRUCKS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. A vehicle of the Fire Department, Police or
Sheriff’s Department; public or private ambulance service; a volunteer fire
department or emergency medical services department; the city; or any utility
providing public utility service.
      TRUCK. Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property or drawing other vehicles or trailers that carry
property with an overall gross weight, including truck and/or trailer(s) of
26,000 pounds or greater (26,000 GVW), or with a gross cargo weight rating of
26,000 pounds or greater.
      VEHICLE. Every motor-driven device, in, upon or which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn, upon a roadway.
   (B)   Closing of portion of city street to truck traffic.
      (1)   Portion of city street closed to truck traffic. The portion of
Wilson Valley Road beginning at the intersection of Wilson Valley Road and FM
436 and south along Wilson Valley Road for one-half mile to the city limit
boundaries as marked by the city limits sign is closed to truck traffic.
      (2)   No trucks permitted on the portion of city street closed to truck
traffic. A person shall not operate a truck on the portion of the city street
within the city unless the operation of the truck at the time and place is
expressly made exempt under this section.
   (C)   Placement of signs. The city shall erect or cause to be placed and
erected signs marking the portion of the city street closed to truck traffic
under this section.
   (D)   Exemptions. 
      (1)   The following vehicles are exempt from the terms of this section
while engaged in the listed activity:
         (a)   Authorized emergency vehicles responding to or from, or at the
scene of an emergency call;
         (b)   Any vehicles, including trucks being used to provide a municipal
services whose use on the portion of the city street closed under this section
is necessary to provide municipal services;
         (c)   Any vehicles used or operated by the city or the city’s
franchisee conducting approved franchisee related activities including
installation, repair or maintenance of any public service or utility such as
telephone, electricity, cable television, gas, water or sewer line; and
         (d)   Recreational vehicles and personal trailers. As used in this
section, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES shall mean a vehicular portable structure
designed for a temporary or short-term occupancy for travel, recreational or
vacation usage. PERSONAL TRAILERS shall mean a wheeled device made to be hauled
by a motor vehicle upon a road or highway, including, but not limited to, a
horse trailer or similar device used to transport animals, car or motorcycle
trailer, boat trailer, lawn equipment trailer or a gooseneck trailer.
      (2)   Trucks prohibited on the street under this section may be permitted
on the portion of the street closed under this section only where it is
necessary to load or unload merchandise at an address located on the portion of
the street closed under this section, or if the owner of such truck resides at
such an address or location. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this
section that the person so charged show by competent evidence that:
         (a)   The truck was making a delivery or pickup at a specific location
located on the portion of the portion of the street closed under this section;
or
         (b)   The operator of the truck resides at an address located on the
portion of the street closed under this section, and the truck, without
trailer, is to be parked and stored temporarily at the operator’s residence.
   (E)   Enforcement. The Chief of Police and members of the Police Department,
both regular and reserve officers, are empowered to enforce this section.
   (F)   Damage to public property. It shall be unlawful for any person to
knowingly or intentionally damage public streets, roadways or any sign posted
by the city under the authority of this section. Any person who knowingly,
intentionally or recklessly causes damage to public streets, roadways or to any
sign posted under the authority of this section, shall be responsible for the
costs of repair.
(Ord. 21-3-1, passed 3-1-2021) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A) Whenever in this title an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in this title the doing of
any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful,
and no specific penalty is otherwise provided in this code of ordinances, the
violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500; provided, however,
that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same
or a similar offense of the laws of the state.
   (B)   Each day a violation of this code or of any ordinance continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Parking within 15 feet of fire hydrants
   
71.02   Parking on shoulder areas of FM 436 prohibited
   
71.03   No parking zone within 300 feet of FM 436 and Highway 95
   
71.04   Parking at entrance to grammar school
   
71.05   Privileged parking of the Tex. Transportation Code
§ 71.01 PARKING WITHIN 15 FEET OF FIRE HYDRANTS.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park
such vehicle within 15 feet of any fire hydrant, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic-control sign or signal.
(Ord. 06-80, passed 12-11-1980) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.02 PARKING ON SHOULDER AREAS OF FM 436 PROHIBITED.
   When signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park or leave
standing a motor vehicle at any time, except during emergencies, on the
pavement or shoulder areas on either side of FM 436 within the city limits.
(Ord. 01-88, passed 3-10-1988) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.03 NO PARKING ZONE WITHIN 300 FEET OF FM 436 AND HIGHWAY 95.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      VEHICLE. Any device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may
be transported upon a highway.
   (B)   No parking zone. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave
any vehicle in the highway right-of-way within 300 feet of the intersection of
FM 436 and Highway 95 in the city.
(Ord. 01-99, passed 11-11-1999) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.04 PARKING AT ENTRANCE TO GRAMMAR SCHOOL.
   It shall hereafter be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to
park such vehicle from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Monday through Friday inclusive
from the north entrance of the grammar school to the south end of Bumblebee
Street.
(Ord. 02-85, passed 12-12-1985) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.05 PRIVILEGED PARKING OF THE TEX. TRANSPORTATION CODE.
   (A)   Declaring applicability of Tex. Transportation Code, Chapter 681. The
provisions of Tex. Transportation Code, Chapter 681 shall hereby be effective
and applicable to both public parking and also privately-owned parking areas,
specifically with respect to the designation of areas that are reserved for
parking by persons with disabilities.
   (B)   Specific applicability to private property. The provisions of Tex.
Transportation Code, Chapter 681 shall apply to a parking space or area for
persons with disabilities on private property that is designated in compliance
with the identification requirements referred to in Tex. Transportation Code, §
681.009(b).
(Ord. 10-02, passed 8-12-2010)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
92.   FIRE REGULATIONS
      
93.   HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.001   Definitions
   
90.002   Purpose
   
90.003   Enforcement
   
90.004   Powers and duties of citizens
   
90.005   Prima facie evidence
   
90.006   Abatement of conditions not complying with chapter
   
90.007   Compliance with chapter not relief from compliance with other
regulations
   
90.008   Fees
Rabies Control
   
90.020   Vaccinations
   
90.021   Vaccination of impounded animals
   
90.022   Proof of vaccination; dismissal; fee
   
90.023   Counterfeiting; destruction of tags or certificates
   
90.024   Reporting rabid animals or rabies exposure
   
90.025   Animal bites and scratch reports; submission to quarantine
   
90.026   Contents of required reports
   
90.027   Quarantine and release
   
90.028   Submission of head for rabies diagnosis
   
90.029   Cost of quarantine or rabies diagnosis
   
90.030   Enforcement
Kennels and Multiple Animal Ownership
   
90.045   Permit required
   
90.046   Permits
   
90.047   Kennel facility requirements
   
90.048   Private breeder disposal permit
   
90.049   Multi-animal ownership
   
90.050   Revocation or suspension of kennel or multi-animal ownership permits
   
90.051   Commercial sales permit
General Regulations
   
90.065   Identification for animals
   
90.066   Animals at large; running at large
   
90.067   Animal in heat
   
90.068   Animal defecation prohibited in certain areas
   
90.069   Wild animals or wildlife
   
90.070   Nuisance animals
   
90.071   Honeybees
   
90.072   Pens and coops; location
   
90.073   Livestock
   
90.074   Storage of feed
   
90.075   Other restrictions
   
90.076   Animals held on complaint
   
90.077   Removal of animals from confinement
Animal Protection Provisions
   
90.090   Animals in motor vehicles
   
90.091   Duty of motor vehicle operator to report accident involving animals
   
90.092   Unlawful restraint of dog; exceptions
   
90.093   Selling dyed animals
   
90.094   Giving animals as prizes or inducements
   
90.095   Trapping and shooting
   
90.096   Molesting animals
   
90.097   Pens and enclosures; sanitary requirements; minimum cage size;
overcrowding
   
90.098   Negligent care
   
90.099   Animal in state of pain or suffering
   
90.100   Sale of animals in public place
   
90.101   Animal fights and fighting paraphernalia
   
90.102   Slaughtering of animals
   
90.103   Use of poisonous substances
   
90.104   Cruel treatment
   
90.105   Seizure of cruelly treated animal
   
90.106   Hearing after seizure of a cruelly treated animal
   
90.107   Abandonment
   
90.108   Creating a health hazard
   
90.109   Tampering with traps and equipment
Dangerous Animals
   
90.120   Purpose of subchapter
   
90.121   Dangerous animals
   
90.122   Potentially dangerous animals
   
90.123   Exceptions
   
90.124   Dangerous dogs
   
90.125   Determination of dangerous dog
   
90.126   Hearing and notice regarding dangerous dog
   
90.127   Defense to determination
   
90.128   Disposition of a dangerous dog
   
90.129   Registerable dangerous dog
   
90.130   Determination of a registerable dangerous dog
   
90.131   Notification of declaration of registered dangerous dog
   
90.132   Status of dog on appeal
   
90.133   Defense to determination of registerable dangerous dog
   
90.134   Disposition of a registerable dangerous dog
   
90.135   Requirements for registration and possession of registered dangerous
dog
   
90.136   Attack by registered dangerous dog
   
90.137   Appeal from Municipal Court
   
90.138   Defense to prosecution for violation of registered dangerous dog
   
90.139   Aggressive dogs
   
90.140   Exhibitions of certain animals prohibited
   
90.141   Prohibited animals
   
90.142   Restricted animals
   
90.143   Permit requirements for restricted animal ownership
   
90.144   Violation of permit requirements
   
90.145   Exemptions
   
90.146   Guard dog
Impoundment of Animals
   
90.160   Impoundment generally
   
90.161   Tampering with animal shelter or impoundment vehicle
   
90.162   Redemption of impounded animal
   
90.163   Disposition of impounded dogs and cats
   
90.164   Adoption of animals
   
90.165   Estray and other livestock
   
90.166   Impoundment of estray and livestock
   
90.167   Advertisement of impounded estray and livestock
   
90.168   Recovery by owner
   
90.169   Sale of estray and livestock
   
90.170   Recovery by owner of sale proceeds
   
90.171   Use of estray and livestock
   
90.172   Death or escape of estray and livestock
 
   
90.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABUSE. To mistreat through intent to ABUSE or reckless neglect of any animal
in a manner that causes or is likely to cause stress or physical injury or as
otherwise stated in this chapter.
   ANIMAL. Any living creature other than a Homo sapiens. Unless indicated
otherwise, the term shall include livestock, fowl, reptiles, amphibians and
wildlife, as well as dogs, cats and other creatures commonly owned as pets. The
term shall exclude a fish and other small aquarium maintained creatures, not
herein prohibited or restricted, where the owner only maintains no more than
three aquariums having a total capacity of 90 gallons.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER, ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY or ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICE.
The officer or office of the city designated as the person primarily
responsible for the enforcement of regulations regarding animals, including the
officers of the Police Department.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. A facility designated by the City Council to be used for the
impoundment of animals taken up by the animal control officers.
   ANIMAL WELFARE GROUP. An association or non-profit corporation which has as
one of its purposes the providing for the welfare and/or protection of animals
of any kind.
   AUTHORITY. The local rabies control authority as defined in this section.
   BOARDING KENNEL. An establishment used for the purpose of boarding pet
animals on a temporary basis and where no animals are bred or sold.
   BRAND. A mark made on the skin of any animal which indicates the ownership
of the animal; typically used with livestock.
   BREEDING KENNEL. An establishment designed or used for the boarding, selling
or breeding of animals where more than three dogs and two cats or three cats
and two dogs or a combination of five other animals are to be boarded, sold or
bred. Grooming parlors where no animals are to be kept overnight and veterinary
clinics shall not be considered KENNELS.
   CAT. The male and the female of any domesticated member of the feline
species of animals.
   CIRCUS or THEATRICAL EXHIBIT. A commercial variety show featuring animal
acts for the public at a fee or a part of a charity.
   DANGEROUS DOG. The same definition as provided for in Tex. Health and Safety
Code, Chapter 822.
   DANGEROUS WILD ANIMAL. Those animals defined as a DANGEROUS WILD ANIMAL
under Tex. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 822, Subchapter E.
   DAY. A workday and shall exclude Saturday, Sunday and city holidays.
   DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES. Where a minimum setback or distance between any
enclosure for an animal from a residence is required, shall mean the most
direct line distance between the two structures, unless otherwise provided.
   DOG. The male and the female of any domesticated member of the canine
species of animal.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal whose physiology has been determined or
manipulated through selective breeding and does not occur naturally in the
wild; any animal which can be vaccinated against rabies with an approved rabies
vaccine; and any animal which has an established rabies quarantine observation
period.
   ESTRAY. Any stray horse, stallion, mare, gelding, filly, colt, mule, jenny,
jack, jennet, hog, sheep, goat, confined and domesticated hares and rabbits or
any species of cattle.
   EXOTIC SPECIES. Any animal or reptile, fish or bird, born or whose natural
habitat is considered to be outside the continental United States, including
non-venomous reptiles and fish.
   FISH. Any of the cold-blooded animals that extract oxygen from water through
the use of gills.
   FOWL. All birds, such as, chickens, turkeys, pheasants, quail, guineas,
geese, ducks, peafowl and other domestic feathered creatures and non-domestic
feathered creatures, regardless of age or sex.
   GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY. An agency or political subdivision of the state or an
agency or department of the federal government.
   HARBOR. The act of keeping and caring for an animal or of providing a
premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter or care for a period of
three days or longer.
   LIVESTOCK. Includes, regardless of age, sex or breed, horses and all equine
species, including mules, donkeys and jackasses; cows and all bovine species;
sheep and all ovine species; llamas; goats and all caprine species; and pigs
and all swine species.
   LOCAL RABIES CONTROL AUTHORITY. The senior animal control officer, or an
officer he or she designates to act in his or her place when he or she is
temporarily unable to act for any reason.
   MARINE ANIMAL. Any animal, other than a mammal or bird, that lives in a
marine environment.
   MULTI-PET OWNER. A person who keeps or harbors more than five cats or dogs
or any combination of five cats and dogs. Puppies and kittens under four months
of age shall not be counted for purposes of this definition.
   NEUTERED. Any animal, male or female, rendered incapable of breeding or
being bred, for example, castration in the male and spaying or ovariectomy in
the female.
   OWNER or PRESUMED OWNER. Any person who has purchased or who owns, keeps,
maintains, harbors or has care, custody or control of one or more animals.
Ownership may be determined by identifying an adult resident of the premises
upon which the animal is kept, maintained, harbored or otherwise resides and
such adult shall constitute the owner of the animal upon such premises. Each
actual resident of the premises shall be the OWNER or PRESUMED OWNER and
charged with responsibility for the animals thereon maintained or harbored.
   PERFORMING ANIMAL. Any spectacle, display, act or event in which animals
perform.
   PERSON. An individual human, partnership, co-partnership firm, company,
limited liability partnership or other partnership or other such company, joint
venture, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, association
or corporation or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives,
agents or assigns.
   POISON. A substance having an inherent harmful property which renders it,
when taken into the system, capable of destroying animal life.
   PREMISES. A definite portion of a legal lot of real estate or land, together
with any appurtenances or buildings.
   PROPER ENCLOSURE. A house or a building, or in the case of a fence or
structure/pen, the fence or structure/pen must be at least four feet in height.
The structure/pen must also have minimum dimensions of five feet by ten feet.
The fence or structure/pen must form an enclosure suitable to prevent entry of
young children and must be locked and secured such that an animal cannot climb,
dig, jump or otherwise escape of its own volition. The ENCLOSURE shall be
securely locked at all times and have secured sides to prevent a dangerous
animal or registered dangerous dog from escaping from the ENCLOSURE. The
structure/pen shall provide protection from the elements for the animal. The
animal control officer may require a fence higher than four feet or require a
secure top and/or a secure bottom to the structure/pen if the need is
demonstrated.
   QUARANTINE. A period of ten days used for observation of a domestic or pet
animal to determine the health status of that animal in relation to the rabies
virus.
   QUARANTINE BY OWNER. An animal owner who quarantines with animal control
officer’s permission under the following conditions:
      (1)   Animal must have current rabies vaccination and be registered with
animal control;
      (2)   Animal must be inside an enclosed structure, such as house or
garage, and must remain there for ten days;
      (3)   If maintained outside, animal must be behind a fence from which it
cannot escape and on a chain from which it cannot break loose or inside a
covered pen or kennel from which it cannot escape. The length of the chain must
prevent the animal from making contact with the fence in which it is kept;
      (4)   Animal must be kept away from other animals and people except those
in the immediate household;
      (5)   Animal may not be removed from corporate city limits while under
quarantine;
      (6)   Owner shall notify animal control officer immediately if animal
becomes sick or displays any behavioral changes;
      (7)   Owner shall not subject the animal to any medical procedure,
without first notifying the animal control officer. This includes any
vaccination;
      (8)   Animal must be examined by a licensed veterinarian by the first day
of home quarantine and again on the final day of quarantine. Owner shall be
responsible for producing proof of the veterinarian examinations;
      (9)   No animal that is at large or unleashed at the time of exposure may
be QUARANTINED BY OWNER; and
      (10)   Owner must allow animal control, with reasonable notice, to view
and confirm the health of the animal during the rabies quarantine period.
   RABIES VACCINATION. The vaccination of a dog, cat or other domestic animal
with an anti-rabies vaccine approved by the State Department of Health and
administered by a veterinarian licensed by the state.
   REGISTERED DANGEROUS DOG. Any dog registered with the city in compliance
with Tex. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 822, Subchapter D, and with §
90.129.
   RESIDENCE. Any place of human habitation at any time, day or night,
including, but not limited to, any single- or multi-family dwelling, church,
school, convalescent center or nursing home.
   RESTRAINED. Any animal secured by a leash, rope or chain of some sort or
confined through fencing or otherwise within the property limits of its owner.
   RESTRICTED ANIMALS. Any individual species and/or subspecies of the
following animals: antelope, lions, tigers, ocelots, cougars, leopards,
cheetahs, jaguars, hyenas, bears, lesser pandas, ferrets born in natural
habitats, binturong, ostriches, emus, miniature pigs, apes or such other non-
domestic species of animal not common to this area.
   RUNNING AT LARGE.
      (1)   Off-premises. 
         (a)   Any animal, except pet cats, which is not restrained by means of
a leash, chain or other physical apparatus of sufficient strength and length to
control the actions of such animal while off-premises; or
         (b)   Any cat which is creating a nuisance off the owner’s property.
      (2)   On-premises. 
         (a)   Any animal, except pet cats, not confined to premises of owner
by a substantial fence of sufficient strength and height to prevent the animal
from escaping therefrom, or secured on the premises by a chain or leash
sufficient in strength to prevent the animal from escaping from premises and so
arranged that the animal will remain upon the premises when the leash is
stretched to full length;
         (b)   An animal intruding upon the property of another person other
than the owners shall be termed at large; or
         (c)   Any animal within a vehicle in a manner that would prevent that
animal’s escape or contact with other persons or animals shall not be deemed at
large.
   SERIOUS INJURY. Bodily injury resulting from severe attack or severe bite
from an animal which produces severe pain, trauma, loss of blood or tissue, and
which requires medical treatment of wounds inflicted by the animal.
   SEVERE ATTACK. An attack in which the animal repeatedly bites or vigorously
shakes its victim, and the victim, or a person intervening, has extreme
difficulty terminating the attack.
   SEVERE BITE. A puncture or laceration made by an animal’s teeth which breaks
the skin, resulting in a degree of trauma which would cause most prudent and
reasonable people to seek medical care for treatment to the wound, without
considerations of rabies prevention alone.
   STRAY ANIMAL. Any animal, of which there is no identifiable owner or
harborer, which is found to be at large within the corporate limits of the
city.
   TAG. A vaccination tag attached to a collar as required by this chapter or
some other permanent identifying device attached to a collar or to an animal.
   TATTOO. A permanent mark which is made on the skin of an animal by
puncturing the skin and inserting indelible color, and which is used to show
ownership.
   UNPROVOKED ATTACK. The animal was not hit, kicked, teased, molested or
struck by a person with an object or part of a person’s body, nor was any part
of the animal’s body pulled, pinched or squeezed by a person.
   VACCINATION. An injection of a rabies vaccine which is approved by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Veterinary Biologics Division, state veterinarian
and administered by a licensed veterinarian or at an approved anti-rabies
clinic.
   VETERINARIAN. Any person duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine by
the State Board of Veterinary Examiners or who is exempt from such licensing.
   WILD ANIMAL or WILDLIFE. Any non-domestic creature (mammal, amphibian,
reptile or fowl) which is of a species which is wild by nature, which can
normally be found in a wild state, and which is not naturally tame or gentle,
or which, because of its size, vicious nature and other characteristics,
constitutes a danger to human life or property including all animals identified
herein as prohibited.
   ZOOLOGICAL PARK or ZOO. Any facility, other than a pet shop or kennel,
displaying or exhibiting one or more species of animals, operated by a person
or under the auspices of a governmental entity.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.002 PURPOSE.
   It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide a safe and healthy
environment within the city for both animals and people. While a person may own
and keep animals within the city, the conduct of those animals and the
conditions that the animals are kept in should be safe and healthy and should
not infringe on the surrounding homes and their inhabitants.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.003 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by animal control
officers, police officers and such other persons as are designated by the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, obstruct,
resist or oppose any animal control officer or other person authorized to
enforce the provisions of this chapter while such person is apprehending an
animal or performing any other duties or investigation. It shall be unlawful to
take or attempt to take any animal from any animal control officer or from any
vehicle used by the officer to transport any animal or to take or attempt to
take any animal from the animal shelter or other kennel or confinement area
used to impound an animal.
   (C)   In all instances of a violation of any provision of this chapter,
whether the animal is impounded or not, the owner or keeper of such animal may
be cited by an officer who has the authority to enforce this chapter for any
violation of this chapter.
   (D)   In the enforcement of this chapter, animal control officers and police
officers shall have the authority to shoot or otherwise disable any animal to
protect themselves, to protect a third person or to protect another animal from
attack or threat of imminent injury or to prevent such animal from enduring
further pain or suffering as a result of disease or injury. They shall also
have the authority to tranquilize or trap any animal, fowl, livestock or
wildlife consistent with humane policies adopted by the animal control office.
   (E)   Unless specifically provided in this chapter, an offense under this
chapter shall not require a culpable mental state. It is the intent of this
chapter to impose strict liability for violation of the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.004 POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITIZENS.
   Any person who finds an animal which he or she does not own on property that
he or she owns or exercises control over or on public property may take control
of said animal if it is running at large (as provided in § 90.066) and may
deliver the animal to an animal control officer, the animal shelter or an
animal emergency medical facility. If the animal is not delivered to an animal
control officer, the animal shelter or an animal emergency medical facility,
the person must report that he or she had taken control of the animal to an
animal control officer or the animal shelter within 72 hours. If animal is
wearing a tag of any kind or has a tattoo, brand or other identifying mark,
that information shall be included in the report to the animal control officer
or animal shelter.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.005 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.
   In any prosecution charging a violation of this chapter, governing the
abuse, neglect or ownership of an animal or failure to license an animal as
herein required, proof that the particular property described in the complaint
was the premises upon which the animal resided, was harbored or maintained and
a violation of any section of this chapter occurred involving said animal,
together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time
of such complaint or at the time when the animal was in violation of this
chapter, the registered owner of such animal or the person with legal rights to
reside on said property, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption
that the registered owner of such animal or the person with legal rights to
reside on said property was the owner of the animal and the person who failed
to comply with the chapter.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.006 ABATEMENT OF CONDITIONS NOT COMPLYING WITH CHAPTER.
   Whenever any premises where animals are kept in an unsanitary conditions, or
the facilities are not in keeping with provisions of this chapter or any other
regulations herein or if any health ordinance or law is not observed, the City
Health Officer or his or her representative, by written notice to the person
responsible for the condition of the premises, may order the abatement of the
conditions which are not in accordance with the ordinance or other regulations,
or conditions which constitute a nuisance. Failure to comply with such order
shall, in addition to any criminal or administrative proceedings, be grounds
for and entitle the city to obtain relief by injunction.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.007 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER NOT RELIEF FROM COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER
REGULATIONS.
   The keeping of any animal in accordance with provisions of this chapter
shall not be construed to authorize the keeping of the same in violation of the
zoning ordinance or any other ordinance of the city.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.008 FEES.
   (A)   The fee schedule attached set forth below shall apply to all animals
within the city limits. In no instance shall the city be required to bear the
costs of any animal that has an owner. The owner shall reimburse the city for
any actual expenses and shall be responsible for all fees set forth. The city
may recover all fees, costs and damages incurred as a result of the animal as
restitution in a criminal proceeding under the provisions of this chapter or
the state statutes in addition to a fine being charged.
   (B)   There is hereby fixed and assessed the following fees to defray the
cost of managing an animal control program and for the protection of the public
health, against the owner or keeper of every animal kept in the city.
      (1)   Standard licensing fees.
 
Neutered dog or cat, 1-time fee   $3
Other animals, 1-time fee         $3
Renewal, per annum                $2
Unneutered dog or cat, 1-time fee $5
 
      (2)   Permits.
Auction                                                         $100
Aviary                                                          $50
Circus                                                          $200
Grooming shop                                                   $50
Guard dog training center                                       $200
Kennel or multi-owner authorized to house fewer than 10 animals $50
Kennel or multi-owner authorized to house 10 to 49 animals      $100
Kennel or multi-owner authorized to house 50 or more animals    $150
Obedience training center                                       $50
Performing animal exhibition                                    $50
Pet shop                                                        $100
Petting zoo                                                     $150
Renewal, per annum fee                                          $5
Riding stable                                                   $100
Zoological park                                                 $200
A permit shall be issued after payment of the applicable fee
 
      (3)   Impoundment fees.
 First Time Second Time Third Time
                                      First Time Second Time Third Time
Fowl or other small animal            $25        $50         $100
Livestock                             $50        $200        $350
Neutered dog or cat                   $45        $90         $200
Unneutered dog or cat                 $45        $150        $300
Zoological and/or circus animal       $100       $200        $500
More than 4 violations by any pet or
combination thereof owned by the same $500 for each impoundment thereafter
person in 3 years or less
An impoundment fee must be paid for each animal captured
 
      (4)   Boarding fees. In addition to the impoundment fee, a boarding fee
must be paid for each animal confined by the animal shelter. Owners must pay
fees established by the animal shelter for the housing and care of the animals
before their animals are released to them.
      (5)   Expenses of animal. In addition to other fees, the owner shall also
pay for any veterinarian or drug fees incurred for the animal(s) while in the
custody of the animal control officer or animal shelter.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
RABIES CONTROL
§ 90.020 VACCINATIONS.
   (A)   All dogs or cats four months of age or older within the city shall be
vaccinated against rabies. Such vaccinations shall be repeated at the intervals
prescribed by rule of the State Department of Health, or its successor.
   (B)   A veterinarian who vaccinates a dog or cat against rabies shall issue
to the owner of such dog or cat a vaccination certificate in a form approved by
the State Department of Health. The veterinarian shall also issue a metal tag
with the veterinarian’s address and the year of the vaccination stamped
thereon. Upon vaccination, the veterinarian shall execute and furnish to the
owner of the dog or cat as evidence thereof, a certificate of vaccination. The
veterinarian shall retain a duplicate copy of the certificate and one copy
shall be filed with the owner. Such certificate shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
vaccinated dog or cat;
      (2)   The date of vaccination;
      (3)   The type of rabies vaccine used;
      (4)   The year and number of the rabies tag; and
      (5)   The breed, age, color and sex of the vaccinated dog or cat.
   (C)   Concurrent with the issuance and delivery of the certificate of
vaccination, the owner of the dog or cat shall cause to be attached to the
collar or harness of the vaccinated animal a metal tag, serially numbered to
correspond with the vaccination certificate number and bearing the year of
issuance.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to own, keep,
possess, harbor or allow to remain upon premises under his or her control any
dog or cat which has not been vaccinated as required herein. Any person
establishing residence within the city shall comply with this subchapter within
ten days of establishing such residency.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.021 VACCINATION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   (A)   After impoundment, all animals which are required to be vaccinated
which are redeemed by an owner from the animal shelter must be vaccinated
against rabies in accordance with the requirements of this subchapter, or the
owner thereof must present a veterinarian’s certificate showing a current
vaccination.
   (B)   In order for an animal not vaccinated in accordance with the
requirements of this subchapter to be released, such owner must sign a
statement giving the name of the owner and the address where the animal is to
be immediately taken and confined and stating that the owner will have the
animal vaccinated in accordance with the requirements of this subchapter.
Within seven days of the release of the animal, a certificate of vaccination
shall be presented to the animal shelter. Failure to present the vaccination
certificate to the animal shelter within the stated time shall be grounds for
the immediate return of the animal to the animal shelter, and such animal may
be destroyed immediately or otherwise disposed of.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.022 PROOF OF VACCINATION; DISMISSAL; FEE.
   The failure of a dog or cat to wear a vaccination tag on a collar shall be
prima facie evidence of the failure to vaccinate the animal as required by this
subchapter. To prove that a dog or cat was vaccinated at the time of the
offense, the owner of the dog or cat must present a copy of the vaccination
certificate issued by the veterinarian that shows the date the vaccination was
administered. The offense shall be dismissed upon verification that the animal
alleged in the offense was vaccinated on the date of the offense with the
payment of a $20 administrative fee.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.023 COUNTERFEITING; DESTRUCTION OF TAGS OR CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly
counterfeit a rabies vaccination tag or certificate or a license.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly
destroy a rabies vaccination tag or certificate.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.024 REPORTING RABID ANIMALS OR RABIES EXPOSURE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of all animal owners, veterinarians, physicians
or any other person to report to the animal control officer all cases of rabies
with which he or she comes in contact or to which his or her attention has been
directed. This report shall be made immediately upon diagnosis or suspicion of
a case of rabies.
   (B)   Any person having knowledge of an animal bite or scratch to an
individual or to another animal by an animal which the person suspects is rabid
shall report that incident to the animal control officer within 24 hours.
   (C)   Every physician or other medical practitioner who treats a person or
persons for any animal bite/scratch that occurred within the city shall within
12 hours report such treatment to the animal control officer giving the name,
age, sex and precise location of the bitten/scratched person or persons and
such other information as the officer or agency may require.
   (D)   Any veterinarian who clinically diagnoses rabies or any person who
suspects rabies in a dog, cat or other domestic or wild animal shall
immediately report the incident to the animal control officer stating precisely
where such animal may be found.
   (E)   If a known suspected rabid animal bites or scratches a domestic
animal, such incident shall also be reported immediately to the animal control
officer.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.025 ANIMAL BITES AND SCRATCH REPORTS; SUBMISSION TO QUARANTINE.
   (A)   Report of victim. Any person who is bitten or scratched by an animal
shall report that fact to the animal control officer within 24 hours. If the
person bitten or scratched is a minor under the age of 17, the parent or
guardian of such minor, if he or she has knowledge of the incident, shall
report that fact to the animal control officer within 24 hours.
   (B)   Report of owner. A person who owns, keeps, harbors or allows an animal
to remain on premises under his or her control and who has knowledge of a bite
shall report to the animal control officer within 24 hours any incident where
such animal bit or scratched any person.
   (C)   Custody. The animal committing the act shall be submitted to the
animal control officer for quarantine. When the local rabies control authority
goes to the premises where the animal that bit or scratched any person is being
kept, the animal control officer may take immediate custody of the animal.
Where suitable arrangements are made, the local rabies control authority may
permit the animal to be transferred to another location for the remainder of
the quarantine period. This duty to submit the animal to quarantine shall apply
to any person who owns, keeps, harbors, has possession of or allows an animal
to remain on premises under his or her control.
   (D)   Observation. Any owned dog or cat having bitten or scratched a person
shall be observed for a period of ten days from the date of the bite. The
procedure and place of observation shall be designated by the investigating
officer or responsible agency in compliance with state law. If the dog or cat
is not confined on the owner’s premises for owner’s quarantine, confinement
shall be by impoundment in the animal shelter, or at a veterinary hospital of
the owner’s choice. Such confinement shall be at the owner’s expense.
   (E)   Strays. Stray dogs and cats, or those animals whose owners cannot be
located shall be confined in the animal shelter for a period of 96 hours and if
unclaimed, may be destroyed and the brain of such animal immediately submitted
to a qualified laboratory for rabies examination at the victim’s expense.
   (F)   Surrender of animal. The owner of any dog or cat that has been
reported to have inflicted a bite on any person shall, on demand, produce the
dog or cat for impoundment, as prescribed in this chapter.
   (G)   Home quarantine. Home quarantine may be allowed only in those
incidents where permitted by state law and agreed to by the animal control
officer. Refusal to produce such dog or cat constitutes a violation of this
section, and each day of such refusal shall constitute a separate and
individual violation.
   (H)   Other animals. Any wild, exotic or dangerous animal that is considered
high risk by state law or regulation and which has bitten or scratched a person
shall be caught and humanely killed and the brain submitted for rabies
examination. Those wild animals which are classified as low risk animals shall
be handled as dictated by state law.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.026 CONTENTS OF REQUIRED REPORTS.
   When an individual is placed under a duty to report an incident in which an
animal has bitten or scratched some person or some animal or to report an
animal known or suspected to be rabid, that report to the animal control
officer shall include, if the person making the report knows, the following
information:
   (A)   The location where the bite or scratch occurred;
   (B)   The location where the animal which committed the act or which is
known or suspected to have rabies or have been exposed to rabies can be
located;
   (C)   The name and address of any person who was bitten or scratched;
   (D)   The name and address of the person who owns, keeps, harbors or has
control over the premises where the animal committing the act normally can be
found; and
   (E)   The names and addresses of the persons who own, keep or harbor any
other animal exposed to rabies can be found.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.027 QUARANTINE AND RELEASE.
    (A)   When an animal is required to be placed in quarantine, the animal
shall be submitted for quarantine at the animal shelter. Only with the prior
approval of the local rabies control authority may the animal be held in
quarantine at any other location.
   (B)   Any animal quarantined shall be held for a period of ten days from the
date of the bite. The animal shall not be released from quarantine until such
release has been approved by the local rabies control authority.
   (C)   Upon release of an animal from quarantine, if the ownership of the
animal is known, such owner has 48 hours to claim the animal. If the ownership
of the animal is unknown, the animal may be disposed of as provided in §
90.163 without waiting for an additional 72 hours.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.028 SUBMISSION OF HEAD FOR RABIES DIAGNOSIS.
   (A)   If the animal biting or scratching a person is a wild animal, the
animal shall be humanely destroyed in such a manner that the brain is not
mutilated. The head shall then be submitted to a laboratory certified by the
State Department of Health for rabies diagnosis.
   (B)   If an animal being quarantined becomes ill, it may be humanely
destroyed in such a manner that the head is not mutilated. The head shall then
be submitted to a laboratory certified by the State Department of Health for
rabies diagnosis. The head of each animal dying while in quarantine shall also
be submitted for rabies diagnosis.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.029 COST OF QUARANTINE OR RABIES DIAGNOSIS.
   (A)   If, at the end of the required quarantine period, a quarantined animal
is found to be free of rabies, the local rabies control authority shall order
the release of the animal to the owner if the rabies vaccination provisions of
this subchapter have been complied with and any impoundment fees have been paid
by such owner.
   (B)   If a head is submitted to the State Department of Health for rabies
diagnosis, the cost of removing the head and shipping it shall be paid by the
owner of the animal.
   (C)   The local rabies control authority may order that all impoundment fees
for the quarantine be paid by the person bitten or scratched if:
      (1)   The animal has a rabies vaccination certificate;
      (2)   The animal was on property under the control of the animal’s owner
when the bite or scratch occurred; and
      (3)   The bite or scratch occurred when the animal was acting to defend
its owner or the property, or after provocation.
   (D)   If the animal is a wild animal, the local rabies control authority may
order that all fees be paid by the person who was bitten or scratched.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.030 ENFORCEMENT.
   For the purposes of discharging the duties imposed by this subchapter and to
enforce its provisions, any peace officer or animal control officer is
empowered to enter upon any premises upon which an animal is kept or harbored
and to demand the exhibition by the owner of such animal or the license for
such animal in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, to include
random city-wide canvassing and checks for compliance with the subchapter. The
owner of any animal is required to produce the license and vaccination
information for each animal in his or her ownership upon demand by an animal
control officer or peace officer.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
KENNELS AND MULTIPLE ANIMAL OWNERSHIP
§ 90.045 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permits shall be required for all kennels and multi-animal owners.
Five or more animals maintained on any one lot or parcel within the city shall
be considered a multi-animal owner or kennel. No person shall maintain, harbor
or care for more than five animals of any species without having obtained a
multi-animal owner or kennel permit, excluding fish.
   (B)   Private breeders shall be issued a private breeder disposal permit in
order to sell or give away any puppies or kittens, on public or private
property within the city limits.
   (C)   Private breeders are not permitted within any lot or parcel located
within any residentially zoned district within the city.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.046 PERMITS.
   (A)   Permits shall be valid for one year from date of issuance. The permit
fee shall be according to the schedule established in §
90.008.
   (B)   No multi-animal or kennel permit shall be issued to permit or allow a
kennel or multi-animal ownership to be located on any lot or parcel located
with any area zoned for residential use.
   (C)   The animal control officer may file an application with the Municipal
Judge to revoke any permit issued under this chapter. The Municipal Judge may
suspend any permit pending a full hearing if such action is determined
reasonably necessary to protect the public health or the safety of any animal.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.047 KENNEL FACILITY REQUIREMENTS.
   Upon inspection of the premises by the animal control officer, the permit
shall be issued if the following conditions are met.
   (A)   The facility must be adequate for the number and type of animals to be
kept.
      (1)   Facility must be of sufficient size as to allow animals to move
about freely. This shall apply to each animal kept. Size of facility shall be
in proportion to the size of the individual animal’s height and weight.
      (2)   Adequate food and water must be provided so that each and all
animals kept shall be maintained in good health and free of malnutrition and/or
dehydration.
      (3)   The premises shall be kept in a sanitary condition and reasonably
free of animal waste, parasites, insects and flies that could be harmful to the
animal’s health and/or to the health of the general public.
   (B)   The animals and the facility must be kept free of odor or stench which
is offensive to a person of ordinary sensibilities.
   (C)   The animals must be maintained in a manner which does not pose a
danger to the health of the animals themselves or to adjacent animals.
   (D)   The animals must not cause noise which is offensive or disturbing to a
person of ordinary sensibilities on adjoining, adjacent or neighboring
premises.
   (E)   The applicant or holder of the permit shall not have been issued
citations for violation of this chapter on two separate occasions, or animals
covered by or to be covered by the permit have not been impounded on two
separate occasions.
   (F)   In the case of a boarding kennel, no animal may be bred or sold
therein.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.048 PRIVATE BREEDER DISPOSAL PERMIT.
   No private breeder may sell or give away any dog, cat or pet animal in the
city limits without a private breeder disposal permit issued by the animal
control officer. Animal control shall determine the basic health of the animals
before a permit is issued.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.049 MULTI-ANIMAL OWNERSHIP.
   All animals to be covered by a multi-animal owner permit shall be kept in a
facility and under the conditions as specified in §
90.047.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.050 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF KENNEL OR MULTI-PET OWNERSHIP PERMITS.
   Any kennel or multi-pet owner permit may be revoked if the owner’s facility
is found to be in violation of any zoning law, health law or any other
applicable ordinance of the city or of the state, or the facility is maintained
in such a manner as to be detrimental to the health, safety or peace of mind of
persons residing in the immediate vicinity.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.051 COMMERCIAL SALES PERMIT.
   (A)   All persons engaged in the commercial sale of any animals, domestic or
otherwise, including, but not limited to, pet stores and stores in which pets
and animals are not the central item of sale within the store, such as
department stores, drugstores and convenience stores, must apply for a
commercial sales permit from the animal control officer. The commercial sales
permit shall be issued; provided the applicant meets all the provisions of this
section. The fee shall be set by the City Council and shall be valid for one
year from the date of issuance. Those persons currently engaged in the selling
of animals in the aforementioned manner are required to apply for the
commercial sales permit immediately. This section shall not be applicable to
persons buying, selling and trading cattle, horses, sheep, goats and similar
livestock within the city that are raised and kept outside of the city in the
course of a farming, ranching or agricultural business or trade; provided that
this section shall be applicable to any business establishment located within
the city and engaged in the buying, selling or trading of livestock for
delivery or holding within the city.
   (B)   Upon inspection of the premises where the animals are to be sold by
the animal control officer, the permit shall be issued if the conditions
specified in §
90.048 are met.
   (C)   The commercial sales permit may be revoked by the animal control
officer if, upon investigation, it is determined that the permit holder has
failed to adhere to any of such conditions. Once the permit has been revoked,
the store whose permit has been revoked may not reapply for a period of six
months and shall not engage in the sale of animals in the manner described in
this section for that period.
   (D)   Upon revocation of the commercial sales permit, the owner of the
animals covered in the revoked permit is to remove those animals from the city
limits within ten days and notify the animal control officer of the location to
which they will be moved. If the owner does not comply with removal of animals
within the ten-day period, the animal control officer shall have the authority
to remove the animals for the purpose of impoundment.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 90.065 IDENTIFICATION FOR ANIMALS.
   Except as provided herein, all animals within the city shall be marked by
some type of identifying license, tag, band, tattoo or brand by which the
animal’s owner can be identified. Animals exempted from this requirement are
mice, rats, rabbits, guineas, hamsters, gerbils, ferrets, fowl and snakes.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.066 ANIMALS AT LARGE; RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   Responsible party. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns,
keeps, harbors or otherwise has control over any animal within the city to
intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence allow or
permit such animal to run or be at large within the city.
   (B)   Cats. The prohibition against an animal running at large shall not
apply to a domestic cat which has been vaccinated as required by this chapter
and which is wearing the required vaccination tags. The prohibition shall apply
to all other cats.
   (C)   Restraint required. An animal shall be considered to be at large if it
is not under the control of its owner by either a leash, chain, cord or other
suitable material attached to a collar or harness, or not restrained on the
property of the owner by a leash, chain, cord or fence. An animal inside a
vehicle parked in a public place or in the open bed of a moving or parked
vehicle in a public place shall be considered to be at large unless it is
restrained in such a manner that it cannot exit the vehicle of its own
volition.
   (D)   Snakes. It shall be unlawful for any person to have a snake in any
park or other public place unless it is within some type of cage, pen or
enclosure.
   (E)   Impoundment. The animal control officer for the city may impound any
animal observed to be at large, whether the animal is on public or private
property, subject to the applicable provisions of the law. If the animal
control officer observes an animal on property which is owned by a person other
than the owner of the animal, and observes the animal return to property of its
owner, the animal control officer may impound the animal or issue a citation
for the animal running at large. In the event the animal is on private property
or property of the animal’s owner the animal control officer, his or her agent,
or peace officer may enter the property, other than a private dwelling for the
purpose of impoundment or issuance of a citation, or both, subject to the
applicable provisions of this chapter. If an animal is at large, or is
reasonably expected to become at large only as a result of or as an incident to
an arrest of the person in control or in possession of the animal, the animal
control officer may impound the animal as authorized in this division (E).
   (F)   Prima facie evidence. Proof that an animal was found at large in
violation of this section, together with proof that the defendant was the owner
of such animal at the time, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the
defendant allowed or permitted the animal to be at large.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.067 ANIMAL IN HEAT.
   (A)   Secured enclosure required. Any unspayed female dog or cat in the
state of estrus (heat) shall be confined during such period of time in a house,
building or secure enclosure and the area of enclosure shall be so constructed
that no other dog or cat may gain access to the confined animals except for
controlled breading permitted by the owner of the female.
   (B)   Chaining or tethering. Additionally, the female dog or cat shall not
be chained or tethered, except in a secured enclosure, and if chained or
tethered within a secured enclosure, the female dog or cat may not be chained
or tethered in a manner that prevents her from defending itself or from
avoiding a male.
   (C)   Removal of the animal. Owners who do not comply shall be ordered to
immediately remove the animal in heat to a veterinary hospital or the animal
shelter. Failure to comply with the removal order of the animal control officer
shall be a violation of this chapter and the dog or cat will then be impounded
as prescribed herein. All expenses incurred, as a result of this confinement,
shall be paid by the owner.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999 
§ 90.068 ANIMAL DEFECATION PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for the owner or person in control of an animal to
intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence allow or
permit such animal to defecate on any public property or improved private
property other than that of the owner of the animal. That the animal was at
large at the time it defecated on any property shall constitute a prima facie
evidence that the owner or person in control of the animal allowed or permitted
the animal to so act.
   (B)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that
the owner or person in control of the animal immediately removed and cleaned up
such animal’s feces from public or private property.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.069 WILD ANIMALS OR WILDLIFE.
   (A)   No person shall possess, keep or have care, custody or control of a
prohibited animal wild animal or wildlife within the city except as provided
herein.
   (B)   All persons shall be prohibited from selling, giving, transferring or
importing into the city any wild animal.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to approved zoological parks, performing
animal exhibitions or circuses. Nor shall this section apply to primary and
secondary schools, colleges and universities, zoological parks owned or
operated by a governmental entity or any animal assisting physically
handicapped persons.
   (D)   It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the
animal being kept was an infant or injured animal which was not capable of
surviving on its own and that such animal was kept for three days or less, or
for such reasonable time as was necessary before giving the animal to a
licensed wildlife rehabilitator.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.070 NUISANCE ANIMALS.
   (A)   As used in this subchapter, a nuisance animal shall be any animal that
commits any of the acts listed herein:
      (1)   Molests or chases pedestrians, passersby or passing vehicles,
including bicycles, or molests, attacks or interferes with other animals or
persons on public property or private property other than the owners;
      (2)   Makes unprovoked attacks on other animals of any kind or engages in
conduct which establishes such animal as a dangerous animal;
      (3)   Is repeatedly at large; specifically, three or more times per 12-
month period (excluding domestic cats);
      (4)   Damages, soils or defiles public property or private property,
other than property belonging to or under the control of the owner;
      (5)   Defecates on property not belonging to or under the control of its
owner, unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the
owner of the animal;
      (6)   Barks, whines, howls, crows, crackles or makes any noise
excessively and continuously, and such noise disturbs a person of ordinary
sensibilities;
      (7)   Produce odors or unclean conditions sufficient to annoy persons
living in the vicinity; or
      (8)   Is unconfined when in heat.
   (B)   If the animal control officer determines that any animal is a
nuisance, the animal control officer may issue an order requiring that the
owner meet certain remedial requirements to correct the conduct of the animal.
The order shall be given to the owner by personal service or by certified mail,
return receipt requested. The owner may file an appeal to this order as
provided in §§
90.020 through
90.030.
   (C)   Persons residing within 600 feet of a person who harbors or keeps an
animal that they believe to be a nuisance may initiate an action before the
City Council as provided for in section 33.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.071 HONEYBEES.
   No person shall construct, place or maintain any beehive within 300 feet of
any residence other than that of the owner except with the consent of the
occupants of all such residences.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.072 PEN AND COOPS; LOCATION.
   (A)   All fowl and rabbits shall be kept within a pen, coop or hutch. A
fenced yard shall not qualify as a pen or coop.
   (B)   Any person keeping or harboring any animal, other than livestock,
shall locate any pen, coop, hutch or other housing at least 50 feet from any
residence, excluding the residence of the person keeping or harboring the
animals.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.073 LIVESTOCK.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having care, custody or
control over any livestock to:
      (1)   Cause or permit any livestock to be pastured, herded, staked or
tied in any street, lane, alley, park or other public place;
      (2)   Tie, stake or pasture or permit the tying, staking or pasturing of
any animal upon any private property within the city without the consent of the
owner or occupant of such property; or in such a way as to permit any livestock
to trespass upon any street or other public place or upon any private property;
or
      (3)   Permit any livestock to be or remain during the nighttime secured
by a stake, or secured in any manner other than by enclosing such animal in a
pen, corral or barn sufficient and adequate to restrain such livestock.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any livestock
within the city in a pen or other enclosure situated at any point closer than
200 feet to any residence, excluding the residence of the person keeping or
harboring the livestock.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any livestock
within the city in a pen or other enclosure which has less than 600 square feet
of area for each livestock.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.074 STORAGE OF FEED.
   All feed provided for animals, other than hay, shall be kept in an enclosed
building or container except when being used to feed an animal.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.075 OTHER RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Hogs and swine. The keeping of hogs, pigs or any swine within the city
is prohibited.
   (B)   Keeping of animals near city water supply.
      (1)   It is unlawful and constitutes an offense for any person, whether
for himself or herself or as the agent or servant of another or others, to keep
or to participate in keeping any horse, cattle, sheep, goat, other livestock
and/or fowl in any pen or lot used to confine any such multiple animal
operation within 500 feet of any water supply wells from which the city obtains
its principal water supply as specified in the official Tex. Administrative
Code, Title 31, Natural Resources and Conservation, § 290.41(c)(1)(C)(D)(F),
published under authority of the Secretary of State.
      (2)   KEEPING means the care and control of the livestock or fowl in
question for a period of longer than five days.
   (C)   Keeping of animals and fowl.
      (1)   Restricted. It is unlawful and constitutes a nuisance to keep any
horse, cattle, sheep, goat, rabbit or other livestock, including fowl, at any
place within the city, when the place where the same are kept is within 200
feet of any private residence or dwelling place or within 500 feet of any
building or establishment open to the public, with the exception of park land,
or if the animal or fowl in question is kept in a manner and under conditions
wherein by reason of the odors emanating therefrom, the noise made by it or
from any other cause pertaining to it or pertaining to the manner or to the
place at which it is kept is reasonably calculated to annoy, offend or disturb
the reasonable sensibilities of inhabitant of a private residence, or person(s)
occupying or visiting an establishment open to the public. The distance
provisions do not apply to park land; however, other requirements of this
section relating to the manner in which animals are kept shall apply to such
park land.
      (2)   Proof constitutes prima facie case. Proof that one dozen or more of
such fowl or animals as described in division (C)(1) above, or any combination
thereof, are being kept at any one time at a place within the city that is
within 200 feet of the private residence of another, or within 500 feet of any
building or establishment open to the public, shall be sufficient to make out a
prima facie case, and unless such prima facie case is overcome by sufficient
evidence, it shall warrant a conviction under the provisions of this section.
      (3)   Exceptions to distance restrictions. The distance restrictions of
this chapter do not apply to property zoned as agricultural and residential, as
expressly set forth in the zoning regulations, only as set forth in the zoning
regulations of the city, or to property properly zoned or used (as in
continuing use) as veterinary clinics or facilities or established kennels that
are for the purposes of care or boarding animals.
   (D)   Dead animals and fowl. It is unlawful for any person in the city to
cause to be placed or place, or allow to remain in or near his or her premises
or the premises of any other person, or in any of the streets or other public
ways, any dead animal, either wild or domesticated, or any dead fowl, either
wild or domesticated.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.076 ANIMALS HELD ON COMPLAINT.
   If a complaint has been filed in Municipal Court against the owner of an
impounded animal for a violation of this chapter, the animal shall not be
released except on the order of the Municipal Judge or animal control officer
which may also direct the owner to pay any penalties for violation of this
chapter in addition to all impoundment fees. Surrender of an animal by the
owner thereof to the animal control officer does not relieve or render the
owner immune from the decision of the court nor from the fees and fines which
may result from a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.077 REMOVAL OF ANIMALS FROM CONFINEMENT.
   (A)   Removal of animals from confinement. It shall be unlawful for any
person to remove or allow to escape from any place of confinement any dog or
cat which has been confined or ordered to be confined by the city, without the
consent of the impounding agency.
   (B)   Release of confined animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to
knowingly or intentionally enter upon the property of another person for which
the person is not given specific permission to enter for the purpose of
releasing a confined, chained or tethered animal.
   (C)   Impounding; interfering with officers. It shall be unlawful for any
person to interfere or attempt to interfere with the animal control officer or
to interfere or attempt to interfere with any person acting for the city in the
taking up and impounding of animals in the city.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
ANIMAL PROTECTION PROVISIONS
§ 90.090 ANIMALS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   No person shall leave any animal in any standing or parked vehicle in such a
way as to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence
endanger the animal’s health, safety or welfare. An animal control officer,
police officer or park ranger is authorized to use reasonable force to remove
the animal from the vehicle whenever it appears that the animal’s health,
safety or welfare is or will be endangered if the owner of the vehicle cannot
be located after reasonable attempts. The animal shall be taken to the animal
shelter or to a veterinarian if the animal is in distress. A written notice
bearing the name of the officer removing the animal, a telephone number where
he or she can be contacted and the location where the animal may be claimed by
the owner shall be attached to the vehicle. Any person violating this section
shall bear the full cost and expense incurred by the city in the care, medical
treatment, impoundment cost and disposal of the animal, including the removal
from a vehicle.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.091 DUTY OF MOTOR VEHICLE OPERATOR TO REPORT ACCIDENT INVOLVING ANIMALS.
   (A)   Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle within the city,
strikes any animal shall report the accident to the Police Department within a
reasonable time if the animal stricken is on or near the roadway so that it
constitutes a potential traffic hazard. It shall be an affirmative defense to
any violation under this section that the incident occurred while the operator
was responding to an emergency and that the incident was reported as soon as
possible.
   (B)   Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic
animal shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal’s owner; in
the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at
once report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency or the local
humane society.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.092 UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT OF DOG; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to tether, chain or fasten
any animal in such a manner as to permit it to be upon any public sidewalk or
street or to leave it unattended while tethered, chained or fastened on public
property.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to tether, chain or fasten an animal in such a
manner as to cause it injury or pain or not permit it to reach shelter, food
and water.
   (B)   An owner may not leave a dog outside and unattended by use of a
restraint that unreasonably limits the dog’s movement:
      (1)   Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
      (2)   Within 500 feet of the premises of a school; or
      (3)   In the case of extreme weather conditions, including conditions in
which:
         (a)   The actual or effective outdoor temperature is below 32ºF;
         (b)   A heat advisory has been issued by a local or state authority or
jurisdiction; or
         (c)   A hurricane, tropical storm or tornado warning has been issued
for the jurisdiction by the National Weather Service.
   (C)   In this section, a restraint unreasonably limits a dog’s movement if
the restraint:
      (1)   Uses a collar that is pinch-type, prong-type or choke-type or that
is not properly fitted to the dog;
      (2)   Is a length shorter than the greater of:
         (a)   Five times the length of the dog, as measured from the tip of
the dog’s nose to the base of the dog’s tail; or
         (b)   Ten feet.
      (3)   Is in an unsafe condition; or
      (4)   Causes injury to the dog.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   A dog restrained to a running line, pulley or trolley system and
that is not restrained to the running line, pulley or trolley system by means
of a pinch-type, prong-type, choke-type or improperly fitted collar;
      (2)   A dog restrained in compliance with the requirements of a camping
or recreational area as defined by a federal, state or local authority or
jurisdiction;
      (3)   A dog restrained for a reasonable period, not to exceed three hours
in a 24-hour period, and no longer than is necessary for the owner to complete
a temporary task that requires the dog to be restrained;
      (4)   A dog restrained while the owner is engaged in, or actively
training for, an activity that is conducted pursuant to a valid license issued
by this state if the activity for which the license is issued is associated
with the use or presence of a dog;
      (5)   A dog restrained while the owner is engaged in conduct directly
related to the business of shepherding or herding cattle or livestock;
      (6)   A dog restrained while the owner is engaged in conduct directly
related to the business of cultivating agricultural products, if the restraint
is reasonably necessary for the safety of the dog; or
      (7)   A person from walking a dog with a hand-held leash.
   (E)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly violates this
section.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.093 SELLING DYED ANIMALS.
   No animal or fowl of any kind that has been dyed or otherwise colored
artificially may be sold or offered for sale, raffled, offered or given as a
prize, premium or advertising device or displayed in any store, shop, carnival
or other public place.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.094 GIVING ANIMALS AS PRIZES OR INDUCEMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall give away any live animal, reptile, fowl, livestock or
wildlife as a prize for or as an inducement to enter any contest, game or other
competition; or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or as an
incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer is for the
purpose of attracting trade. This prohibition shall apply to carnivals, fairs
and circuses.
   (B)   The prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to fish or
to animals given as prizes at a rodeo contest or livestock show or as part of
an FFA, 4-H or similar project.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.095 TRAPPING AND SHOOTING.
   (A)   Trapping prohibited. It shall be unlawful to set, trigger, activate or
otherwise use, or cause to be set, triggered, activated or used, any steel-
jawed, leg-hold trap to be used for the capture of any animal. This section is
not intended to prohibit the prudent use of traps on one’s own property to
control rodents.
   (B)   Hunting prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt,
shoot, intentionally injure or kill any wild bird, animal, mammal or reptile
within the corporate limits of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to
hunt, shoot or kill, within the city, any domestic bird, animal, mammal,
reptile or pet that is not owned by such person. Except this section shall not
be construed or interpreted to prohibit the shooting and destruction of snakes
and skunks, and it shall be a defense to prosecution that the only animal or
reptile shot or destroyed was a snake or a skunk that was upon property owned
or occupied by the person charged, or upon property occupied by a third party
that requested the person charged to shoot or destroy the snake or skunk.
   (C)   Domestic animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot a
domestic animal within the corporate limits of the city. It shall be a defense
to prosecution that the domestic animal shot was a vicious animal upon the
property owned or occupied by the person charged, or upon property occupied by
a third party that requested the person charged to shoot or destroy the
domestic animal due to an immediate threat to the safety.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.096 MOLESTING ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner tease, annoy, disturb,
molest or irritate an animal that is confined to the owner’s premises.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.097 PENS AND ENCLOSURES; SANITARY REQUIREMENTS; MINIMUM CAGE SIZE;
OVERCROWDING.
   (A)   (1)   The owners of any animal shall maintain and keep all pens,
coops, kennels, fenced areas and enclosures of any kind in a sanitary
condition.
      (2)   This shall include the following.
         (a)   All animal wastes shall be disposed of promptly and all pens and
enclosures shall be cleaned as needed to prevent odors, and not draw insects or
other vermin or create a nuisance.
         (b)   The premises upon which animals are kept shall be clean and free
from noxious and unpleasant odors.
         (c)   Some standard spray or other chemicals shall be used at
reasonable intervals to keep the premises free of flies, mosquitoes, ticks,
fleas and other vectors.
   (B)   Cages, pens or enclosures used to confine animals shall be of
sufficient size to maintain all of the animals within such pen or enclosures
comfortably and in good health.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.098 NEGLIGENT CARE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to fail, refuse or neglect to provide
any animal in his or her charge or custody, as owner or otherwise, with proper
food, drink, shade, adequate shelter, veterinary care when needed to prevent
suffering, grooming when lack thereof would adversely affect the health of the
animal, and with humane care and treatment.
   (B)   To provide adequate shelter for a dog or cat kept outdoors, a person
must provide a shelter accessible to the dog or cat meeting the following
standards.
      (1)   The shelter must provide protection from the weather, such as sun,
wind, precipitation (in whatever form) or other inclement weather conditions.
      (2)   If there are no artificial heat sources, the structure shall be
small enough to allow the dog or cat to warm the interior of the structure and
maintain its body heat, but large enough to permit normal postural adjustments,
or standing.
      (3)   Plastic air shipping containers and/or pet carriers shall not be
used as outdoor shelters.
   (C)   A notice of violation requiring that the condition be corrected within
a specified time period shall be issued to a person before any notice to appear
at the Municipal Court may be issued or before a complaint may be filed with
the Municipal Court.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.099 ANIMAL IN STATE OF PAIN OR SUFFERING.
   (A)   If any animal without a license tag or other identifying marker is
found in a state of pain and suffering or becomes so during confinement, the
city or its agent may dispose of the animal in any humane manner without
complying with the three-day (72-hour) waiting period as set out in §
90.163.
   (B)   If the owner or keeper of an animal found in a state of pain or
suffering refuses to assume responsibility to care for the animal, the animal
control officer may dispose of the animal in a humane manner.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.100 SALE OF ANIMALS IN PUBLIC PLACE.
   (A)   If an animal is offered for sale in a public place within the city,
the person offering the animal for sale, the owner of the animal, the manager
of the property which is the public place on which the offer is being made and
the owner of the property which is the public place on which the offer is being
made, shall be responsible for ensuring that §§
90.093,
90.094,
90.097 and
90.098 are complied with in regard to the animal offered for sale in a public
place during the time the animal is in the public place.
   (B)   The term PUBLIC PLACE as used herein shall mean any place to which the
public or a substantial group of the public has access. It shall include, but
is not limited to, shops, stores and flea markets.
   (C)   If an animal offered for sale in a public place is kept within a cage
or pen of any type, such cage or pen shall comply with the following
requirements.
      (1)   The cage or pen must be large enough for the animal to stand on all
of its legs and hold its head in a natural position and not be in a crouched
position. The cage or pen must also have enough room for the animal to turn
around or move without stepping on another animal, animal feces or food or
water provided for the animal.
      (2)   The cage or pen must either have room for water and food or have
water and food situated so that the animal has access to it through the cage.
      (3)   The cage or pen must be situated so that air may circulate through
it, so that any animal kept within the cage or pen is not exposed to extreme
heat. During cold or inclement weather, cages or pens should be situated so
that animals contained therein may stay warm and stay dry.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.101 ANIMAL FIGHTS AND FIGHTING PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly,
recklessly or with criminal negligence use, or allow or permit to be used,
property that he or she owns or has control over for the purpose of conducting
animal fights. For purposes of this section, ANIMAL shall mean a domesticated
living creature and wild living creature previously captured, other than a dog.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess animal fighting
equipment within the city. As used herein, the term ANIMAL FIGHTING EQUIPMENT
means any equipment used for training, handling, housing, feeding or
transporting fighting animals. The term also includes animals being used,
trained or bred for fighting or intended to be used, trained or bred for
fighting.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.102 SLAUGHTERING OF ANIMALS.
   Animals may be slaughtered for human or animal consumption within the city;
provided it is done at a location that is shielded from sensory perception of
the general public; and provided it is done in a manner designed to cause the
animal’s death as quickly as possible without needless suffering.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.103 USE OF POISONOUS SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to administer poison to an animal
belonging to another without legal authority or the owner’s effective consent.
No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food
or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any domestic animal or
person.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly or with criminal
negligence injure another’s animal by leaving a poisonous substance of any kind
in any place within the city.
   (C)   The provisions of divisions (A) and (B) above shall not apply to an
exterminator using poisons as part of a pest control program, nor shall it
apply to persons using commercial insecticides and rodent baits used to control
insects and wild rodents. For purposes of this section, the term EXTERMINATOR
shall mean an individual licensed by the State Structural Pest Control Board,
unless he or she is exempt from such licensing.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.104 CRUEL TREATMENT.
   No person shall beat, cruelly ill treat, torment, mentally abuse, overload,
overwork or otherwise abuse an animal or cause, instigate or permit any dog
fight, cock fight, bull fight or other combat between animals or between
animals and humans. The definition for CRUELLY TREATED and ANIMAL shall be as
defined in Tex. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 821.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.105 SEIZURE OF CRUELLY TREATED ANIMAL.
   (A)   If a peace officer or the animal control officer has reason to believe
that an animal has been or is being cruelly treated, the animal control officer
may apply to the Judge of the Municipal Court in for a warrant to seize the
animal.
   (B)   On a showing of probable cause to believe that the animal has been or
is being cruelly treated, the Court shall issue the warrant and set a time
within ten days of the date of issuance for a hearing in the Municipal Court to
determine whether the animal has been cruelly treated.
   (C)   The officer executing the warrant shall cause the animal to be
impounded and shall give written notice to the owner of the animal of the time
and place of the hearing.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.106 HEARING AFTER SEIZURE OF A CRUELLY TREATED ANIMAL.
   The hearing on whether an animal has been cruelly treated shall be conducted
after the seizure of an animal. The hearing shall be conducted as required and
in accordance with Tex. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 821.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.107 ABANDONMENT.
   No person shall abandon an animal in his or her custody.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.108 CREATING A HEALTH HAZARD.
   Any person who shall harbor or keep animals on his or her premises, or in or
about a premises under his or her control, and who allows such premises to
become a hazard to the general health and welfare of the community, or who
shall allow such premises to give off obnoxious or offensive odors due, to the
activity or presence of such animals, shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.109 TAMPERING WITH TRAPS AND EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall remove, alter, damage or otherwise tamper with a trap or
equipment belonging to or set out by the animal control officer.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
DANGEROUS ANIMALS
§ 90.120 PURPOSE OF SUBCHAPTER.
   It is the intention of this subchapter to provide a means of dealing with an
animal that is dangerous or, by its conduct, has indicated that it may
represent a danger in the future. In interpreting the definitions contained in
this subchapter and in implementing its provisions, the animal control officer
and the City Council shall recognize the right of a person to use an animal as
a protector or as a guard; however, the animal control officer and the City
Council shall also take into consideration the right of a neighborhood to be
free from fear that an animal may leave the premises of its owner or keeper and
attack and injure a person or other domestic animal.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.121 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   A dangerous animal, which does not include a dangerous dog as that
term is defined by this chapter and state law, shall be defined as an animal
other than a dog which:
      (1)   Has inflicted injury on a human being without provocation on public
or private property;
      (2)   Has killed or severely injured a domestic animal without
provocation while off the owner’s property;
      (3)   Is trained or harbored for fighting which may be determined based
on whether the animal exhibits behavior and/or bears physical scars or injuries
which indicate that the animal has been trained or used for the purpose of
fighting;
      (4)   Is a warm-blooded mammal which is known to carry or be susceptible
to the rabies virus and which cannot be effectively vaccinated against that
virus with any vaccine approved by the State Department of Health;
      (5)   Is a hybrid animal or any pet wildlife which has attacked a human
or which is apprehended or observed unrestrained; or
      (6)   Is a venomous or carnivorous fish or reptile or any fish or reptile
that grows over six feet in length.
   (B)   If an animal acts as stated in division (A) above, the animal control
officer shall impound the animal immediately if it is at large; or, if it is in
the possession of some person, the animal control officer may issue a notice
requiring that the animal be taken to a designated location for impoundment. An
animal which is impounded shall not be released until a final determination is
made on the disposition of the animal.
   (C)   Notice shall be given to the owner that the animal control officer has
determined that the animal is a dangerous animal. This notice shall also set
out the remedial requirements which the owner must comply with. This notice
shall be given to the owner by personal service or by certified mail, return
receipt requested. The owner shall have five working days from receipt of the
notice to file a letter with the City Secretary stating that he or she shall
comply with the remedial requirements as stated in the notice or that he or she
disagrees with the determination that the animal is dangerous or the remedial
requirements and that he or she requests a hearing before the City Council.
Such hearing shall be conducted as provided for in §§
90.020 through
90.030.
   (D)   If the owner of a dangerous animal cannot be determined after
reasonable efforts to do so and after holding the animal for 72 hours, the
animal may be disposed of in a humane manner. If the owner of a dangerous
animal which has been impounded cannot be located for the delivery service of
the notice required herein either in person or by mail, the animal may be
disposed of in a humane manner after all reasonable effort has been made to
locate such owner.
   (E)   If the animal’s behavior creates a more dangerous situation even
though the owner is complying with the remedial requirements, the City Council
may again review the situation and prescribe additional or different remedial
requirements.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.122 POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   If the animal control officer or a neighborhood believes that an
animal has exhibited behavior indicating that it represents a potential danger,
the animal control officer or residents of an area as provided in section 33(b)
may initiate an action before the City Council to determine whether or not the
animal is potentially dangerous. Any such hearing shall be conducted as
provided for in §§
90.020 through
90.030. Pending the outcome of such hearing, the animal must be securely
confined in a humane manner either on the premises of the owner, with a
licensed veterinarian or at the animal shelter.
   (B)   An animal may be potentially dangerous if it has engaged in the
following conduct:
      (1)   When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon the streets,
sidewalks or any public or private property in a menacing fashion or apparent
attitude of attack; or
      (2)   Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise threaten the safety of human beings
or domestic animals.
   (C)   If an animal’s behavior creates a more dangerous situation even though
the owner is complying with the remedial requirements, the City Council may
again review the situation and prescribe additional or different remedial
requirements.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.123 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No animal may be declared dangerous or potentially dangerous if the
threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who at the time:
      (1)   Was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises
occupied by the owner of the animal;
      (2)   Was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or has in the past
been observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the animal and
the animal was not at large at the time of the offense;
      (3)   Was committing or attempting to commit a crime;
      (4)   If the dog was protecting or defending a person while in that
person’s control from an unjustified attack or assault; or
      (5)   If the dog was injured and responding to pain.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to animals under the
control of a law enforcement or military agency.
   (C)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to a dog whose
conduct has brought it within the coverage of the Tex. Health and Safety Code,
Chapter 822, to the extent that said chapter preempts local regulation of the
dog’s conduct.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.124 DANGEROUS DOGS.
   Tex. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 822 shall apply for the procedures and
process to determine whether a dog has caused the death of or serious bodily
injury to a person by attacking, biting or mauling the person and whether the
dog is a dangerous dog; for definitions of animal control authority; cases
involving serious bodily injury or death to a human; dangerous dog
determinations; the authority to seize a such a dog; and the requirements to
secure a dangerous dog.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.125 DETERMINATION OF DANGEROUS DOG.
   Tex. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 822 shall apply for the procedures and
process to determine whether a dog is a dangerous dog. The animal control
officer or animal control authority, as appropriate, shall notify the owner in
writing of the determination.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.126 HEARING AND NOTICE REGARDING DANGEROUS DOG.
   (A)   (1)   A hearing shall be set to determine whether a dog that caused
the death of or serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting or
mauling the person.
      (2)   The hearing must be held not later than the tenth day after the
date on which a warrant for the seizure of the dog is issued, or if no warrant,
not later than the tenth day after the date on which the dog was seized by the
animal control authority.
   (B)   The requirements and procedures governing the hearing shall be as
established and set forth Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 822.003.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.127 DEFENSE TO DETERMINATION.
   The defenses that may be asserted in a hearing under §
90.126 are the defenses described and set forth in Tex. Health and Safety Code,
§ 822.003.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.128 DISPOSITION OF A DANGEROUS DOG.
   Tex. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 822 shall apply to the disposition of a
dog found to be a dangerous dog after a hearing as provided for under Tex.
Health and Safety Code, § 822.003.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.129 REGISTERABLE DANGEROUS DOG.
   The determination of whether a dog is a registerable dangerous dog under
this chapter shall be determined in accordance with and in compliance with Tex.
Health and Safety Code, Chapter 822, Subchapter D.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.130 DETERMINATION OF A REGISTERABLE DANGEROUS DOG.
   A dog is determined to be a registerable dangerous dog if it meets the
definition of a dangerous dog as provided under Tex. Health and Safety Code,
Chapter 822, Subchapter D, or after a hearing as provided in Tex. Health and
Safety Code, Chapter 822, Subchapter D.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.131 NOTIFICATION OF DECLARATION OF REGISTERABLE DANGEROUS DOG.
   (A)   The animal control officer or animal control authority, as
appropriate, shall notify the owner in writing of the determination.
   (B)   An owner, not later than the fifteenth day after the date the owner is
notified that a dog owned by the owner is a dangerous dog, may appeal the
determination of the animal control officer to the Municipal Court.
   (C)   To file an appeal under division (B) above, the owner must:
      (1)   File a notice of appeal of the animal control authority’s dangerous
dog determination with the court;
      (2)   Attach a copy of the determination from the animal control
authority; and
      (3)   Serve a copy of the notice of appeal on the animal control officer
by mailing the notice through the United States Postal Service.
   (D)   An owner may appeal the decision of the Municipal Court in the manner
permitted in Tex. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 822, Subchapter D.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.132 STATUS OF DOG ON APPEAL.
   Pending the outcome of the appeal, the animal must be confined at a licensed
veterinary clinic or at the animal shelter, the cost of which shall be borne by
the owner of the dog in question. If the dog in question is not in the
possession of the animal shelter or a veterinary clinic at the time of the
determination, the owner must surrender the dog to the animal control officer
when ordered to do so. If the owner fails to immediately surrender the dog, the
animal control officer shall have the right to take the dog into its possession
from the premises of the owner or elsewhere, wherever the dog may be found
within the city limits. If the dog can not be taken into custody by the animal
control officer, it may be taken into custody under a search warrant for
contraband issued by the Municipal Judge.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.133 DEFENSE TO DETERMINATION OF REGISTERABLE DANGEROUS DOG.
   The defenses identified and provided or available under Tex. Health and
Safety Code, Chapter 822 shall be available as a defenses to the determination
of a dog as a registerable dangerous dog and to the prosecution of the owner of
that dog.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.134 DISPOSITION OF A REGISTERABLE DANGEROUS DOG.
   (A)   If the Municipal Court upholds the determination by the animal control
officer, the owner shall, no later than 30 days after the hearing, comply with
the provisions of this chapter for the keeping of a registered dangerous dog in
the city and the dog shall be returned to the owner provided all costs involved
in the impoundment, holding and medical treatment of the dog are paid.
   (B)   In the event the Municipal Court reverses that determination, the dog
in question shall be returned to or released to its owner provided the owner
has paid all veterinary medical costs administered to such dog while in the
custody of the animal control officer, seizure and impoundment fees, and
additional costs for maintaining the dog while the dog was in the custody of
the animal control officer.
   (C) The owner of a dangerous dog who does not comply with divisions (A) or
(B) above shall deliver the dog to the animal control authority not later than
the thirtieth day after the owner learns that the dog is a dangerous dog.
   (D)   If, the Municipal Court Judge finds, after notice and hearing as
provided in Tex. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 822, Subchapter D, that the
owner of a dangerous dog has failed to comply with divisions (A) or (C) above,
the Court shall order the animal control authority to seize the dog and shall
issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The animal control authority shall
seize the dog or order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the
dog in secure and humane conditions.
   (E)   If the owner has not complied with division (A) above before the
eleventh day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered to the
animal control authority. If the owner complies with the requirements of
division (A) above before eleventh day after the date on which the dog is
seized or delivered to the animal control authority, the Court shall order the
animal control authority to return the dog to the owner.
   (F)   Subject to division (G) below, the Court shall order the animal
control authority to humanely destroy the dog if the owner has not complied
with division (A) below before the eleventh day after the date on which the dog
is seized or delivered to the authority. The Court shall order the authority to
return the dog to the owner if the owner complies with division (A) above
before the eleventh day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered
to the authority.
   (G)   Any order to destroy the dog under this section is stayed for a period
of ten calendar days from the date the order issued, during which period the
dog’s owner may file a notice of appeal, and if an appeal is filed the dog may
not be destroyed during the pendency of the appeal.
   (H)   If the animal control officer has information or belief, or has
determined that a court of competent jurisdiction has ever made or upheld a
determination or declaration that a dog is dangerous, or if the animal control
officer has determined that a declaration or determination of dangerous dog
became final for failure to appeal or any other reason, under previous or other
ordinances of this city or other cities or state law, the animal control
officer shall notify the person owning or keeping such dog in writing that the
owner shall no later than ten days after the date of the notice comply with the
provisions of this chapter for the keeping of a registered dangerous dog in the
city.
   (I)   The Court may order the humane destruction of a dog if the owner of
the dog has not been located before the fifteenth day after the seizure and
impoundment of the dog.
   (J)   For purposes of this section, a person learns that the person is the
owner of a dangerous dog when:
      (1)   The owner knows of an attack as described in Tex. Health and Safety
Code, Chapter 822, Subchapter D;
      (2)   The owner receives notice that the Municipal Court has found that
the dog is a dangerous dog under Tex. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 822,
Subchapter D; or
      (3)   The owner is informed by the animal control authority that the dog
is a dangerous dog under Tex. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 822, Subchapter
D.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.135 REQUIREMENTS FOR REGISTRATION AND POSSESSION OF REGISTERED DANGEROUS
DOG.
   The owner must register the dog with the animal control officer, and pay the
annual registration fees as required by Tex. Health and Safety Code, Chapter
822, Subchapter D and further comply with all provisions of Tex. Health and
Safety Code, Chapter 822, Subchapter D.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.136 ATTACK BY REGISTERED DANGEROUS DOG.
   The owner of a dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer of any
attacks the dog makes on people or animals.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.137 APPEAL FROM MUNICIPAL COURT.
   Any appeal of the decision or order of the Municipal Court shall be made
within ten days in the same manner as appeal from civil cases originating in
the Justice of the Peace Courts of the state. The Municipal Court shall order
the appellant to post a supersedeas bond payable to the city in an amount not
less than $10,000. The form of the bond shall be as prescribed in the laws
pertaining to civil appeals originating in the Justice of the Peace Courts in
the state. The appellant shall be responsible for the cost of appeal.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.138 DEFENSE TO PROSECUTION FOR VIOLATION OF REGISTERED DANGEROUS DOG.
   It is a defense to prosecution that the person possessing a dangerous dog
is:
   (A)   A veterinarian, peace officer or employee of the city, and the
harboring of the dog was in the performance of his or her duties;
   (B)   An employee of the institutional division of the State Department of
Criminal Justice or a law enforcement agency and trains or uses dogs for law
enforcement or corrections purposes: or
   (C)   A dog trainer or an employee of a guard dog company, while in the
performance of his or her duties, under the Private Investigators and Private
Security Agencies Act.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.139 AGGRESSIVE DOGS.
   (A)   The animal control officer may investigate any incident where a dog is
accused of attacking, injuring or killing any other animal. If, after receiving
the statements of any witnesses and conducting an investigation of any incident
involving a dog attacking, injuring or killing any other animal, the animal
control authority may make a determination that the dog committing the attack
is an aggressive dog.
   (B)   The animal control officer or animal control authority, as
appropriate, shall notify the owner in writing of the determination that the
dog is an aggressive dog.
   (C)   An animal control officer shall have the authority to seize a dog that
has been determined to be an aggressive dog in accordance with Tex. Health and
Safety Code, Chapter 822, if the animal control officer reasonably believes
that the aggressive dog represents a threat to the public if the dog is not
seized.
   (D)   A hearing shall be set to determine whether the dog is an aggressive
dog because of attacking, injuring or killing any other animal. The hearing
must be held not later than the tenth day after the date on which either a
warrant for the seizure of the dog is issued, or if no warrant, not later than
the tenth day after the date on which the dog was seized by the animal control
authority.
   (E)   A dog is determined to be an aggressive if it meets the definition of
a dangerous dog as provided under Tex. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 822,
Subchapter D, or after a hearing as provided in Tex. Health and Safety Code,
Chapter 822, Subchapter D.
   (F)   An owner, not later than the fifteenth day after the date the owner is
notified that a dog owned by the owner is an aggressive dog, may appeal the
determination of the animal control officer to the Municipal Court.
   (G)   To file an appeal under division (B) above, the owner must:
      (1)   File a notice of appeal of the animal control authority’s dangerous
dog determination with the Court;
      (2)   Attach a copy of the determination from the animal control
authority; and
      (3)   Serve a copy of the notice of appeal on the animal control officer
by mailing the notice through the United States Postal Service.
   (H)   An owner may appeal the decision of the Municipal Court in the manner
permitted in Tex. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 822, Subchapter D.
   (I)   The disposition of an aggressive dog pending appeal and the final
disposition of an aggressive dog with regard to requiring the aggressive dog to
be confined to a secure enclosure shall be determined in the same manner as
provided for registered dangerous dogs under Tex. Health and Safety Code,
Chapter 822, Subchapter D. The Municipal Court may make any other reasonable
orders with regard to an aggressive dog as provided under Tex. Health and
Safety Code, Chapter 822.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.140 EXHIBITIONS OF CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall keep, or permit to be kept, on his or her premises, any
dangerous wild animal for display or for exhibition purposes, whether
gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be construed so as to apply
to a theatrical exhibit or circus, as defined in §
90.001.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.141 PROHIBITED ANIMALS.
   No person may possess a prohibited animal within the city limits. Such
prohibited animals shall include, but are not limited to, all animals
prohibited by the state or federal law and shall include, but are not limited
to, the following animals or any hybrid of these animals or such other class of
animals as may be determined to be dangerous by animal control officer or any
other dangerous animal which may be added in the future to the list as a high
risk animal in the Texas Rabies Control Act, as amended:
   (A)   Class mammalia: family Canidae (such as wolves, coyotes and fox)
except domesticated dogs and hybrids involving same; family Mustelidae (such as
weasels, martins, fishers, skunks, wolverines, mink and badgers) except
ferrets; family Procyonidae (such as raccoons); family Ursidae (such as bears);
and order Chiroptera (such as bats);
   (B)   Poisonous reptiles, cobras and related species (Elapidae, Hydrophiidae
); vipers and related species (Crotiladae, Viperidae); Boonslang and Kirtland’s
tree snakes; Gila monsters (Helodermatidae); and crocodiles, alligators and
their allies (order Loricata) and non-venomous reptiles over six feet in
length; provided that non-venomous reptiles, not to exceed 12 feet in length,
may be kept for the purposes of wholesale breeding operations only in
accordance with this chapter;
   (C)   Brown recluse (Loxosceles) and black widow (Lactrodectus) spiders; and
   (D)   Any animal defined as a dangerous wild animal under Tex. Health and
Safety Code, Chapter 822, Subchapter E.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.142 RESTRICTED ANIMALS.
   No person may possess any individual species and/or subspecies of the
following animals: antelope, Order Carnivora, family felidae (such as lions,
tigers, jaguars, leopards and cougars, leopards, cheetahs, jaguars), hyenas,
bears, lesser pandas, ferrets from natural habitats, order Primata (such as
monkeys, chimpanzees, apes); binturong, miniature pigs, elephants, Vietnamese
pot belly pigs or such other non-domestic species of animal not common to this
area without a permit issued through the animal control officer.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.143 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR RESTRICTED ANIMAL OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   A person may not own, harbor or have custody or control of a dangerous
wild animal for any purpose unless the person holds a certificate of
registration for that animal issued by the animal control authority. For the
purposes of this subchapter, a certificate of registration shall be considered
as a permit.
   (B)   All applicable requirements for obtaining a certificate of
registration are set forth in Texas Health and Safety Code, Chapter 822,
Subchapter E.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.144 VIOLATION OF PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   Failure to comply with the permit requirements shall constitute a violation
of this chapter and each day of non-compliance shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.145 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   This subchapter does not apply to those entities or organizations who
are not subject to Tex. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 822, Subchapter E that
provides pursuant to Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 822.102.
   (B)   This chapter does not apply to an animal that is an FFA or 4-H project
and that is and remains in good standing and on an official list of such
authorized projects filed with the city by the authorized sponsor of such FFA
or 4-H program; provided that such exemption shall be withdrawn upon the
sponsor of the applicable FFA or 4-H program notifying the Mayor that such
animal is not being maintained and cared for in compliance with the standards
of such FFA or 4-H program, or is, otherwise, no longer an authorized FFA or 4-
H project.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.146 GUARD DOGS.
   (A)   (1)   All dogs which are trained by a certified professional and kept
solely for the protection of persons and property, residential, commercial or
personal, shall obtain a permit from the animal control officer.
      (2)   The annual fee for this permit shall be set by the City Council.
   (B)   (1)   The area or premises in which such dog is confined shall be
conspicuously posted with warning signs bearing letters not less than two
inches high, stating “Guard Dog On Premises.”
      (2)   The area of premises shall be subject to inspection by the animal
control officer to determine that the animal in question is maintained and
secured at all times in such a manner so as to prevent its coming in contact
with the public.
   (C)   Dogs used by federal, state, county or municipal law enforcement
agencies are exempt from this section.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS
§ 90.160 IMPOUNDMENT GENERALLY.
   (A)   Animals owned or harbored in violation of this chapter or law of the
state shall be taken into custody by an animal control officer or other
designated official and impounded under this chapter.
   (B)   Owners of impounded pets are required to pay all fees related to the
impoundment as set in §
90.008.
   (C)   Under this subchapter, after the expiration of any required
impoundment period, or immediately after being voluntarily released by its
owner, an animal shall become the property of the city, all ownership rights
for the animal shall transfer to the city, and the animal control authority may
dispose of the animal by any method provided under this chapter, taking into
consideration factors that may include, but not be limited to, the animal’s
behavior, aggressive tendencies, feral characteristics, health and housing
space availability within the sole discretion of the animal control officer.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.161 TAMPERING WITH ANIMAL SHELTER OR IMPOUNDMENT VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city without proper authority to
break into, open, pull down the enclosure of or make any opening into the
animal shelter or any enclosure belonging to or used by the city to impound or
keep animals. It shall also be unlawful for any person to turn out or release,
or cause to be turned out or released, or aid or abet the turning out or
release of any animal from the animal shelter, from an impoundment vehicle or
from any enclosure used by the city for the impoundment of animals.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.162 REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMAL.
   (A)   Except as may be provided elsewhere in this chapter, the owner of any
animal impounded in accordance with this chapter may reclaim such animal upon
showing satisfactory proof of ownership and paying all impoundment fees and any
other expenses incurred by the city or its agent in keeping the animal or
attempting to locate the owner of the animal.
      (1)   If the owner does not pay these fees, the animal may be sold or
otherwise disposed of by the city or its agent. However, these fees may be
waived by the city if the owner signs an agreement to attend and actually does
attend a pet education seminar within 90 days of redeeming his or her animal
from the animal shelter. The city may establish guidelines or requirements for
determining which animal owners will be allowed to take the pet education
seminar in exchange for waiving the impoundment fees and other expenses. The
city may establish a registration fee for the seminar that must be paid at the
time the animal is returned to the owner.
      (2)   If the owner does not attend the seminar, the city may seek to
collect the impoundment fees and any other expenses incurred by the city. It
shall be unlawful for any person to fail to attend a pet education seminar
within the required time in exchange for waiving the impoundment fees and other
expenses, unless prior to expiration of the time period the person had obtained
an extension to complete the seminar from the field supervisor for animal
control office or has paid all of the fees that would have been required at the
time the animal was redeemed from the animal shelter. A complaint for failure
to attend the seminar may be filed in the Municipal Court.
   (B)   If a dog or cat has been impounded on two prior occasions, the dog or
cat must be spayed or neutered before being released to the owner if impounded
on a third occasion. The owner of the dog or cat will be responsible for
arranging for the spay or neuter surgery. The dog or cat will be transported to
the veterinarian by an animal control officer or an employee or agent of the
animal shelter. The cost to spay or neuter the dog or cat shall be paid by the
owner, along with the impoundment fees, either to the animal shelter or to the
veterinarian in advance of transporting the animal for the surgery. After the
surgery is performed, the veterinarian may release the dog or cat to the owner.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.163 DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS AND CATS.
   (A)   Dogs and cats with no identification. References to animal shall refer
to both dogs and cat.
      (1)   All dogs and cats impounded by the animal control officer or
brought to the animal shelter by a person, other than the harborer or owner of
that animal shall be held for a minimum of 72 hours during which time period
the owner may present proof of ownership at the shelter. After paying all
applicable fees, that owner may reclaim the animal.
      (2)   In the event that the dog or cat is not claimed after the dog or
cat has been in the animal shelter for 72 hours, or has otherwise been
impounded by the city for at least 72 hours, the dog or cat shall become the
sole property of the city as provided in this subchapter.
   (B)   Dogs and cats with identification. References to animal shall refer to
both dogs and cat.
      (1)   Unless earlier claimed by the owner, all dogs and cats impounded by
the animal control officer, or brought to the animal shelter by a person other
than the harborer or owner of that animal, which are wearing traceable
identification, or where an owner is known, said animal shall be held in the
animal shelter for a minimum of seven days from the date the dog or cat enters
the facility. During this seven-day period, the animal control officer will
make reasonable efforts to notify the owner of the impoundment of the dog and
cat. If the address for the owner is known, the animal control officer will
provide written notice to the owner for the owner to retrieve that animal by a
certain specific date. The notice shall specify that the owner must notify the
animal control officer in writing of the date by which the owner will retrieve
his, her or their dog and cat.
      (2)   If the owner fails or refuses to provide any response stating when
the owner will reclaim and retrieve the owner’s dog and cat within ten days
after being provided with the written notice, or any other notice reasonably
informing the owner of the impoundment of the owner’s animal, the impounded
animal shall become the sole property of the city as provided in this
subchapter. If the owner does provide a written response to the animal control
officer, but either does not provide a date by which the owner will retrieve
the animal or the owner fails to retrieve the animal by the date specified by
the owner, the impounded animal shall become the sole property of the city as
provided in this subchapter.
   (C)   Animals surrendered by the owner/harborer. All animals surrendered by
the owner/harborer to the animal control officer shall become the property of
the city immediately upon completion of the owner/harborer surrender form.
   (D)   Animals other than dogs, cats or estrays impounded. All animals other
than dogs, cats, estrays or animals, holding current restricted animal permits,
that are impounded by the animal control officer or brought to the animal
shelter by a person other than the owner/harborer shall become the property of
the city unless such ownership is prohibited by state or federal law.
   (E)   Disposition of animals. Any animal that cannot be adopted or
transferred to a proper and appropriate agency shall be euthanized by an
injection of substances approved for euthanasia by the American Veterinary
Medical Association and/or the Texas Veterinary Medical Association to be
administered in compliance with the laws of the state. All animals listed as
endangered or protected shall be transferred to the proper authority at the
earliest possible date.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.164 ADOPTION OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   All animals which are adopted from the animal shelter shall be
surgically altered to prevent reproduction in that animal. The person adopting
the animal shall sign an adoption contract stating that he or she will have the
animal surgically altered and the date by which the surgery must be performed,
if the animal has not been altered before it leaves the animal shelter.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the person adopting to provide proof
of altering to the animal control officer.
   (C)   Failure to comply with this section or failure to comply with the
terms of the adoption contract shall give the animal control officer the right
to recover the adopted animal in question and revoke the owner’s adoption
contract. Such failure shall also constitute a violation of this chapter.
   (D)   The adoption fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council, to
render neutral the cost of surgically altering, medicating, vaccinating and
preparing the animal for adoption. The person adopting the animal shall be
provided a list of fees related to the adoption prior to the agreement being
signed.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.165 ESTRAY AND OTHER LIVESTOCK.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any owner or person in control of any horse, mule,
jack, jennet, cattle, hog, goat or sheep (estray) to permit any such animal to
run at large on land not his or her own or under his or her control, or on any
street, alley or other public place in the city.
   (B)   It is unlawful for the owner or person in control of any chicken or
other fowl to permit the same to run at large on any land not his or her own or
under his or her control, or on any street, alley or other public place in the
city.
   (C)   It is unlawful and constitutes a nuisance for the owner or any person
in charge or control of any pigeons in the city, or the owner or any person in
charge or control of any out building or barn in the city upon which pigeons
nest, to allow such pigeons to run or fly at large in the city.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.166 IMPOUNDMENT OF ESTRAY AND LIVESTOCK.
   It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to take up any and all
estray and other livestock that may be found in and upon any street, alley or
upon any unenclosed lot in the city, or otherwise to be found at large, and to
confine such estray or other livestock for safe keeping. Upon impounding, the
animal control officer shall prepare a file to be located in the city offices.
Each entry shall include the following:
   (A)   The name and address of the person who notified the animal control
officer of the estray or other livestock;
   (B)   The date, time and location of the estray or other livestock when
found;
   (C)   The location of the estray or other livestock until disposition; and
   (D)   A description of the animal including its breed, color, sex, age,
size, all markings of any kind and other identifying characteristics.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.167 ADVERTISEMENT OF IMPOUNDED ESTRAY AND LIVESTOCK.
   When an estray or other livestock has been impounded, the animal control
officer shall make a diligent search of the register of recorded brands in the
county for the owner of the estray or other livestock. If the search does not
reveal the owner, the animal control officer shall advertise the impoundment of
the estray in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least twice
during the next 15 days following impoundment and post a notice of the
impoundment of the estray or other livestock on the public notice board of city
hall.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.168 RECOVERY BY OWNER.
   The owner of an estray or other livestock may recover possession of the
animal at any time before the animal is sold under the terms of this chapter
if:
   (A)   The owner has provided the animal control officer with an affidavit of
ownership of the estray or other livestock containing at least the following
information:
      (1)   The name and address of the owner;
      (2)   The date the owner discovered that the animal was missing;
      (3)   The property from which the animal strayed; and
      (4)   A description of the animal including its breed, color, sex, size,
all markings of any kind and any other identifying characteristics.
   (B)   The animal control officer has approved the affidavit; and
   (C)   The owner has paid all handling fees to those entitled to receive
them.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.169 SALE OF ESTRAY AND LIVESTOCK.
   If the ownership of an estray or other livestock is not determined within 14
days following the final advertisement required by this chapter, ownership of
the estray or other livestock rests with the city and the animal control
officer shall then cause the estray or other livestock to be sold at a public
auction. If there are not any bidders, ownership is forfeited to the city.
   (A)   Title shall be deemed vested in the animal control officer for
purposes of passing a good title, free and clear of all claims to the purchaser
at the sale.
   (B)   The disposition of the proceeds derived from the sale at public
auction will be as follows:
      (1)   Pay all handling fees to those entitled to receive them;
      (2)   Execute a report of sale of impounded stock;
      (3)   The net proceeds remaining from the sale of the estray or other
livestock after the handling fees have been paid shall be delivered by the
animal control officer to the City Secretary. Such net proceeds shall be
subject to claim by the original owner of the estray or other livestock as
provided herein; and
      (4)   If the bids are too low, the animal control officer shall have the
right to refuse all bids and arrange for another public auction or sealed
bidding procedure.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.170 RECOVERY BY OWNER OF SALE PROCEEDS.
   (A)   Within 12 months after the sale of an estray or other livestock under
the provisions of this chapter, the original owner of the estray may recover
the net proceeds of the sale that were delivered to the City Secretary if:
      (1)   The owner has provided the animal control officer with an affidavit
of ownership; and
      (2)   The animal control officer has accepted the affidavit of ownership.
   (B)   After the expiration of 12 months from the sale of an estray or other
livestock as provided by this chapter, the sale proceeds shall escheat to the
city. If an animal was forfeited to the city due to no bidders at auction, then
the city is not to be liable to owner for any proceeds of sale, since no
proceeds were received.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.171 USE OF ESTRAY AND LIVESTOCK.
   During the period of time an estray or other livestock is held by one who
impounded the estray or other livestock, it may not be used by any person for
any purpose.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.172 DEATH OR ESCAPE OF ESTRAY AND LIVESTOCK.
   If the estray or other livestock dies or escapes while held by the person
who impounded it, the person shall report the death or escape to the animal
control officer. The report shall be filed in the record regarding the
impoundment.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 90.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or
shall fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, within
the city limits shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be liable for a
fine not to exceed the sum of $500. Each day the violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Such penalty shall be in addition to all the
other remedies provided herein.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if, with intent to deceive, he or she
knowingly makes a false report or statement, either verbal or written, that is
material to an investigation of an alleged violation of this chapter to an
animal control officer or other person authorized to enforce provision of this
chapter.
   (C)   A person commits an offense if he or she reports to a person
authorized to enforce provisions of this chapter an offense or incident within
that person’s concern knowing that the offense or incident did not occur.
   (D)   Whoever violates §
90.021 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor with a minimum fine of $200.
   (E)   Whoever is convicted of violating § 90.0025, a minimum fine of $100
shall be imposed by the Municipal Court.
   (F)   A violation under §
90.092 may be enforced or prosecuted as follows.
      (1)   A peace officer or animal control officer who has probable cause to
believe that an owner is violating §
90.092 shall provide the owner with a written statement of that fact. The
statement must be signed by the officer and plainly state the date on which and
the time at which the statement is provided to the owner.
      (2)   A person commits an offense if the person is provided a statement
described by division (F)(1) above and fails to comply with this section within
24 hours of the time the owner is provided the statement.
      (3)   If a person commits an offense under §
90.092 and has previously been convicted of an offense under §
90.092, the offense is punishable as provided for under Tex. Health and Safety
Code, Chapter 821, Subchapter D.
      (4)   If a person fails to comply with §
90.092 with respect to more than one dog, the person’s conduct with respect to
each dog constitutes a separate offense.
      (5)   If conduct constituting an offense under §
90.092 also constitutes an offense under any other law, the actor may be
prosecuted under this section, the other law or both.
      (6)   Unless otherwise expressly provided by state law, an offense under
§
90.092 is a Class C misdemeanor.
   (G)   A violation of ay provision of §§
90.120 through
90.146 shall be punishable as provided for in Tex. Health and Safety Code,
Chapter 822.
(Ord. 04132023B, passed 4-13-2023)
CHAPTER 91: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
91.01   Walking path
§ 91.01 WALKING PATH.
   The following rules and regulations shall apply to the walking path
constructed along FM 436.
   (A)   Use of the walking path is limited to pedestrians and human powered
vehicles having no more than four wheels.
   (B)   No horses or other large animals shall be permitted on the walking
path.
   (C)   Pedestrians shall have the right-of-way in all instances.
   (D)   All users of the walking path shall wear or carry reflective devices.
   (E)   Users of the walking path do so at their own risk.
(Ord. 04-87, passed 12-10-1987) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 92: FIRE REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Buildings or other structures
   
92.02   Fireworks
Outdoor Burning
   
92.15   Permitted burning subject to conditions
   
92.16   Prohibited burning
   
92.17   Land clearing
   
92.18   Duty to report fire or smoke
   
92.19   Noxious smoke
   
92.20   Outdoor cooking devices
   
92.21   Burn bans
   
92.22   Cleanup of property damaged by fire or smoke
   
92.23   Inspection of premises emanating fire or smoke
   
92.24   Enforcement
 
   
92.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 BUILDINGS OR OTHER STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Any owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises,
who shall keep or maintain the same when, for want of repair or by reason of
age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, it is especially liable to
fire, and which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others,
or is especially liable to fire and which is so occupied that fire would
endanger other persons or their property therein is guilty of a violation.
   (B)   Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure, or premises,
who shall keep or maintain the same with an improper arrangement of a stove,
range, furnace or other heating appliance of any kind whatever, including
chimneys, flues and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be
dangerous in the matter of fire, or health, or safety of persons or property of
others; or who shall keep or maintain any building, other structure or premises
with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or system, or with a storage
of explosives, petroleum, gasolene, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products,
ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, refuse or with any other condition
which shall be dangerous in character to the persons, health of property of
others; or which shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting, augmenting or
causing fires; or which shall create conditions dangerous to firefighters or
occupants of such buildings, structure or premises other than the maintainer
thereof is guilty of a violation.
   (C)   No prosecution shall be brought under this section until the order
provided for in §
30.02 be given, and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with the
same.
(Ord. 05-80, passed 12-1-1980) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.02 FIREWORKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in possession for sale, to
offer for sale or to sell any firecrackers, Roman candles, sky rockets,
torpedoes or other pyrotechnics within the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or explode or cause to be
fired or exploded any firecrackers, Roman candles, sky rockets, torpedoes or
other pyrotechnics within the city limits, except that the City Council may
issue a permit permitting fireworks displays in keeping with certain functions
and traditions, and then only after proper safeguards have been assured.
(Ord. 04-80, passed 10-9-1980) Penalty, see §
92.99
OUTDOOR BURNING
§ 92.15 PERMITTED BURNING SUBJECT TO CONDITIONS.
   Burning permitted by this subchapter shall be permitted within the city
limits subject to the following conditions.
   (A)   Burning shall be commenced and conducted only when wind direction and
other meteorological conditions are such that smoke and other pollutants will
not cause adverse effects to any public road, landing strip, navigable water or
off-site structure containing sensitive receptor(s).
   (B)   If at any time the burning causes or may tend to cause smoke to blow
onto or across a road or highway, it is the responsibility of the person
initiating the burn to post flag persons on affected roads.
   (C)   Burning must be conducted downwind of or at least 300 feet (90 meters)
from any structure containing sensitive receptors located on adjacent
properties unless prior written approval is obtained from the adjacent occupant
with possessory control.
   (D)   Burning shall be conducted in compliance with the following
meteorological and timing considerations.
      (1)   The initiation of burning shall commence no earlier than one hour
after sunrise. Burning shall be completed on the same day not later than one
hour before sunset and shall be attended by a responsible party at all times
during the active burn phase when the fire is progressing. In cases where
residual fires and/or smoldering objects continue to emit smoke after this
time, such areas shall be extinguished if the smoke from these areas has the
potential to create a nuisance or traffic hazard condition. In no case shall
the extent of the burn area be allowed to increase after this time.
      (2)   Burning shall not be commenced when surface wind speed is predicted
to be less than six mph (five knots) or greater than 23 mph (20 knots) during
the burn period.
      (3)   Burning shall not be conducted during periods of actual or
predicted persistent low-level atmospheric temperature inversions.
   (E)   Electrical insulation, treated lumber, plastics, non-wood
construction/demolition materials, heavy oils, asphaltic materials, potentially
explosive materials, chemical wastes and items containing natural or synthetic
rubber must not be burned.
(Ord. 04132023C, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.16 PROHIBITED BURNING.
   Burning of any solid waste, which includes garbage or hazardous waste is
prohibited and shall never be permitted within the city for any reason or
purpose. The terms SOLID WASTE and HAZARDOUS WASTE shall have the meaning as
defined under state law.
(Ord. 04132023C, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.17 LAND CLEARING.
   On-site land clearing may occur only in compliance with the state and
federal laws and regulations. In addition to complying with the state and
federal laws and regulations, a person clearing a lot of greater than two acres
of selected trees, brush and plant growth originating on such property may only
burn such vegetation cleared from the property with the express permission of
the Fire Marshal in compliance with any additional requirements of the state or
federal laws and regulations stipulated by the Fire Marshal.
(Ord. 04132023C, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 92.18 DUTY TO REPORT FIRE OR SMOKE.
   In the event of a fire or discovery of a fire or discovery of impermissible
smoke discharge caused by fire, burning or smoldering combustibles on any
property, the owner, occupant or person in control of the property or person in
control of the fire from which the fire or smoke is emanating shall immediately
report such condition to the Fire Department.
(Ord. 04132023C, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 92.19 NOXIOUS SMOKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city limits, in any way, to
intentionally, knowingly or carelessly burn or cause to be burned any
combustibles which cause noxious smoke, toxic order or smoke of a significant
quantity or quality to be released so as to inhibit the use and enjoyment of
neighboring properties. Such release of smoke is hereby declared a nuisance and
is hereby prohibited.
(Ord. 04132023C, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.20 OUTDOOR COOKING DEVICES.
   (A)   The operator of an outdoor cooking device shall use and maintain the
device in a safe and properly operating condition when intended to be used.
   (B)   Such devices shall not be utilized in close proximity to a building or
other combustible materials.
(Ord. 04132023C, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 92.21 BURN BANS.
   During periods of time in which the county adopts or institutes a burn ban
for the entire county, burning is prohibited within the city in accordance with
such burn ban.
(Ord. 04132023C, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.22 CLEANUP OF PROPERTY DAMAGED BY FIRE OR SMOKE.
   (A)   All properties damaged by fire are hereby declared a nuisance and must
be secured and cleaned up by the owner, occupant or person in control of the
property.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation responsible for any fire or
impermissible smoke discharge shall institute and complete all actions
necessary to remedy and assist in the remedy of all the effects of such fire
and/or smoke at no cost to the city.
   (C)   Whenever any building or other structure is partially or totally
burned, the owner or occupant of the property or the person in charge or
control thereof, within ten days after notice from the Fire Marshal, shall
remove from the premises all refuse, debris, charred and partially burned
lumber and material as directed in such notice. If such building or other
structure is burned to such an extent that it is rendered incapable of being
repaired, the owner or occupant of the property upon which the same is located
or the person in control thereof, within ten days after notice from the Fire
Marshal, shall remove from the premises all of the remaining portions of the
building or structure that are damaged beyond repair and immediately secure the
property as directed.
   (D)   The Fire Marshal may direct the owner, occupant or person in control
of the property in the necessary measures to secure the premises after a fire.
The owner, occupant or person in control of the property shall promptly comply
with the directive of the Fire Marshal. Failure to comply with the written
directives of the Fire Marshal within ten days of the notice shall be a
violation of this subchapter.
   (E)   When deemed necessary by the Fire Marshal due to an imminent threat to
the public safety or an attractive nuisance constituting an imminent threat,
the Fire Marshal may cause immediate cleanup to be initiated by the Fire
Department or by an authorized individual or firm.
   (F)   All costs associated with such cleanup shall be borne by the owner,
operator, person in control of the property or other person responsible for the
fire or impermissible discharge of smoke. Failure of a person deemed
responsible for a fire to pay the costs of cleanup shall be deemed a violation
of this subchapter.
(Ord. 04132023C, passed 4-13-2023) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.23 INSPECTION OF PREMISES EMANATING FIRE OR SMOKE.
   Any premises emanating fire or smoke shall be subject to inspection by the
Fire Marshal, or authorized representative, the City Marshal or the Code
Enforcement Officer at any reasonable hour or at any hour in cases of suspected
fire or smoke discharge.
(Ord. 04132023C, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 92.24 ENFORCEMENT.
   The civil and criminal provisions of this subchapter shall be enforced by
those persons or agencies designated by the city. Licensed peace officers
employed or designated by the Fire Marshal, and his or her designee, are at all
times granted authority to enforce this subchapter. The Fire Marshal or his
authorized representative and the Little River Volunteer Fire Department under
the supervision of the Fire Chief may extinguish any fire until the matter can
be resolved through the proper legal processes. A peace officer employed or
designated by the city and the Fire Marshal, or his or her authorized
representative, may further prohibit burning until the matter can be resolved
through the proper legal processes. It shall be a violation of this subchapter
to interfere with or to violate any lawful verbal or written directives of the
Fire Marshal or a peace officer in the performance of his or her duties.
(Ord. 04132023C, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person violating §
92.01 shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200.
      (2)   The fines provided for in division (B)(1) above shall be recovered
by the city in the same manner as provided by law for the enforcement of fines,
forfeitures and punishments for offenses against the city.
      (3)   Everyday’s maintenance of any of the conditions prohibited in §
92.01 shall be a distinct and separate offense.
      (4)   All misdemeanors shall be prosecuted, and all fines and forfeitures
herein provided for shall be recovered and enforced, in the same manner as
provided by law for the enforcement of fines, forfeitures, penalties and
punishments for offenses generally against the city.
   (C)   Any person violating §
92.02 will be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not to exceed
$200 upon conviction. Each day during or upon which said person shall violate
or continue violation of any provisions of §
92.02 or non-compliance with any requirement of §
92.02 shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. The violation of any
provision of §
92.02 or failure to comply with any requirement of §
92.02 shall each constitute a distinct and separate offense.
   (D)   A violation of §§
92.15 through
92.24 implicates fire safety and affects the public health and safety.
Accordingly, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §§
92.15 through
92.24, or shall fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements
thereof, within the city limits shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall
be liable for a fine or penalty not to exceed $2,000. Each day the violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense. Such penalty shall be in addition
to all the other remedies provided herein.
(Ord. 04-80, passed 10-9-1980; Ord. 05-80, passed 12-1-1980; Ord. 04132023C,
passed 4-13-2023)
CHAPTER 93: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
   
93.01   Authority
   
93.02   Purpose
   
93.03   Definitions
   
93.04   Duties and authority of the Code Enforcement Authority
   
93.05   Littering
   
93.06   Repair of motor vehicles and storage of materials outdoors
   
93.07   Nuisances and offensive conditions on private property
   
93.08   Noise nuisances
   
93.09   Right to abate dangerous conditions
   
93.10   Right to inspect
   
93.11   Violations and notices
   
93.12   Costs and appeals
   
93.13   Cost of abatement constitutes lien
   
93.14   Enforcement
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the police powers and authority given
general law cities by the constitution, codes and general laws of the state,
including, but not limited to, Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, Chapter 51 and the Tex.
Health and Safety Code.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 93.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for public health and general
welfare, the efficient and effective provision of city services and the
protection of the environment and natural resources of the community. From and
after the passage of this chapter, all occupancies and uses within the city
shall conform to the following rules and regulations in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 93.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BRUSH. All uncultivated shrubs, bushes and small trees.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. The person designated by the city for purposes
of making inspections, sending notices and otherwise enforcing the provisions
of this chapter.
   EARTH AND CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS. Earth, rocks, bricks, concrete, other
similar materials and waste materials resulting from construction or
remodeling.
   GARBAGE. Rubbish, trash, kitchen and household waste, ashes, bottles, cans,
rags, paper, food, food containers, lawn trimmings, tree trimmings, hedge
trimmings, leaves, grass, weeds and refuse, and all decayable wastes, including
animal and vegetable matter.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Solid or liquid waste, in any amount; which is defined,
characterized, identified or designated as hazardous by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency or appropriate state agency by or pursuant to
federal or state law, or waste, in any amount, which is regulated under federal
or state law, including motor oil and radiator, engine crank case, transmission
or differential fluid, gasoline, paint, paint cans, toxic or corrosive
materials or any material found harmful to personnel or equipment as determined
by the Director of Public Works.
   JUNK. All worn out, worthless and discarded material, in general, including,
but not limited to, scrap iron, scrap tin, scrap brass, scrap copper, scrap
lead or scrap zinc and all other scrap metals and their alloys, and bones,
rags, glass, paper, cordage, cloth, rubber, rope, tinfoil, bottles, old cotton,
machinery, tools, construction materials, appliances, furniture, fixtures,
utensils, boxes or crates, pipe or pipe fittings, automobile or airplane tires,
dismantled motor vehicles, boats, boat trailers, boathouses or travel trailers
or parts thereof, or other manufactured goods or odds and ends that are worn-
out, worthless, deteriorated, obsolete, discarded material or other wastes,
especially those that are unusable in their existing condition.
   LITTER. Any quantity of uncontainerized paper, metal, plastic, glass or
miscellaneous solid waste which may be classed as trash, debris, rubbish,
refuse, garbage or junk not placed in a solid waste container.
   LOT. Any tract, block or other parcel of land, or portion thereof located
within the city limits.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle, car, boat or similar vehicle that is, or was
originally, designed to be self-propelled.
   REFUSE. See GARBAGE.
   RUBBISH. All refuse, junk, rejected tin cans, old vessels of all sorts,
useless articles, abandoned pipe, waste wood, wood products, tree trimmings,
grass cuttings, dead plants, weeds, leaves, dead trees or branches thereof,
chips, shavings, sawdust, printed matter, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, used
and discarded clothing, used and discarded shoes and boots, combustible waste,
pulp and other products used for packaging or wrapping crockery and glass,
ashes, cinders, floor sweepings, glass, mineral or metallic substances,
textiles and objects of all sorts, and in general all litter. The words “any
and all objectionable or unsanitary matters” not included within the meaning of
the other terms as herein used, means those which are liable to produce or tend
to produce an unhealthy, unwholesome or unsanitary condition to the general
locality where the same are situated.
   SEWAGE or WASTEWATER. A combination of waterborne wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and commercial and industrial establishments,
together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
   SOLID WASTE. All household garbage and refuse and commercial garbage and
refuse, brush cuttings and weeds.
   SOLID WASTE SERVICE. The collection and hauling of residential and business
solid waste, such as garbage, trash and refuse, for disposal at a state
licensed landfill; and the actions and services directly related thereto or
necessary for the provision of such services to consumers or customers in the
city.
   STRUCTURE. An object which is built or constructed regardless of the
materials used.
   TRASH. See GARBAGE. 
   UNWHOLESOME MATTER. All stagnant water, filth, carrion, impure matters and
any condition liable to produce, harbor or spread disease or germs or cause
noxious, foul and offensive odors, including foodstuff or by-product thereof of
any animal nature, or any fruit, vegetable or other thing which may become
tainted, diseased, fermented or decaying or otherwise unwholesome or unclean.
   WASTE. Rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous or
solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural, commercial or industrial
activities.
   WEEDS. All rank and uncultivated vegetable growth or matter which is liable
to become an unwholesome or decaying mass or breeding place for flies,
mosquitoes, snakes, rats or other vermin, including, but not limited, to all
grass or weeds that are 12 inches tall, or taller, and on a platted lot within
the city.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 93.04 DUTIES AND AUTHORITY OF THE CODE ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   In addition to the authority of the Police Department to enforce any part of
this chapter, the Code Enforcement Authority shall be authorized to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 93.05 LITTERING.
   (A)   Littering by pedestrians and motorists prohibited.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, discard, place or
deposit litter in any manner or amount on any public or private property within
the corporate limits of the city, except in lawfully provided containers.
      (2)   In prosecuting the owner of a motor vehicle for violating division
(A)(1) above, proof that the litter originated from the particular vehicle
described in the complaint, together with proof that the defendant named in the
complaint was at the time of such violation the registered owner of said
vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a presumption that the registered owner
was the person who committed the violation.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of every person distributing handbills,
leaflets, flyers or any other advertising and information material to take
whatever measures that may be necessary to keep such materials from littering
public or private property.
      (4)   (a)   To facilitate proper disposal of litter by pedestrians and
motorists, publicly patronized or used establishments shall provide, regularly
empty and maintain in good condition adequate containers that meet standards
prescribed by the city.
         (b)   This requirement shall be applicable, but not limited to, fast
food outlets, shopping centers, convenience stores, supermarkets, service
stations, commercial parking lots and public institutions.
   (B)   Vehicles transporting loose materials.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, institution
or organization to transport any loose cargo by truck or other motor vehicle
within the corporate limits of the city unless said cargo is covered and
secured in such manner as to prevent depositing of litter on public and private
property.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) above shall also apply to the owner or operator of
the truck or other vehicle.
      (3)   In prosecuting a person, firm, corporation, institution,
organization or owner or operator of a truck or other vehicle under division
(B)(1) above, proof that the cargo was not adequately covered and secured shall
constitute in evidence a presumption of a violation of this section.
   (C)   Loading and unloading operations.
      (1)   Any owner or occupant of an establishment or institution at which
litter is attendant to the packing and unpacking and loading and unloading of
materials at exterior locations shall provide suitable containers for the
disposal and storage of such litter and shall make appropriate arrangements for
its collection.
      (2)   Further, it shall be the duty of the owner or occupant under
division (C)(1) above to remove any litter that has not been containerized at
the end of each day.
   (D)   Responsibility to keep property clean; abatement.
      (1)   The owner, agent, occupant or lessee, or renter of private property
shall keep the exterior free of litter, junk, refuse and unwholesome matter.
This requirement applies not only to removal of loose litter, but to materials
that already are, or become, trapped at locations such as fence and wall bases,
grassy and planted areas, borders, embankments and other lodging points.
      (2)   Owners, agents, occupants or lessees, or renters of private
property that faces city sidewalks and strips between streets shall keep such
sidewalks and strips free of litter.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for a person under this section to sweep or
push litter from sidewalks and strips into streets. Owners, agents, occupants
or lessees of private property must pick up and put sidewalk and strip
sweepings into household or commercial solid waste containers.
      (4)   Non-resident owners of vacant lots or other vacant property shall
appoint a resident agent to keep that lot or other property free of litter.
   (E)   Dumping refuse; other material. It shall be unlawful for any person to
dump refuse, garbage, rubbish, junk or any other material, including, but not
limited to, cement or any earth or construction materials, on or near city
streets, private property, parks, parking lots, commercial or public buildings,
or on adjoining highways and rights-of-way; provided, however, the owner or
resident of private property may deposit a reasonable amount of refuse or
garbage on his or her private property for soil composting purposes, so long as
such is done in a manner that prevents the deposit from being blown by the wind
or strewn or scattered by animals.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.06 REPAIR OF MOTOR VEHICLES AND STORAGE OF MATERIALS OUTDOORS.
   (A)   Motor vehicle maintenance, assemblage and the like on public property.
It shall be unlawful to repair, strip, assemble or perform ordinary maintenance
on a motor vehicle on public property, parking lots or any vacant lots within
the city limits, except in those situations in which immediate action is
necessary because the vehicle is disabled.
   (B)   Motor vehicle maintenance, assemblage and the like on private
property. It shall be unlawful to repair, strip, assemble or store a disabled
motor vehicle, or parts thereof, on any private property; unless said vehicle
is totally enclosed within a structure or behind a six-foot privacy fence where
the vehicle is completely screened from the view of the public and is not
visible from a public roadway, except in those situations in which immediate
action is necessary because a vehicle is disabled and the vehicle remains for
no longer than 48 consecutive hours.
   (C)   Refrigerators and other containers.
      (1)   This section applies to a refrigerator, icebox or other airtight or
semi-airtight container that has:
         (a)   A capacity of at least one and one-half cubic feet;
         (b)   An opening of at least 50 square inches; and
         (c)   A door or lid equipped with a latch or other fastening device
capable of securing the door or lid shut.
      (2)   No person shall place a container described in division (C)(1)
above outside of a structure or in a warehouse, a storage room or an unoccupied
or abandoned structure so that it is accessible to children.
      (3)   No person shall permit a container described in division (C)(1)
above to remain outside of a structure or in a warehouse, storage room or
unoccupied or abandoned structure so that it is accessible to children.
   (D)   Residential solid waste containerization; removal.
      (1)   All owners or residents of residential property shall have
sufficient container capacity to accommodate their volume of solid waste
between collections.
      (2)   Owners or residents of residential property shall deposit all items
too large to fit into containers, such as, but not limited to, appliances,
furniture and mattresses through fee-payment bulk collection service or self
transport of such items to end-disposal facilities outside the city.
      (3)   Owners or residents of residential property shall bundle and
securely tie all loose materials which normally fit into containers, but which
are excess as a result of special circumstances, such as holidays, so as to
repel animals, prevent materials from , blowing or scattering, and place such
materials beside the containers.
      (4)    Owners or residents of residential property shall keep containers
covered at all times.
      (5)   The owner or user of any container which does not conform to
prescribed standards or which has defects likely to hamper collection or injure
the person collecting the contents or the public generally shall replace the
container after receiving written notice of such defects from the city. Failure
to do so within five days of such notification shall constitute a violation of
this section.
      (6)   The owner of containers used for collection shall take necessary
precautions so that the contents do not become litter when placing and removing
them.
      (7)   It shall be unlawful for any resident to deposit household solid
waste in any receptacle maintained on a sidewalk or at any other location for
disposal of litter by pedestrians.
   (E)   Commercial solid waste containerization; removal.
      (1)   All owners of establishments and institutions which generate solid
waste for collection by approved contractors shall obtain adequate containers
approved by the city and shall keep said containers in such a manner that they
are not visible from adjacent public or private property.
      (2)   Owners described in division (E)(1) above shall keep containers
covered at all times.
      (3)   The owner or user of any container which does not conform to
prescribed standards or which has defects likely to hamper collection or injure
the person collecting the contents or the public generally shall replace the
container after receiving written notice of such defects from the city. Failure
to do so within five days of such notification shall constitute a violation of
this section.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager or employee of a
commercial establishment or institution to deposit solid waste from that
establishment or institution in any receptacle maintained on a sidewalk or at
any other location for disposal of litter by pedestrians.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.07 NUISANCES AND OFFENSIVE CONDITIONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful for an owner, occupant,
lessee or renter of any lot or parcel of ground within the city limits (herein
cumulatively referred to as “owner” or “occupant”) to:
      (1)   Fail to maintain such property:
         (a)   Free of accumulations of brush, earth and construction
materials, garbage, litter, junk, refuse, rubbish; solid waste, trash, weeds,
unwholesome matters; and any other objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary
matter of whatsoever nature;
         (b)   Free and clear from weeds and tall grass from the line of such
property, including the sidewalks, to the established curb line next adjacent
thereto;
         (c)   Free of drain holes and depressions in which water collects or
to fail to regrade any lots, grounds or yards or any other property owned or
controlled by the owner or occupant which shall be unwholesome or have stagnant
water thereon, or which from any other cause, is in such condition as to be
liable to produce disease;
         (d)   Free from filth, carrion or other impure or unwholesome matter
of any kind, on any portion of the property under the owner or occupant’s
control, including any house, building, establishment, lot yard or ground owned
or occupied, especially any such filth, carrion or other impure or unwholesome
matter that exudes any noxious, foul or offensive odor that is detectable past
or beyond the boundary of the property upon which the matter is located;
         (e)   Free of discharge of sewage or hazardous wastes into the soil or
subsurface soil without proper containment thereto; or
         (f)   In any manner that is inconsistent with this chapter.
      (2)   Suffer, allow or permit any person to bring or transport onto the
property any filth, carrion, decaying animal or vegetable matter, or other
impure or unwholesome matter of any kind, that exudes any noxious, foul or
offensive odor that is detectable past or beyond the boundary of the property
that is under the ownership or control of the owner or occupant; or
      (3)   Operate or conduct any business or activity on the property in a
manner that causes or results in any noxious, foul or offensive odor that
originates on the property, or that emanates from any source that such owner or
occupant has suffered, allowed or permitted to come onto the property, being
detectable past or beyond the boundary of the property that is under the
ownership or control of the owner or occupant.
   (B)   Nuisance declared and duty to abate. Whenever brush, earth or
construction materials, garbage, litter, junk, refuse, rubbish, solid waste,
trash, weeds, unwholesome matters and any other objectionable, unsightly or
unsanitary matter of whatsoever shall exist, covering or partially covering the
surface of any lot or parcel of any real estate situated within the city, or
when any of said lots or parcels of real estate as aforesaid shall have the
surface thereof filled or partly filled with holes or be in such condition that
the same holds or is liable to hold stagnant water therein, or if from any
other cause shall be in such condition as to cause disease, or produce, harbor
or spread disease or germs of any nature or tend to render the surrounding
atmosphere unhealthy, unwholesome or obnoxious, or shall contain unwholesome
matter of any kind or description, or any other conduct prohibited hereby
occurs upon any lot or parcel in the city, the same is hereby declared to
constitute a public nuisance, the prompt abatement of which is hereby declared
to be a public necessity. Any such nuisance shall be removed from the property
by the owner or other person in possession or control of such property.
   (C)   Noxious odors declared nuisance. If the owner or occupant of any lot
or parcel of land within the city shall suffer, allow or permit any spoiled,
rotting or decaying animal or vegetable matter to be on the property, and, such
spoiled, rotting or decaying animal or vegetable matter shall cause or result
in a noxious, foul or offensive odor being detectable past or beyond the
boundary of the property that is under the ownership or control of the owner or
occupant, the same is hereby declared to be and constitute a public nuisance.
Any such nuisance shall be removed from the property by the owner or other
person in possession or control of such property.
   (D)   Storage of materials. All garbage, sewage, hazardous wastes and other
unwholesome materials of any kind shall be stored in containers to prevent such
materials from dispersing beyond the storage location, seepage into the ground
or permitting the escape of noxious, foul or offensive odors into the air
across the boundaries of the owner or occupant’s property to another property.
   (E)   Maintenance of processing premises. The entire yard and premises
occupied by any butcher shops, meat markets and food processing or food
manufacturing establishments of any animal or vegetable matter shall be well
drained, the floors shall be free of sawdust, shavings or other dust creating
or filth-collecting coverings and all back rooms, sheds or yards, or other
places connected by any opening with any room shall at all times be kept in a
clean and sanitary condition, and free from filth, exposed refuse or garbage,
trash and unrefrigerated animal or vegetable scraps. Each room and the floors,
walls, ceilings, windows and doors thereof, and all the fixtures, furniture,
receptacles, utensils, machinery, implements and other things, excepting
receptacles used to hold refuse, in each such room; or used in connection with
any such business, shall at all times be kept free from dirt, adhering foreign
matter, unwholesome odors, decaying substance, cobwebs, trash, scraps and the
like, and in a clean and sanitary condition. Further, all butcher shops, meat
markets and food processing or food manufacturing establishments shall comply
with the following requirements.
      (1)   Two adjacent deep vats shall be provided for in all rooms
containing the actual butcher shops, meat markets and food processing or food
manufacturing establishments with hot and cold running water under pressure.
      (2)   No slaughtered meat, fish, poultry or meat products, and no milk,
butter, cheese or dairy products shall be left open or exposed to contamination
by dust, air, insects or other extraneous matter, either within or without any
such room or place of business, and all fresh or uncooked meat, fish, poultry
and all milk and butter shall be immediately placed and kept in a refrigerator,
or icebox or cold-storage room, except when removed therefrom for the immediate
purposes and operation of the business. Meats and fish shall not be kept in the
same compartment with milk and butter.
      (3)   Each refrigeration, icebox or cold storage room shall be well
constructed, tight and secure, and shall be kept reasonably dry on the inside
and free from foul odors, mold and slime, and shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.
      (4)   All readily perishable products shall be kept at 50ºF or below,
including offal, bones and other waste products while on the property. All
liquid wastes from such refrigeration equipment shall be connected to a public
sewer in an approved manner.
      (5)   No refuse or tainted or decaying meat, fish or other substance
shall be allowed to remain in any refrigerator, icebox or cold-storage
compartment, unless such refrigerator, icebox or cold-storage compartment is
designated and maintained exclusively for such purpose. Offal, bones or other
garbage or discarded organic matter, animal or vegetable, or slops or refuse of
any character whatsoever shall not be left exposed to the atmosphere of any
room, but shall immediately be deposited and kept in a closed container which
shall be emptied and cleaned at least once each day. All refuse and tainted or
decaying meat, fish, poultry, cheese or other organic matter, whether animal or
vegetable, shall be stored and removed from the property in a manner to prevent
any foul, noxious or offensive odor from being detectable past or beyond the
boundary of the property that is under the ownership or control of the owner or
occupant.
      (6)   Each room shall be kept free from flies, rats, roaches and other
insects and vermin.
      (7)   No animals or fowl shall be kept or allowed to be kept in the same
room as any food processing or manufacturing.
   (F)   Waste transportation and disposal. All vehicles, wagons, carts,
transports and conveyances used for delivering, collecting or transporting,
through the city, any offal, bones or other garbage or discarded organic
matter, animal or vegetable matter, or slops refuse of any character in an
amount of greater than 45 pounds shall keep, maintain, haul and transport the
waste in an enclosed storage container that is well constructed, tight and
secure, to prevent the escape of any such matter and to prevent any noxious,
foul or offensive smells from escaping the confines of such storage container
within the city limits.
   (G)   Limitation on the height of grass and weeds. It shall be unlawful for
any person who shall own or occupy any lot or lots in the city limits to allow
weeds and/or grass to grow on such lot or lots to a height of more than 12
inches. Weeds and/or grass of a height exceeding 12 inches are declared a
nuisance; provided, however, this section shall not apply to property used for
the growing of agricultural crops or grass if such property has not been
platted into lots.
   (H)   Discharge of sewage and hazardous wastes. Any person or persons who
shall allow or permit sewage or hazardous wastes to discharge into the ground
or subsurface soil, which shall have the effect of causing odors or obnoxious,
unhealthy and unwholesome conditions to exist, is declared to have caused a
public nuisance and shall be in violation of this chapter.
   (I)   Prima facie evidence. In any prosecution charging a violation of this
chapter governing the discharge of sewage or toxic wastes, proof that the
particular sewage or toxic wastes described in the complaint was discharged
into the ground or subsurface soil in violation of division (H) above, together
with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such
discharge, the registered owner or occupant of such lot or lots, shall
constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner or
occupant of such lot or lots was the person who discharged such sewage or toxic
wastes when such violation occurred.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.08 NOISE NUISANCE.
   Any unreasonably loud, disturbing or unnecessary noise which causes material
distress, discomfort or injury to persons of ordinary sensibilities in the
immediate vicinity thereof, or any noise of such character, intensity and
continued duration which substantially interferes with the comfortable
enjoyment of private homes by persons of ordinary sensibilities, is prohibited
after the effective date hereof, and is hereby declared to be a nuisance. The
following acts, among others, are declared to come within the purview of this
section and to be nuisances within the meaning hereof, but said enumerations
shall not be deemed to be exclusive, such acts being as follows:
   (A)   The continued or frequent sounding of any horn or other signal device
on any automobile or other vehicle except as a danger or warning signal, or
creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh
noise for any unnecessary purpose or unreasonable period of time; or
   (B)   The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air, unless
the noise to be created thereby has been effectively muffled and reduced.
(Ord. 1211-01, passed 12-11-2008) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.09 RIGHT TO ABATE DANGEROUS CONDITIONS.
   Whenever an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person
exists as a result of garbage, rubbish, junk, trash, unwholesome matter, sewage
or toxic waste discharge, storage of airtight containers in an unsafe location,
or weeds which have grown to a height, at any point on the property, of greater
than 48 inches, the city may abate the nuisance without notice to the owner. In
the event the city abates the nuisance under this section, the city shall
forward notice to the owner within seven days in the manner set forth in §
93.11.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 93.10 RIGHT TO INSPECT.
   The Code Enforcement Officer or designee is authorized to inspect any
property within the corporate limits of the city, at any reasonable time,
subject, however, to the requirements for obtaining the permission of the
occupant, or obtaining a warrant for the entry and inspection of private
residences.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 93.11 VIOLATIONS AND NOTICES.
   (A)   If an officer charged with the enforcement of this chapter shall
determine that a person has violated any provision of this chapter, such
officer may issue a citation.
   (B)   If an officer charged with the enforcement of this chapter shall
determine that a situation exists which immediately affects or threatens the
health, safety and well-being of the general public, and that immediate action
is necessary, such officer may take such action as shall be necessary,
including issuing citations for violations of the terms and provisions hereof
to the owner and/or occupant of the property upon which such condition exists,
as may be deemed appropriate and necessary.
   (C)   If an officer charged with enforcement of this chapter determines a
situation constitutes an immediate threat to the public health, safety and
welfare, and the owner or occupant of the property is absent or fails to
immediately remedy the violation, the City Council may, at a regular session or
at an emergency session called for the purpose of considering the issue, upon
evidence heard, determine that an emergency exists and order such action as may
be required to protect the public health, safety and welfare. In such event,
the city may prosecute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to
recover its costs.
   (D)   If any owner or occupant shall fail or refuse to remedy any of the
conditions prohibited by this chapter within seven days after written notice to
do so, the city may do such work or cause the same to be done, and pay
therefor, and charge the expenses in doing or having such work done or
improvements made to the owner(s) of the property, and such charge shall be a
personal liability of such owner to the city.
   (E)   Notices required pursuant to this chapter shall be in writing. Such
notices may be served upon such owner and/or occupant as follows: in person by
an officer or employee of the city; by letter addressed to such owner or
occupant at his or her post office address; or, if personal service may not be
had, or the owner or occupant’s address be not known, then notice may be given
by publishing a brief summary of such order at least once in the official
newspaper of the city or by posting a notice on or near the front door of each
building on the property upon which the violation relates, or, if no building
exists, by posting notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the
ground on the property to which the violation relates. The notice shall state
“Sanitary Improvements,” “To Whom It May Concern” and a brief statement of the
violation(s). Service of the notice by any one of the above methods, or by a
combination thereof, shall be deemed sufficient notice.
   (F)   If an owner is mailed a notice in accordance with division (E) above
and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as refused or unclaimed
the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as
delivered.
   (G)   Notices provided by mail or by posting as set forth in division (E)
above may provide for year round abatement of the nuisance and inform the owner
that should the owner commit any other violation of the same kind that pose a
danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of
the date of the notice, the city without further notice may abate the violation
at the owner’s expense and assess the costs against the property.
   (H)   Persons littering, in violation of §
93.05 or causing or creating a prohibited nuisance in the presence of a person
authorized to enforce this chapter, may be cited or a complaint filed for such
violation without notice of the violation, or warning, and such citation or
complaint shall be filed in the Municipal Court of the city.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 93.12 COSTS AND APPEALS.
   In addition to any other remedy provided in this chapter and cumulative
thereto, the Code Enforcement Officer, after giving to the owner of the
property seven days’ notice in writing, as provided in §
93.11, may cause any of the work or improvements mentioned in this chapter to
be done at the expense of the city, and charge the utility bill of the property
on which such work or improvements are done, and cause all of the actual cost
to the city to be assessed on the real estate or lot on which such expenses
occurred; provided, that the owner of any such real estate may appeal to the
City Council from the order of the Code Enforcement Officer by filing a written
statement with the Code Enforcement Officer within seven days after receipt of
the notice provided for above, stating that such real estate complied with the
provision of this chapter before the expiration of a seven-day period. The City
Council shall set a date, within 30 days from the date of the appeal, for
hearing the appeal to determine whether the real estate complied with the
provisions of this chapter before the expiration of such seven-day period. The
authority of the Code Enforcement Officer to proceed to cause such work to be
done shall not be suspended while an appeal from the order is pending. If it
shall be determined by the City Council that the premises complied with the
provisions of this chapter before the expiration of the seven-day period, then
no personal liability of the owner shall arise nor shall any lien be created
against the premises upon which such work was done.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 93.13 COST OF ABATEMENT CONSTITUTES LIEN.
   Cumulative of the city’s remedy by fine, as set forth herein, the city may
do such work or cause the same to be done to remedy such condition to remove
such matter from such owner’s premises at the city’s expense and charge the
same to the utility bill of such property and assess the same against the real
estate or lot or lots upon which such expense is incurred.
   (A)   Expenditures plus 10% per annum interest on the expenditures from the
date of such payment by the city shall be added to the next billing cycle for
utility bills for the real estate or lot or lots, if not already paid. Payment
shall be due and payable in full by the owner or occupant at the time of
payment of such utility bill. If the property is unoccupied, no utilities shall
be furnished to the property where the work occurred until such obligation, as
herein set out, payable to the city for abatement of any nuisance described
herein is paid in full.
   (B)   Upon filing with the County Clerk a statement by the City Secretary or
designee of such expenses, the city shall have a privileged lien upon said real
estate or lot or lots, second only to tax liens and liens for street
improvements, to secure the expenditure so made and 10% per annum interest on
the amount from the date of such payment so made by the city.
   (C)   The city may, additionally, institute suit and recover such expenses
and foreclose such lien in any court of competent jurisdiction, and the
statement so filed with the County Clerk or a certified copy thereof shall be
prima facie proof of the amount expended in any such work or improvements to
remedy such condition or remove any such matter.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 93.14 ENFORCEMENT.
   The civil and criminal provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the
persons or agencies designated by the city, including, but not limited to, the
County Sheriff’s Department, the Police Department, the Building Official and
the Code Enforcement Officer. It shall be a violation of this chapter to
interfere with the Code Enforcement Officer, or other person authorized to
enforce this chapter, in the performance of his or her duties.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter,
except §
93.08, or shall fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements of
this chapter, except §
93.08, within the city limits, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall
be liable for a fine as follows:
      (1)   One hundred dollar fine for the first offense;
      (2)   Two hundred dollar fine for the second offense; and
      (3)   And for each subsequent offense after the second offense, an
additional $100 fine shall be imposed upon the violator up to a maximum of
$2,000.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating §
93.08 shall be fined not less than $1 nor more than $500 for each offense, and
a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 1211-01, passed 12-11-2008; Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   TEMPORARY BUSINESSES AND SALES
      
111.   CABLE TELEVISION
CHAPTER 110: TEMPORARY BUSINESSES AND SALES
Section
Garage Sales
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   [Missing]
   
110.03   [Missing]
   
110.04   [Missing]
   
110.05   Information to be filed
   
110.06   Persons and sales excepted
Solicitations at Private Residences
   
110.20   Enforcement
   
110.21   Hours and places of solicitations
   
110.22   Unlawful use of streets and sidewalks
   
110.23   Unlawful parking on streets
   
110.24   Unlawful solicitation on public roadway
   
110.25   Definitions
   
110.26   Requirements
   
110.27   Allowing property to be used by unlicensed persons
   
110.28   Application and issuance
   
110.29   Grounds to revoke or deny
   
110.30   Appeals
   
110.31   Contents
   
110.32   Fee and term
   
110.33   Bond
   
110.34   Conditions
   
110.35   Assignment
   
110.36   Display
   
110.37   Records
   
110.38   Service, warranties and claims
   
110.39   Trespass
Mobile Food Vehicles
   
110.50   Definitions
   
110.51   Scope
   
110.52   Mobile food vehicle permit required
   
110.53   Application for a mobile food vehicle permit
   
110.54   Rules and regulations
   
110.55   Permit fees
   
110.56   Permit renewal
   
110.57   Prohibition against the transfer of a permit
   
110.58   Operation of mobile food vehicles
   
110.59   Enforcement
 
   
110.99   Penalty
GARAGE SALES
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARAGE SALES. All sales entitled garage sale, lawn sale, attic sale, estate
sale or an similar casual sale or tangible personal property by the owner of
such property (such owner being a person who does not hold himself or herself
out as engaging, nor does he or she habitually engage in the business of
selling such tangible personal property) and which such sale is advertised by
any means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of said sale.
   GOODS. Any goods or other property that is capable of being the object of a
sale regulated hereunder.
(Ord. 09-813091, passed 8-13-2009)
§ 110.02 [MISSING].
(Ord. 09-813091, passed 8-13-2009)
§ 110.03 [MISSING].
(Ord. 09-813091, passed 8-13-2009)
§ 110.04 [MISSING].
   (B)   Each permit issued under this subchapter must be prominently displayed
on the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted throughout the entire
period of the permitted sale.
(Ord. 09-813091, passed 8-13-2009)
§ 110.05 INFORMATION TO BE FILED.
   The information to be filed with the city, pursuant to this subchapter,
shall be as follows:
   (A)   Name of person or persons conducting the sale;
   (B)   Name of owner of the property on which the sale is to be conducted;
   (C)   Location at which the sale is to be conducted;
   (D)   Number of days of sale; maximum of three days;
   (E)   Date and nature of any past sale; and
   (F)   Sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full and true and known to him or her to be so.
(Ord. 09-813091, passed 8-13-2009)
§ 110.06 PERSONS AND SALES EXCEPTED.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
   (A)   Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction;
   (B)   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials; or
   (C)   Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of
personal property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement and which are not displayed for public view.
(Ord. 09-813091, passed 8-13-2009)
SOLICITATIONS AT PRIVATE RESIDENCES
§ 110.20 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 09-81309, passed 8-13-2009)
§ 110.21 HOURS AND PLACES OF SOLICITATIONS.
   All solicitations to private residences, including, but not limited to,
homes, duplexes, mobile homes, rooming houses and apartments, shall occur
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., unless otherwise posted by the
private property owner or by someone with apparent authority to act for the
owner. This section does not apply where the solicitor is on the property by
express, prior invitation of the person residing on the premises.
(Ord. 09-81309, passed 8-13-2009)
§ 110.22 UNLAWFUL USE OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No person shall have or maintain in a stationary location, any truck,
trailer, booth or any other kind of structure on any public street, or alley in
the city for the purpose of selling, exhibiting or soliciting orders for any
goods, wares or merchandise, or cold drinks, hot drinks or food, or for the
purpose of exhibiting any kind of exhibit.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any of
the goods on the sidewalks of the city unless such goods are offered for sale
or sold by a person owning, occupying or controlling the premises adjoining or
adjacent to the sidewalk, and then such goods shall be exposed and sold in the
usual course of trade in accordance with all ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 09-81309, passed 8-13-2009) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.23 UNLAWFUL PARKING ON STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any motor
vehicle, truck, trailer or vehicle of any kind on any public street or alley in
the city for the purpose of selling, exhibiting or soliciting orders for any
goods, wares, merchandise, cold drinks, hot drinks or food for a period of
longer than ten minutes.
(Ord. 09-81309, passed 8-13-2009) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.24 UNLAWFUL SOLICITATION ON PUBLIC ROADWAY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand, sit or lie in a street,
median, roadway or public right-of-way to solicit a ride, contribution,
employment or business from the occupant of a vehicle operating on a public
roadway.
(Ord. 09-81309, passed 8-13-2009) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL TRAVELER. A person who is employed by or who represents a
manufacturer, wholesaler or importer who sells or exhibits goods to parties who
engage in the business of purchasing such goods for the purpose of resale to
the general public.
   GOODS. Tangible chattels of every kind and character.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT. A person who moves stocks of goods or samples of goods
into the city for the purpose of selling or offering for sale or taking orders
for the sale of such goods with the intention of removing such samples or the
unsold portion of such goods away from the city before the expiration of one
month and who has no fixed place of business within the city or county for
which definite arrangements have been made for the use, occupancy, hire, rental
or lease of such place for a term of at least one month.
   PEDDLER. A person who carries goods upon a truck or other vehicle on the
streets of the city for the purpose of exhibiting, selling or offering for sale
such goods from such truck or other vehicle or who within the city goes from
door to door of residences, offices or places of business to display, sell,
offer for sale or take orders for the sale of goods or to exhibit brochures,
sales literature or price lists for the purpose of taking orders for the sale
of goods or who within the city exhibits, sells, offers for sale or takes
orders for the sale of goods from a vacant lot, parking lot, tent, boat,
storage bin, stall or unenclosed structure.
   TRANSIENT VENDOR. A person who within the city engages in the temporary
business of exhibiting, delivering, selling or offering for sale any goods or
exhibiting brochures, sales literature or price lists for the purpose of taking
orders for the sale of goods and who has no fixed place of business within the
city or county that is used, occupied, hired, rented or leased for a period of
at least one month for the purpose of operating or conducting such business
thereon.
(Ord. 09-81309, passed 8-13-2009)
§ 110.26 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   Before any person engages in the occupation of a peddler,
itinerant merchant or transient vendor within the city, such person shall first
obtain from the City Secretary a license to engage in such occupation.
      (2)   A separate license and application shall be required for each
person who engages in the activities defined in §
110.25, including each employee, agent or consignee who engages in such
activity.
   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Commercial travelers;
      (2)   Sales or exhibits at fairs, rodeos, conventions or events sponsored
by one or more city civic organization, school, church or the Chamber of
Commerce; and
      (3)   Charitable solicitation.
   (C)   This subchapter does apply to transient vendors, itinerant merchants
and peddlers involved in interstate commerce, as the Council finds the license
procedure and fee does not unduly burden interstate commerce.
(Ord. 09-81309, passed 8-13-2009)
§ 110.27 ALLOWING PROPERTY TO BE USED BY UNLICENSED PERSONS.
   Any property owner who knowingly allows his or her property to be used or
occupied by a peddler, transient merchant or itinerant vendor who conducts
thereon a business operation or who exhibits or offers for sale goods without
first obtaining a license as required by the provisions of this subchapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 09-81309, passed 8-13-2009) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.28 APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE.
   (A)   An application for a license required by this subchapter shall be made
in person by the persons requesting such license upon forms available in the
office of the City Secretary. Such application form shall provide a space for
the following information which must be furnished by the applicant:
      (1)   The name, current and former residence and business address,
current residence and business telephone number, and occupation of applicant.
If applicable, the local address and telephone number where the applicant may
be reached;
      (2)   The Social Security number and birth date of the applicant, valid
driver’s license number, expiration date and state issuing it;
      (3)   A physical description of the applicant which includes race, sex,
height, weight, hair and eye color;
      (4)   Two recent photographic likenesses of the applicant’s face, which
photographs shall not be less than one-inch square or larger than two inches
square in size. One photograph shall be kept with the application and one
photograph shall be attached to the license;
      (5)   A valid state driver’s license. Only non-drivers may submit other
positive identification issued to the applicant by a governmental agency and
the state issuing it (such as, birth certificate);
      (6)   A description of the goods to be sold, including brand name if any.
If the goods are to be shipped, the name, address and telephone number of the
manufacturing location and/or shipping location;
      (7)   The address of the location from which such goods shall be
displayed to the public or offered for sale or a statement that the applicant
will travel from door to door for the purpose of exhibiting or offering goods
for sale;
      (8)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property
at such location;
      (9)   If the goods to be sold are transported in or displayed from a
vehicle, the vehicle owner’s name, address and telephone number and the
vehicle’s make, model, color, description, identification number and license
number;
      (10)   Statement that the applicant has not been convicted within the
last five years of an offense:
         (a)   Involving narcotics, dangerous drugs or crimes with dangerous
weapons;
         (b)   Involving the use of force and violence upon the person of
another when the offense is designated as a felony in the state of conviction
or the state;
         (c)   Of fraud, misrepresentation, embezzlement, forgery or theft when
such offense is designated as a felony in the state of conviction or the state;
or
         (d)   In a court of property jurisdiction of violating this subchapter
at any time.
      (11)   Such other information as may be required to complete an
investigation as to the fitness of the applicant to conduct such business
operation.
   (B)   Each person making application for a license required hereunder shall
swear or affirm that the information given on the application form is true and
correct.
   (C)   If the applicant proposes to display goods to the public or to offer
such goods for sale from a designated location, the application form shall be
accompanied by a written permit signed by the owner or the duly authorized
agent of the owner of the property at the location from which the applicant
proposes to display or to offer for sale any goods. Such permit shall state
that said owner consents that the applicant may use and occupy such property
for the purpose of selling or offering for sale such goods.
   (D)   If state law requires that sales tax must be paid upon the purchase of
such goods as the applicant proposes to offer for sale, the application for
license shall be accompanied by a valid sales tax permit issued by the office
of the comptroller of public accounts of the state.
   (E)   Each application shall bear the signature of the City Secretary
indicating that applicant’s proposed use of property complies with the
occupancy requirements of the City Building Code or that such requirement is
inapplicable because the applicant will be authorized by the license only to
travel from door to door.
   (F)   Each applicant who proposes to sell or offer for sale goods consisting
of any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, ice, beverage or ingredient
used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption
shall secure on the application form for license hereunder the signature of the
public health officer of the city and/or county indicating that such goods meet
minimum food standards of the state.
   (G)   Each application for a license shall be approved by the Chief of
Police or his or her authorized representative before such license is granted.
The Chief of Police shall have a reasonable time to conduct an investigation of
an applicant for such license, but such an investigation shall not be longer
than three business days. After inspection or investigation, the Chief of
Police shall either approve or disapprove the application for license and if
disapproved shall give the applicant, upon request, a written statement setting
forth the reasons for such disapproval and notifying the applicant of his or
her right to appeal.
   (H)   Upon approval of the license and prior to issuance, each applicant
shall be required to secure photo identification from a designated city
representative, if the photographs submitted are not acceptable to the City
Secretary.
(Ord. 09-81309, passed 8-13-2009)
§ 110.29 GROUNDS TO REVOKE OR DENY.
   The City Secretary or her designated representative may deny or revoke a
license for a peddler, itinerant merchant or transient vendor for any of the
following reasons:
   (A)   The applicant does not present a valid state driver’s license or, if
allowed, other positive identification by a governmental agency;
   (B)   The applicant does not complete the application form and procedure;
   (C)   The applicant or the proposed activity of the applicant does not
comply with applicable city ordinances and codes, including building codes or
health codes, or county or state health laws;
   (D)   The applicant makes false or fraudulent statements on the application
form;
   (E)   The applicant or licensee is found after investigation by the Chief of
Police to be misrepresenting or making false statements in regard to his or her
authority to sell such goods;
   (F)   Within the last five years the applicant or licensee has been
convicted of an offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs or crimes with
dangerous weapons;
   (G)   Within the last five years the applicant or licensee has been
convicted of an offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person
of another when the offense is designated as a felony in the state of
conviction or the state;
   (H)   Within the last five years the applicant or licensee has been
convicted of an offense of fraud, misrepresentation, embezzlement, forgery or
theft when such offense is designated a felony in the state of conviction or
the state;
   (I)   Within the last five years the applicant or licensee has been
convicted in a court of proper jurisdiction of violating this division at any
time; and
   (J)   Upon recommendation from the Chief of Police that the license be
revoked because the conduct of the licensee or the manner in which the licensee
is conducting his or her business operation endangers the health or safety of a
citizen of the city or a visitor within the city.
(Ord. 09-81309, passed 8-13-2009)
§ 110.30 APPEALS.
   (A)   If the applicant for a license under this subchapter or the holder of
such a license is dissatisfied with any holding or finding of the City
Secretary or the Chief of Police, he or she shall have the right to appeal to
the City Council by filing a written notice of such appeal with the City
Secretary within ten days from the decision by the City Secretary or Chief of
Police.
   (B)   Upon the filing of such notice of appeal, the application for the
license and all papers possessed by the City Secretary in connection with such
application and such license may be delivered to the City Council and such
matters as may be in controversy shall be heard by the Council at its next
regular meeting after the filing of the notice of appeal. The City Council
shall have the same powers and authority at such hearing on such appeal as is
vested in the City Secretary by this subchapter.
(Ord. 09-81309, passed 8-13-2009)
§ 110.31 CONTENTS.
   A license issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall contain the
following:
   (A)   The name of the applicant and his or her address;
   (B)   A physical description of the applicant;
   (C)   A photographic likeness furnished with the application;
   (D)   The date the license was issued and the date it expires with the
signature of the City Secretary;
   (E)   The location from which such person is licensed to conduct the
business operation authorized by such license; and
   (F)   The fact that the licensee is a peddler who is authorized to go from
door to door of residences, offices or places of business to display, sell,
offer for sale or take orders for the sale of goods or to exhibit brochures,
sales literature or price lists of goods.
(Ord. 09-81309, passed 8-13-2009)
§ 110.32 FEE AND TERM.
   (A)   (1)   Any person who is required to obtain a license by the provisions
of this subchapter may apply for either a 30-day license or a 12-month license.
When a 30-day license is issued to any such person, the applicant shall pay to
the City Secretary a license fee in an amount which is on file in the City
Secretary’s office. When a 12-month license is issued to any such person, such
person shall pay to the City Secretary a license fee in an amount which is on
file in the City Secretary’s office.
      (2)   All such fees shall be used to defray part of the expense of
administration and enforcement of this subchapter.
   (B)   No license issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
issued for a longer period than 12 months.
(Ord. 09-81309, passed 8-13-2009)
§ 110.33 BOND.
   (A)   Prior to the issuance of any license under the provisions of this
subchapter, the person making application therefor shall secure and furnish a
surety bond in a penal sum as is on file in the City Secretary’s office
executed by such person as principal and a corporate surety authorized to
transact business in the state who has appointed a resident agent for purposes
of notice and service of process with a permanent location and mailing address
within the county.
   (B)   (1)   The applicant may post a cash bond in lieu of a surety bond but
under the same terms.
      (2)   A cash bond shall be held by the city in a non-interest bearing
escrow account used only for such cash bonds.
   (C)   A company may post a blanket surety bond in an amount which is on file
in the City Secretary’s office for all of its employees; however after a
significant complaint or multiple complaints against the company or its
employees are received by the city, the City Council, in its sole discretion,
may raise the amount and terms of the bond as a prerequisite for the continued
validity of any licenses already issued or to be issued to any company
employee.
   (D)   Upon the breach of principal’s obligation on such bond, the surety
thereon shall be liable to any obligee thereon for damages, court costs and
attorney’s fees not to exceed the face amount of the bond caused by or arising
from any act or omission of the principal that constitutes a violation of any
ordinance of the city or of the Texas Deceptive Trade Practices and Consumer
Protection Act, as now or hereafter amended, in connection with goods sold,
offered, exhibited or delivered by the principal. or any employee, agent or
consignee of the principal.
   (E)   The obligation of the surety shall continue for a period of two years
from the date of sale or delivery of such goods, whichever is later, and as
long thereafter as required to bring to a final conclusion any litigation
pending at the expiration of the two-year period instituted by an obligee on
the bond for a claim under the Texas Deceptive Trade Practices Act, or by the
district attorney of the county or the attorney general of the state for
violation of the Texas Deceptive Trade Practices Act in connection with such
sale or delivery of goods by the principal.
   (F)   Such surety bond shall be approved by the City Attorney as to form and
condition and such approval shall be written on the face of such bond, which
shall thereafter be filed with the City Secretary.
(Ord. 09-81309, passed 8-13-2009)
§ 110.34 CONDITIONS.
   A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter is issued
with the express provision that the licensee shall not make any false or
fraudulent representation as to the goods to be sold, or his or her authority
to sell such goods or his or her identity.
(Ord. 09-81309, passed 8-13-2009)
§ 110.35 ASSIGNMENT.
   A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall not be
assignable and shall not authorize more than one person to engage in the
occupation of peddler, itinerant merchant or transient vendor within the city.
(Ord. 09-81309, passed 8-13-2009)
§ 110.36 DISPLAY.
   (A)   Any person issued a license pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter must exhibit the license and the photo identification issued under
the provisions of this subchapter, upon his or her outer clothing and demand,
to the Mayor, City Secretary, any police officer of the city or any person to
whom a sales or solicitation is attempted to be made.
   (B)   In addition to the exhibiting of the license and the photo
identification, any licensee shall also exhibit upon demand identification of
and authorization from the company represented by such licensee.
(Ord. 09-81309, passed 8-13-2009)
§ 110.37 RECORDS.
   The City Secretary shall keep a record of each license issued pursuant to
the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 09-81309, passed 8-13-2009)
§ 110.38 SERVICE, WARRANTIES AND CLAIMS.
   Any person required to obtain a license under the provisions of this
subchapter who for the purposes of selling or offering for sale or soliciting
orders for the sale of goods hires, rents, leases or occupies any room or space
in any building, structure, enclosure, vacant lot, parking lot or any other
property of whatever kind or character shall display at all times during which
such person is doing business on such premises, a sign lettered in two-inch
letters and visible for sale on such premises and specifying the type and
duration of any warranties made on such goods and the address where any
purchaser may make a claim for breach thereof.
(Ord. 09-81309, passed 8-13-2009)
§ 110.39 TRESPASS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the holder of any license issued under this
subchapter to enter upon the land or premises of another after receiving,
immediately before such entry, notice from the owner, resident, occupant or
adult person acting for such person exercising possession that such entry is
forbidden.
   (B)   A sign on the premises stating approximately “No Solicitors Commercial
or Charitable” or “No Solicitors Except for Non-Profit Organizations Based in
Bell County, Texas” shall constitute notice.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any such license holder to remain on the
premises of another after receiving notice from the owner, resident, occupant
or adult person acting for such person exercising possession, to depart such
premises.
   (D)   A conviction for the violation of this section shall result in the
automatic revocation of such convicted person’s peddler’s and solicitor’s
license.
(Ord. 09-81309, passed 8-13-2009) Penalty, see §
110.99
MOBILE FOOD VEHICLES
§ 110.50 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY SECRETARY. The City Secretary for the City of Little River Academy or
his or her designee.
   DEPARTMENTS. The Volunteer Fire Department, City Health Department and the
County Health Department.
   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. A business operation that stores, prepares, packages,
serves, vends or otherwise provides food for human consumption as set forth in
the State Health Code.
   MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE. A food establishment that is located upon a vehicle, or
which is pulled by a vehicle, where food or beverage is cooked, prepared and
served for individual portion service, such as a mobile food kitchen; provided,
however that a MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE shall not be considered a food service
establishment for the purposes of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 110.51 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to mobile food vehicle
operations engaged in the business of cooking, preparing and distributing food
or beverages with or without charge from mobile food vehicles on or in public,
private or restricted spaces.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 110.52 MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person or business entity, including a religious or charitable
organization, shall operate a mobile food vehicle in any public, private or
restricted space without a permit issued by the city.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.53 APPLICATION FOR A MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE PERMIT.
   (A)   Single application. The city shall make a single application form to
apply for each mobile food vendor permit. The application shall provide the
following:
      (1)   A description of required inspections, rules and fees; and
      (2)   A description of areas within the city where the operation of
mobile food vehicles are limited or prohibited.
   (B)   Submission of materials. Each application shall indicate on its face
that the following materials must be submitted by the applicant:
      (1)   The name of the business and its owner or owners, the physical
mailing address of the business and a contact phone number;
      (2)   The applicant’s photo ID;
      (3)   The description of the type of vehicle to be used for the proposed
mobile food vehicle operation, along with a photo of the vehicle;
      (4)   Proof of state sales tax and use permit;
      (5)   The address of the property where food sales are proposed to occur,
along with written permission for such sales from the property owner;
      (6)   A site plan showing the proposed location of the mobile food
vehicle on the subject property where sales are proposed;
      (7)   The site plan shall also depict where customers of the mobile food
vehicle will park and the customer dining area, if applicable;
      (8)   If located at one property for more than four hours, a written
agreement from a business owner of the property where the mobile food vehicle
is located allowing employees of the mobile food vehicle operation to have use
of flushable restrooms (or other facilities as approved by the City Secretary)
during hours of operation;
      (9)   A listing of all food items to be sold in the mobile food vehicle;
      (10)   Certification that the vehicle to be used is properly insured, as
well as licensed and registered by the state. A valid certificate issued by the
County Health Department;
      (11)   Certification that all employees who will be working in the mobile
food vehicle have valid food handler certificates; and
      (12)   Signature of the applicant.
   (C)   Approval process. An application must be submitted to the City
Secretary, who then shall forward the application to the departments for review
and approval. The application must receive the approval of each of the
departments, based on duly-published criteria established by the city, prior to
its final approval and the issuance of a permit by the City Council.
      (1)   The City Secretary may work with the applicant or permit holder to
modify a service location at any time before the issuance of a permit; after
the issuance of a permit, if the granting of a permit or approval of a service
location has led to the creation of a nuisance or otherwise is endangering the
public health, safety or order; or or by request of the permit holder.
      (2)   Within ten days of the submission of a completed application, the
City Council shall either issue or deny the application for a permit.
      (3)   If the application is denied in whole or in part, the City
Secretary shall state the specific reasons for the denial. Any applicant who
has been denied a permit may appeal such denial by submitting a written request
for a hearing to the City Secretary within ten days of denial.
      (4)   Such hearing shall be conducted by the City Council within 30 days
of receipt of said appeal. The decision of the City Council shall be final.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 110.54 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The operator of a mobile food vehicle shall comply with the following rules
and regulations.
   (A)   No operator of a mobile food vehicle shall park, stand or move a
vehicle and conduct business within areas of the city where the permit holder
has not been authorized to operate.
   (B)   An operator of a mobile food vehicle may not operate on public
property unless the City Council has granted approval on the permit application
for its operation at the particular location during specific times.
   (C)   The issuance of a permit does not grant or entitle the exclusive use
of the service location, in whole or in part, to the mobile food vehicle permit
holder, other than the time and place, as approved, for the term of the permit.
   (D)   For mobile food vehicles on public property, the city reserves the
right to temporarily move a mobile food vehicle to a nearby location if the
approved location needs to be used for emergency purposes (fire, construction
or other public benefit) as deemed by the City Secretary.
   (E)   No mobile food vehicle shall provide or allow any dining area,
including, but not limited to, tables, chairs, booths, bar stools, benches and
stand-up counters, unless a proposal for such seating arrangements is submitted
with the permit application and approved by City Secretary.
   (F)   The permit holder shall provide consumers with single service
articles, such as plastic forks and paper plates.
   (G)   Mobile food vendors shall supply, in a prominent location, trash
containers sufficient in size to collect all waste generated by customers and
staff of the mobile food vehicle operation. All trash and debris generated by
customers and staff shall be collected by the mobile food vehicle operator and
deposited in their trash container and removed from the site by the mobile food
vehicle operator.
   (H)   An operator of a mobile food vehicle shall not use stakes, rods or any
method of support that is required to be drilled, driven or otherwise fixed, in
asphalt pavement, curbs, sidewalks or buildings.
   (I)   Mobile food vehicles shall not impede access to the entrance or
driveway of any adjacent building.
   (J)   Mobile food vehicles shall not obstruct sight distance for drivers.
   (K)   An operator of mobile food vehicles is prohibited from using PA
systems, bells or music.
   (L)   If the operator of a mobile food vehicle maintains food at a hot
holding temperature by mechanical means, that person shall comply with fire and
explosion safety standards established by the Volunteer Fire Department.
   (M)   If the operator of a mobile food vehicle uses a pressurized fuel
system or container in conjunction with the mobile food vehicle, the operator
shall comply with fire and explosion safety standards established by the Fire
Department.
   (N)   Mobile food vehicles shall comply with the regulations of the County
Health Department and the state regarding time, temperature, plumbing,
operation and maintenance requirements for mobile food vehicles.
   (O)   The operator of a mobile food vehicle shall demonstrate that the
vehicle is readily moveable, if requested by the City Council.
   (P)   All food and supplies must be stored within the mobile food vehicle.
   (Q)   A person who operates a mobile food vehicle may not place food,
equipment or supplies that are part of its operations outside of the permitted
vehicle and must conduct all of its operational activities within the mobile
food vehicle.
   (R)   If necessary to protect against public health hazards or nuisances,
the city may impose specific requirements in addition to those requirements
contained in this section.
   (S)   All wastewater and sewage generated from the operation of the mobile
food vehicle shall be disposed of through an approved sanitary sewer system.
   (T)   Water from an approved source shall be made available in a mobile food
vehicle for food preparation, handwashing and for cleaning and sanitizing
utensils and equipment.
   (U)   Hand sanitizer shall be made available for public use.
   (V)   Individuals working in a mobile food vehicle shall have a valid food
handler certificate.
   (W)   Mobile food vehicles shall operate any day between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.55 PERMIT FEES.
   The fee for an annual permit granted by the city for the operation of a
mobile food vehicle shall be $100. The term of the permit is a calendar year,
January through December, with a seven-day grace period for renewal of the
permit. For permits acquired after June 1, the permit fee shall be $50.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 110.56 PERMIT RENEWAL.
   ln addition to providing the information required in §
110.53, applicants seeking to renew their annual permit to operate a mobile
food vehicle shall provide, with their permit application, documentation of the
sales taxes collected and reported to the state from their prior year’s sales
activity in the city.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 110.57 PROHIBITION AGAINST THE TRANSFER OF A PERMIT.
   (A)   Transfers for value prohibited. No person holding a permit for a
mobile food vehicle shall sell, lend, lease or in any manner transfer a mobile
food vehicle permit for value.
   (B)   Non-value transfers, as part of the sale of a business. A permit
holder may transfer a permit for a mobile food vehicle as part of the sale of a
majority of the stock in a corporation holding such permit, as part of the sale
of a majority of the membership interests of a limited liability company
holding such permit, or as part of the sale of a business or substantially all
of its assets; provided that there shall be no allocated or actual value for
the transfer of the permit.
      (1)   Prior to any such transfer, the transferor shall notify the City
Secretary in writing and the transferee shall submit a food vehicle permit
application for approval to the City Secretary pursuant to the application
process set forth in this subchapter and any additional rules and regulations
promulgated by the City Council.
      (2)   Any such transfer shall be subject to the terms and conditions of
the original permit.
   (C)   Unauthorized transfer voids permit. Any unauthorized transfer or
attempt to transfer a permit shall automatically void such permit. Whoever
violates this provision, including both the transferor and transferee, shall be
subject to a fine of $300, pursuant to penalty provisions of this subchapter.
The unauthorized transfer or attempt to transfer of each permit shall
constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.58 OPERATION OF MOBILE FOOD VEHICLES.
   (A)   Operation without permit. Any mobile food vehicle being operated
without a valid mobile food vehicle permit issued by the City Secretary shall
be deemed a public safety hazard and may be ticketed and impounded.
   (B)   Unattended vehicles prohibited. No mobile food vehicle shall be parked
on the street overnight or left unattended and unsecured at any time food is
kept in the mobile food vehicle. Any mobile food vehicle which is found to be
unattended and unsecured shall be considered a public safety hazard and may be
ticketed and impounded.
   (C)   A mobile food vehicle operating outside of an approved route, at an
unauthorized location or beyond the hours for which the operation has been
permitted shall be deemed operating without a permit in violation of this
section and may be subject to enforcement under §
110.59.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 110.59 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Revocation, suspension and modification. Once a permit has been
issued, it may be revoked, suspended, modified or not renewed by the City
Secretary for failure to comply with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Removal. Any permit holder found in violation of this subchapter or
any rules and regulations promulgated by the City Council may be issued a
ticket for violation and the mobile food vehicle may be impounded.
   (C)   Enforcement. The provisions of this subchapter or any rules and
regulations promulgated by the City Council may be enforced by the Police
Department.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person conducting any such sale as set forth in §§
110.01 through
110.06 without being properly permitted therefor or who shall violate any of
the other terms and regulations of this subchapter, shall, upon conviction, be
fined up to the maximum amount by law for a Class C misdemeanor.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation which violates §§
110.20 through
110.39 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense and each violation
hereof shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense for each of said days
and shall be punishable as such.
   (D)   Any permit holder operating a mobile food vehicle in violation of §§
110.50 through
110.59 may be subject to a fine of $300 per day. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. 09-81309, passed 8-13-2009; Ord. 09-813091, passed 8-13-
2009)
CHAPTER 111: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Title
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   Information to be provided by cable operator on monthly subscriber
bills
   
111.04   Negative option billing
   
111.05   Subscriber bill itemization
Rates
   
111.20   Rates for the basic service tier
   
111.21   Rates for equipment and installation used to receive the basic service
tier
   
111.22   Cost accounting and cost allocation requirements
   
111.23   Costs of franchise requirements
   
111.24   Charges for customer changes
Regulatory Provisions
   
111.35   Notification of proposed rate increase
   
111.36   Initiation of review of basic cable service and equipment rates
   
111.37   City review of basic cable rates and equipment costs
   
111.38   Proprietary information
   
111.39   Burden of proof
   
111.40   Small systems
   
111.41   Written decision
   
111.42   Reduction of rates; prescription of rates
   
111.43   Refunds
   
111.44   Governing law; venue
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 TITLE.
   The following regulations are hereby adopted and shall be known as the cable
television regulations for the city.
(Ord. 02-93, passed 10-14-1993)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AFFILIATED PROGRAMMER. A programmer with an ownership interest of 5% or
more, including general partnership interests, direct ownership interests and
stock interests in a corporation where such stockholders are officers or
directors or who directly or indirectly own 5% or more of the outstanding
stock, whether voting or non-voting. Such interests include limited partnership
interests of 5% or greater.
   BASIC SERVICE TIER. At a minimum, include all signals of domestic television
broadcast stations provided to any subscriber (except a signal secondarily
transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such station,
regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable system), any
public, educational and governmental programming required by the franchise to
be carried on the basic tier, and any additional video programming signals or
service added to the basic tier by the cable operator.
   CABLE OPERATOR. Any person or group of persons who provides cable service
over a cable system within the city under a franchise issued by the city, and
who directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in
such cable system; or who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system.
   CABLE PROGRAMMING SERVICE. Any video programming provided over a cable
system, regardless of service tier, including installation or rental of
equipment used for the receipt of such video programming, other than:
      (1)   Video programming carried on the basic service tier as defined in
this section;
      (2)   Video programming offered on a pay-per-channel or pay-per-program
basis; or
      (3)   A combination of multiple channels of pay-per-channel or pay-per-
program video programming offered on a multi-plexed or time-shifted basis so
long as the combined service:
         (a)   Consists of commonly-identified video programming; and
         (b)   Is not bundled with any regulated tier of service.
   COMMISSION. The Federal Communications Commission.
   SMALL SYSTEM. A cable television system that serves fewer than 1,000
subscribers. The service area of a SMALL SYSTEM is determined by the number of
subscribers that are served by a system’s principal headend, including any
other headends or microwave receive sites that are technically integrated to
the system’s principal headend.
(Ord. 02-93, passed 10-14-1993)
§ 111.03 INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED BY CABLE OPERATOR ON MONTHLY SUBSCRIBER
BILLS.
   A cable operator must provide the following information to subscribers on
monthly bills:
   (A)   A statement substantially the same as the following: “The basic
service tier rates and related equipment and installation charges are regulated
by the city. If you have any questions or comments regarding these rates, you
may call or write the city at [address and telephone number];” and
   (B)   The FCC community unit identifier for the cable system.
(Ord. 02-93, passed 10-14-1993)
§ 111.04 NEGATIVE OPTION BILLING.
   A cable operator shall not charge a subscriber for any service or equipment
that the subscriber has not affirmatively requested by name. This provision,
however, shall not preclude the addition or deletion of a specific program from
a service offering, the addition or deletion of specific channels from an
existing tier of service or the restructuring or division of existing tiers of
service that do not result in a fundamental change in the nature of an existing
service or tier of service; provided that such change is otherwise consistent
with applicable regulations. A subscriber’s failure to refuse a cable
operator’s proposal to provide such service or equipment is not an affirmative
request for service or equipment. A subscriber’s affirmative request for
service or equipment may be made orally or in writing.
(Ord. 02-93, passed 10-14-1993)
§ 111.05 SUBSCRIBER BILL ITEMIZATION.
   (A)   Cable operators may identify as a separate line item of each regular
subscriber bill the following:
      (1)   The amount of the total bill assessed as a franchise fee;
      (2)   The amount of the total bill assessed to satisfy any requirements
imposed on the cable operator by the franchise agreement to support public,
educational or governmental channels or the use of such channels; and
      (3)   The amount of any other fee, tax, assessment or charge of any kind
imposed by any governmental authority on the transaction between the operator
and the subscriber. In order for a governmental fee or assessment to be
separately identified under this section, it must be directly imposed by a
governmental body on a transaction between a subscriber and an operator.
   (B)   The charge identified on the subscriber bill as the total charge for
cable service should include all fees and costs itemized pursuant to this
section.
(Ord. 02-93, passed 10-14-1993)
RATES
§ 111.20 RATES FOR THE BASIC SERVICE TIER.
   (A)   Basic service tier rates.
      (1)   Basic service tier rates are subject to regulation by the city in
order to assure that they are in compliance with the requirements of 47 U.S.C.
§ 543. Rates that are demonstrated, in accordance with this chapter, not to
exceed the initial permitted per channel charge or the subsequent permitted per
channel charge as described in divisions (B) and (C) below, or the equipment
charges as specified in § 110.07, will be accepted as in compliance.
      (2)   The maximum monthly charge per subscriber for the basic service
tier offered by a cable operator shall consist of a permitted per channel
charge multiplied by the number of channels on the tier, plus a charge for
franchise fees. The maximum monthly charges for the basic service tier shall
not include any charges for equipment or installations. Charges for equipment
and installations are to be calculated separately pursuant to § 110.07.
   (B)   Initial permitted per channel charge.
      (1)   For purposes of this section, the initial date of regulation for
the basic service tier shall be the date on which the city gives written notice
to the cable operator that the city has been certified by the Commission to
regulate rates for the basic service tier and this chapter has been adopted by
the city.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, rates in effect on the initial date
of regulation or in effect on September 30, 1992, shall be the rates charged to
subscribers for service received on that respective date.
      (3)   The permitted per channel charge on the initial date of regulation
shall be, at the election of the cable operator, either:
         (a)   A charge determined pursuant to a cost-of-service proceeding; or
         (b)   The charge specified in divisions (B)(3)(b)1., (B)(3)(b)2. or
(B)(3)(b)3. below, as applicable.
            1.   If the operator’s per channel charge for the basic service
tier and equipment in effect on the date of initial regulation is equal to or
below the benchmark per channel charge, as adjusted forward for inflation from
September 30, 1992, to the date of initial regulation, then the permitted per
channel charge shall be the per channel charge in effect on the date of initial
regulation, adjusted for equipment.
            2.   If:
               a.   The operator’s per channel charge for the basic service
tier and equipment in effect on the date of initial regulation is above the
benchmark per channel charge, as adjusted forward for inflation from September
30, 1992, until the initial date of regulation; and
               b.   The operator’s per channel charge for the basic service
tier and equipment in effect on September 30, 1992, was above the benchmark per
channel charge, then the permitted per channel charge is nine-tenths of the per
channel charge in effect on September 30, 1992, but no lower than the benchmark
per channel charge, additionally adjusted for inflation from September 30,
1992, to the initial date of regulation, for equipment, and for any changes in
the number of channels offered on the basic service tiers.
            3.   If:
               a.   The operator’s per channel charge for the basic service
tier and equipment in effect on the date of initial regulation is above the
benchmark per channel charge, as adjusted forward for inflation from September
30, 1992, until the initial date of regulation; and
               b.   The operator’s per channel charge for the basic service
tier and equipment in effect on September 30, 1992, was below the benchmark per
channel charge, then the permitted per channel charge is the benchmark rate per
channel adjusted for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the initial date of
regulation, for equipment, and for any changes in the number of channels
offered on the basic service tier.
   (C)   Subsequent permitted per channel charge. After the initial date of
regulation, the permitted channel charge for the basic service tier shall be,
at the election of the cable operator, either:
      (1)   A per channel rate determined pursuant to a cost-of-service
showing; or
      (2)   The prior permitted per channel charge previously approved by the
city, adjusted for inflation and external costs in accordance with the price
cap requirements set forth in division (D) below.
   (D)   Price cap requirements.
      (1)   Inflation adjustments. Permitted per channel charges for the basic
service tier may be adjusted periodically on account of inflation. Adjustments
to permitted per channel charges on account of inflation shall be based on
changes in the Gross National Product Price Index (GNP-PI) published by the
Bureau of Economic Analysis of the United States Department of Commerce.
      (2)   External costs. Permitted per channel charges for the basic service
tier may also be adjusted for changes in external costs measured on a per
channel per subscriber basis. To the extent external cost increases are greater
or less than the GNP-PI for the relevant period, the per channel charge will be
adjusted accordingly. Per channel charges may not be increased if external
costs other than franchise fees increase at a rate less than inflation.
Permitted per channel charges also shall be decreased on account of external
costs to the extent such costs decrease from previous levels.
         (a)   External costs shall consist of costs in the following
categories:
            1.   State and local taxes applicable to provision of cable
television service;
            2.   Franchise fees;
            3.   Costs of complying with franchise requirements, including
costs of providing public, educational and governmental access channels as
required by the city;
            4.   Retransmission consent fees; and
            5.   Programming costs.
         (b)   The permitted per channel charge for the basic service tier
shall be adjusted on account of programming costs and retransmission consent
fees only for programming or broadcast signals offered on that tier.
         (c)    The permitted per channel charge shall not be adjusted for
costs of retransmission consent fees or charges in those fees incurred prior to
October 6, 1994.
         (d)   The starting date for adjustments on account of external costs
for the basic service tier shall be the initial date of regulation or 180 days
from September 1, 1993, if the initial date of regulation occurs on or after
180 days from September 1, 1993.
         (e)   Changes in franchise fees shall not result in an adjustment to
permitted per channel charges, but rather shall be calculated separately as
part of the maximum monthly charge per subscriber for the basic service tier.
         (f)   Adjustments to permitted per channel charges on account of
increases in costs of programming obtained from affiliated programmers shall be
the lesser of actual increases or the previous permitted rate level increased
by the amount of inflation.
         (g)   Adjustments to permitted per channel charges on account of
increases in costs of programming shall be further adjusted to reflect any
revenues received by the operator from the programmer.
(Ord. 02-93, passed 10-14-1993)
§ 111.21 RATES FOR EQUIPMENT AND INSTALLATION USED TO RECEIVE THE BASIC SERVICE
TIER.
   (A)   Scope.
      (1)   The equipment regulated under this section consists of all
equipment in a subscriber’s location that is used to receive the basic service
tier, regardless of whether such equipment is additionally used to receive
other tiers of regulated programming service and/or unregulated service.
      (2)   Such equipment shall include, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Converter boxes;
         (b)   Remote control units;
         (c)   Connections for additional television receivers; and
         (d)   Other cable home wiring.
      (3)   Subscriber charges for such equipment shall not exceed charges
based on actual costs in accordance with the requirements set forth in this
section.
   (B)   Unbundling. A cable operator shall establish rates for remote control
units, converter boxes, other customer equipment, installation and additional
connections separate from rates for basic service tier. In addition, the rates
for such equipment and installations shall be unbundled one from the other.
   (C)   Equipment basket. A cable operator shall establish an equipment
basket, which will include all costs associated with providing customer
equipment and installation under this section. Equipment basket costs shall be
limited to the direct and indirect material and labor costs of providing,
leasing, installing, repairing and servicing customer equipment, as determined
in accordance with the cost accounting and cost allocation requirements of §
111.08. The equipment basket shall not include general administrative overhead
including general marketing expenses. The equipment basket may include a
reasonable profit.
   (D)   Hourly service charge. A cable operator shall establish charges for
equipment and installation using the hourly service charge (HSC) methodology.
The HSC shall equal the operator’s annual equipment basket costs, excluding the
purchase cost of customer equipment, divided by the total person hours involved
in installing, repairing and servicing customer equipment during the same
period. The purchase cost of customer equipment shall include the cable
operator’s invoice price plus all other costs incurred with respect to the
equipment until the time it is provided to the customer. The HSC is calculated
according to the following formula:
 
HSC = EB - CE
    H
 
   Where:
         EB   =   Annual equipment basket cost
         CE   =   Annual purchase cost of all customer equipment
         H   =   Person hours involved in installing and repairing equipment
per year
   (E)   Installation charges. Installation charges shall be either:
      (1)   The HSC multiplied by the actual time spent on each individual
installation; or
      (2)   The HSC multiplied by the average time spent on a specific type of
installation.
   (F)   Remote charges.
      (1)   Monthly charges for rental of a remote control unit shall consist
of the average annual unit purchase cost of the type of remote leased,
including acquisition price and incidential costs such as sales tax, financing
and storage up to the time it is provided to the customer, added to the product
of the HSC times the average number of hours annually repairing or servicing a
remote, divided by 12 to determine the monthly lease rate for a remote
according to the following formula:
 
Monthly = UCE + (HSC x HR)
Charge   12
 
   Where:
         HR   =   Average hours repair per year
         UCE   =   Average annual unit cost of remote
      (2)   Separate charges shall be established for each significantly
different type of remote control unit.
   (G)   Other equipment charges. The monthly charges for rental of converter
boxes and other customer equipment shall be calculated in the same manner as
for remote control units. Separate charges shall be established for each
significantly different type of converter box and each significantly different
type of other customer equipment.
   (H)   Additional connection charges. The costs of installation and monthly
use of additional connections shall be recovered as charges associated with the
installation and equipment cost categories, and at rate levels determined by
the actual cost methodology presented in divisions (E), (F) and (G) above. An
operator may recover additional programming costs and the costs of signal
boosters on the customers premises, if any, associated with the additional
connection as a separate monthly unbundled charge for additional connections.
   (I)   Charges for equipment sold. A cable operator may sell customer
premises equipment to a subscriber. The equipment price shall recover the
operator’s cost of the equipment, including costs associated with storing and
preparing the equipment for sale up to the time it is sold to the customer,
plus a reasonable profit. An operator may sell service contracts for the
maintenance and repair of equipment sold to subscribers. The charge for a
service contract shall be the HSC times the estimated average number of hours
for maintenance and repair over the life of the equipment.
   (J)   Promotions. A cable operator may offer equipment or installation at
charges below those determined under divisions (E) through (G) above, as long
as those offerings are reasonable in scope in relation to the operator’s
overall offerings in the equipment basket and not unreasonably discriminatory.
Operators may not recover the cost of a promotional offering by increasing
charges for other equipment basket elements, or by increasing programming
service rates above the maximum monthly charge per subscriber prescribed by
this chapter. As part of a general cost-of-service showing, an operator may
include the cost of promotions in its general system overhead costs.
   (K)   Franchise fees. Equipment charges may include a properly allocated
portion of franchise fees paid to the city.
(Ord. 02-93, passed 10-14-1993)
§ 111.22 COST ACCOUNTING AND COST ALLOCATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Applicability. The requirements of this section are applicable for
purposes of rate adjustments on account of external costs and for cost-of-
service showings.
   (B)   Generally accepted accounting principles. Cable operators shall
maintain their accounts in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles, except as otherwise directed by the city.
   (C)   Accounts required. Cable operators shall maintain accounts in a manner
that will enable identification of appropriate costs and application of the
city’s cost assignment and allocation procedures, to cost categories necessary
for rate adjustments due to changes in external costs and for cost-of-service
showings. Such categories shall be sufficiently detailed and supported to
permit verification and audit against the company’s accounting records.
   (D)   Accounting level. Except to the extent indicated below, cable
operators shall aggregate expenses and revenues at either the franchise,
system, regional or company level in a manner consistent with practices of the
operator as of April 3, 1992. However, in all events, cable operators shall
identify at the franchise level their costs of franchise requirements,
franchise fees, local taxes and local programming.
   (E)   Cost allocation requirements.
      (1)   For purposes of establishing expenses at the franchise level, cable
operators shall allocate expenses and revenues aggregated at higher levels to
the franchise level based on the ratio of the total number of subscribers
served at the franchise level to the total number of subscribers served at the
higher level.
      (2)   Except to the extent indicated below, all categories of costs
allocated to, or identified at, the franchise level shall be allocated to the
basic service tier based on the ratio of channels in the basic tier to the
total number of channels offered in the franchise area, including non-regulated
and leased commercial access channels. These costs shall be allocated to each
tier of cable programming services based on the ratio of channels in that tier
to the total number of channels offered in the franchise area.
      (3)   Costs of programming and retransmission consent fees, however,
shall be allocated only to the tier on which the programming or broadcast
signal at issue is offered.
      (4)   Costs of franchise fees shall be allocated among equipment and
installations, program service tiers and subscribers in a manner that is most
consistent with the methodology of assessment of franchise fees by the city.
      (5)   Costs of public, educational and governmental access channels
carried on the basic tier shall be directly assigned to the basic tier where
possible.
   (F)   Common costs. Expenses which cannot be assigned to any single expense
or service category shall be described as common costs. Common costs shall be
allocated to expense categories as follows.
      (1)   Wherever possible, common costs are to be allocated to service cost
categories based on direct analysis of the origin of the costs themselves.
      (2)   When direct analysis is not possible, common costs shall, if
possible, be allocated to service cost categories based on an indirect, cost-
causative linkage to other costs directly assigned or allocated to the service
cost category.
      (3)   When neither direct nor indirect measures of cost allocation can be
found, common costs shall be allocated to each service cost category based on
the ratio of all costs directly assigned and attributed to a service cost
category over total costs directly assignable and attributable.
   (G)   Unrelated expenses and revenues. Cable operators shall exclude from
cost categories used to develop rates for the provision of basic service tier
and equipment, any direct or indirect expenses and revenues not related to the
provision of such services. Common costs of providing basic service tier and
equipment, and unrelated activities shall be allocated between them in
accordance with division (F) above.
   (H)   Part-time channels. In situations where a single channel is divided on
a part-time basis and is used to deliver service associated with different
tiers or with pay per channel or pay per view service, a reasonable and
documented allocation of that channel between services shall be required along
with the associated revenues and costs.
(Ord. 02-93, passed 10-14-1993)
§ 111.23 COSTS OF FRANCHISE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The costs of satisfying franchise requirements to support public,
educational and governmental channels shall consist of the sum of:
      (1)   All per channel costs for the number of channels used to meet
franchise requirements for public, educational and governmental channels;
      (2)   Any direct costs of meeting such franchise requirements; and
      (3)   A reasonable allocation of general and administrative overhead.
   (B)   The costs of satisfying any other requirement under the franchise
shall consist of the direct and indirect costs, including a reasonable
allocation of general and administrative overhead.
(Ord. 02-93, passed 10-14-1993)
§ 111.24 CHARGES FOR CUSTOMER CHANGES.
   (A)   This section shall govern charges for any changes in service tiers or
equipment provided to the subscriber that are initiated at the request of a
subscriber after initial service installation.
   (B)   The charge for customer changes in service tiers effected solely by
coded entry on a computer terminal or by other similarly simple methods shall
be a nominal amount, not exceeding actual costs, as defined in division (C)
below.
   (C)   The charge for customer changes in service tiers or equipment that
involve more than coded entry on a computer or other similarly simple method
shall be based on actual cost. The actual cost charge shall be either the HSC,
as defined in §
111.20, multiplied by the number of person hours needed to implement the change
or the HSC multiplied by the average number of person hours involved in
implementing customer changes.
   (D)   A cable operator may establish a higher charge for changes effected
solely by coded entry on a computer terminal or by other similarly simple
methods, subject to approval by the city, for a subscriber changing service
tiers more than two times in a 12-month period, except for such changes ordered
in response to a change in price or channel line-up. If a cable system adopts
such an increased charge, the cable system must notify all subscribers in
writing that they may be subject to such a charge for changing service tiers
more than the specified number of times in any 12-month period.
   (E)   Downgrade charges that are the same as, or lower than, upgrade charges
are evidence of the reasonableness of such downgrade charges.
   (F)   For 30 days after notice of retiering or rate increases, a customer
may obtain changes in service tiers at no additional charge.
(Ord. 02-93, passed 10-14-1993)
REGULATORY PROVISIONS
§ 111.35 NOTIFICATION OF PROPOSED RATE INCREASE.
   (A)   A cable operator shall provide written notice to a subscriber of any
increase in the price to be charged for the basic service tier or associated
equipment at least 30 days before any proposed increase is effective. The
notice shall include a provision stating that protests to such prices may be
filed with the city at 509 East Main Street. The notice shall also include a
statement that such protests must be filed with the city no later than 30 days
after the notice is received by the subscriber.
   (B)   In addition to the notice required in division (A) above, the cable
operator shall give the city a minimum of 30 days’ advance written notification
of any changes in rates for cable programming service or associated equipment.
(Ord. 02-93, passed 10-14-1993)
§ 111.36 INITIATION OF REVIEW OF BASIC CABLE SERVICE AND EQUIPMENT RATES.
   A cable operator shall file its schedule of rates for the basic service tier
and associated equipment with the city within 30 days of receiving written
notification from the city that the city has been certified by the Commission
to regulate rates for the basic service tier, or by November 15, 1993,
whichever is later.
(Ord. 02-93, passed 10-14-1993)
§ 111.37 CITY REVIEW OF BASIC CABLE RATES AND EQUIPMENT COSTS.
   (A)   After a cable operator has submitted to the city for review its
existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment costs, or a
proposed increase in these rates (including increases in the baseline channel
charge that results from reductions in the number of channels in a tier), the
existing rates will remain in effect or the proposed rates will become
effective after 30 days from the date of submission to the city; provided,
however, that the city may toll this 30-day deadline for an additional time by
issuing a brief written order as described in division (D) below within 30 days
of the rate submission explaining that it needs additional time to review the
rates. The city may, at any time, require the cable operator to produce
additional information, including proprietary information, that the city deems
necessary in order to make a rate determination. If proprietary information is
provided, the provisions of §
111.38 will apply to such information.
   (B)   Upon receipt by the city, the cable operator’s submittal shall be
available for public inspection and copying. Comments on the submittal by
interested persons may be submitted in writing or orally at a City Council
meeting held at any time during the initial 30-day review period. Written
comments shall be addressed to the City Secretary, and must be received prior
to the end of the 30-day review period.
   (C)   If a cable operator submits a proposed rate increase for review that
appears to exceed the presumptively reasonable level and does not include a
cost-of-service showing to justify the rate, the city will permit the cable
operator to cure this deficiency and submit a cost-of-service showing.
   (D)   If the city is unable to determine, based upon the material submitted
by the cable operator, that the existing or proposed rates are within the
permitted basic service tier charge or actual cost of equipment as defined in
§§
111.20 and
111.21, or if a cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing pursuant
to §§
111.22 and
111.39, seeking to justify a rate above the basic service tier charge as
defined in §§
111.20 and
111.21, the city may toll the 30-day deadline in division (A) above to request
and/or consider additional information or to consider the comments from
interested parties as follows:
      (1)   For an additional 90 days in cases not involving cost-of-service
showings; or
      (2)   For an additional 150 days in cases involving cost-of-service
showings. The order tolling the effective date of the proposed rate shall
explain why the city could not make the necessary determination, and it shall
also provide the cable operator an opportunity to cure any deficiencies in its
original filing. During the additional time periods provided in this division
(D)(2), comments from interested persons may be submitted in writing, as
provided in division (B) above, or orally during at least one City Council
meeting during the period of abatement.
   (E)   If the city has availed itself of the additional 90 or 150 days
permitted in division (C) above, and has taken no action within these
additional time periods, then the proposed rates will go into effect at the end
of the 90- or 150-day periods, or existing rates will remain in effect at such
times, subject to refunds if the city subsequently issues a written decision
disapproving any portion of such rates; provided, however, that in order to
order refunds, the city must have issued a brief written order to the cable
operator by the end of the 90- or 150-day period permitted in division (C)
above directing the operator to keep an accurate account of all amounts
received by reason of the rate in issue and on whose behalf such amounts were
paid.
(Ord. 02-93, passed 10-14-1993)
§ 111.38 PROPRIETARY INFORMATION.
   (A)   If the city has required the cable operator to produce proprietary
information under the provisions of this chapter, the cable operator may submit
therewith a request that such information not be made routinely available for
public inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to and shall cover
all of the materials to which it applies and all copies of those materials. If
feasible, the materials to which the request applies shall be physically
separated from any materials to which the request does not apply. If this is
not feasible, the portion of the materials to which the request applies shall
be identified.
   (B)   Each such request shall contain a statement of the reasons for
withholding the materials from inspection and of the facts upon which those
reasons are based. If the request is that the materials be withheld from
inspection for a limited period of time, that period shall be specified.
   (C)   Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of divisions
(A) and (B) above will not be considered.
   (D)   Upon receipt of a request in compliance with divisions (A) and (B)
above, the city will not grant routine public access to the materials. A letter
to that effect will be placed in a public file in lieu of the materials
withheld from public inspection.
   (E)   Provided, however, if a written request for the materials is received
by the city pursuant to the Open Records Act, Tex. Gov’t Code, Chapter 552, the
city will notify the person providing the materials of the request for the
materials. If the person providing the materials requests the city to do so,
the city will request an opinion from the Attorney General, pursuant to the
Open Records Act, regarding the public availability of the materials. If the
person providing the materials does not request the city to request an opinion
from the Attorney General, the city may, at its option, either request such an
opinion or provide the materials to the public.
   (F)   If the Attorney General issues an opinion or letter ruling requiring
the city to make the materials available to the public, the materials will be
made available for public inspection.
   (G)   If no request for confidentiality is submitted, the city assumes no
obligation to consider the need for non-disclosure.
(Ord. 02-93, passed 10-14-1993)
§ 111.39 BURDEN OF PROOF.
   (A)   A cable operator has the burden of proving that its existing or
proposed rates for basic service and associated equipment comply with 47 U.S.C.
§ 543, and §§
111.20 and
111.21.
   (B)   For an existing or a proposed rate for basic service tier or
associated equipment that is within the permitted tier charge and actual cost
of equipment as set forth in §§
111.20 and
111.21, the cable operator must submit the appropriate FCC form to the city.
   (C)   For an existing or a proposed rate for basic service tier that exceeds
the permitted tier charge as set forth in §§
111.20 and
111.21, the cable operator must submit to the city a cost-of-service showing to
justify the proposed rates. The cost-of-service showing must be in conformance
with accounting and cost allocation requirements as adopted and amended by the
Commission for cable system operators.
(Ord. 02-93, passed 10-14-1993)
§ 111.40 SMALL SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Option one. 
      (1)   A small system, as defined in §
111.02, may certify that the small system’s initial rates for basic service and
associated equipment comply with §
111.20. A certification by a small system under this section shall be filed
with the city within 30 days of receiving written notification from the city
that the city has been certified by the Commission to regulate rates for the
basic service tier. The certification shall be in writing, shall be signed by
the General Manager of the system, and shall be verified.
      (2)   Such certification shall be subject to verification by the city on
its own motion or upon complaint by a subscriber. The city may request
additional information from the operator in order to verify the certification.
In the event proprietary information is requested by the city, the provisions
of §
111.37 shall control the availability of such information to the public.
      (3)   As used in this section, INITIAL RATES shall mean those rates
charged by the small system operator on the date on which the city gives
written notice to the cable operator that the city has been certified by the
Commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier and this chapter has
been adopted by the city.
      (4)   If the city determines that the small system’s certification is in
error, it shall so notify the small system operator and shall require the small
system to comply with all filing requirements for non-small systems in this
chapter.
      (5)   Subsequent rate filings by a small system operator shall comply in
all respects with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Option two.
      (1)   A small system, as defined in §
111.02, may certify that the small system’s rates for basic service and
associated equipment, and subsequent rate increases, comply with §
111.20. A certification by a small system under this section for its initial
rates shall be filed with the city within 30 days of receiving written
notification from the city that the city has been certified by the Commission
to regulate rates for the basic service tier. Certifications for subsequent
rate increases shall be filed with the city at the same time that notice is
given to the small system’s subscribers of the proposed rate increase, in
conformance with §
111.35. All certifications shall be in writing, shall be signed by the General
Manager of the system and shall be verified.
      (2)   Such certification shall be subject to verification by the city on
its own motion or upon complaint by a subscriber. The city may request
additional information from the operator in order to verify the certification.
In the event proprietary information is requested by the city, the provisions
of §
111.38 shall control the availability of such information to the public.
      (3)   If the city determines that the small system’s certification is in
error, it shall so notify the small system operator and shall require the small
system to comply with all filing requirements for non-small systems in this
chapter.
(Ord. 02-93, passed 10-14-1993)
§ 111.41 WRITTEN DECISION.
   (A)   The city shall issue a written decision in a rate-making proceeding
whenever it disapproves an initial rate for the basic service tier or
associated equipment in whole or in part, disapproves a request for a rate
increase in whole or in part, or approves a request for an increase in whole or
in part over the objections of interested parties. The city is not required to
issue a written decision that approves an unopposed existing or proposed rate
for the basic service tier or associated equipment.
   (B)   Public notice shall be given of any written decision required in
division (A) above, by making the text of any written decision available to the
public, and by publication of the decision one time in the official newspaper
of the city.
(Ord. 02-93, passed 10-14-1993)
§ 111.42 REDUCTION OF RATES; PRESCRIPTION OF RATES.
   (A)   The city may order a cable operator to implement a prospective
reduction in basic service tier or associated equipment rates where necessary
to bring rates into compliance with the standards set forth in §§
111.20 and
111.21.
   (B)   The city may prescribe a reasonable rate for the basic service tier or
associated equipment after it determines that a proposed rate is unreasonable.
(Ord. 02-93, passed 10-14-1993)
§ 111.43 REFUNDS.
   (A)   (1)   The city may order a cable operator to refund to subscribers
that portion of previously paid rates determined by the city to be in excess of
the permitted tier charge or above the actual cost of equipment, unless the
operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing which justifies the rate
charged as reasonable.
      (2)   Before ordering a cable operator to refund previously paid rates to
subscribers, the city shall give the operator notice and opportunity to
comment. The operator’s opportunity to comment upon the proposed refunds may be
at any meeting of the City Council during the city’s period of review of the
operator’s rates. If the city has extended its review period under §
111.37, and has issued an accounting order under §
111.37(E), then the operator, prior to refunds being ordered, may request an
opportunity to appear before the City Council to comment upon the proposed
refunds.
   (B)   An operator’s liability for refunds is limited to a one-year period,
except that an operator that fails to comply with a valid rate order issued by
the city shall be liable for refunds commencing from the effective date of such
order until such time as it complies with such order.
   (C)   The refund period shall run as follows:
      (1)   From the date the operator implements a prospective rate reduction
back in time to September 1, 1993, or one year, whichever is shorter; or
      (2)   From the date the city issues an accounting order pursuant to §
111.37(D), and ending on the date the operator implements a prospective rate
reduction ordered by the city or one year, whichever is shorter.
   (D)   The cable operator, in its discretion, may implement a refund in the
following manner:
      (1)   By returning overcharges to those subscribers who actually paid the
overcharges, either through direct payment or as a specifically identified
credit to those subscribers’ bills; or
      (2)   By means of a prospective percentage reduction in the rates for the
basic service tier or associated equipment to cover the cumulative overcharge.
This shall be reflected as a specifically identified, one-time credit on
prospective bills to the class of subscribers that currently subscribe to the
cable system.
   (E)   Refunds shall include interest computed at applicable rates published
by the Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds and additional tax payments.
(Ord. 02-93, passed 10-14-1993)
§ 111.44 GOVERNING LAW; VENUE.
   This chapter shall be construed under and in accordance with the laws of the
state [and the City Charter] and city codes to the extent that such [Charter
and] codes are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and
laws of the United States or the state. All obligations of the parties
hereunder are performable in the county. In the event that any proceeding is
brought to enforce the terms of this chapter, the same shall be brought in the
county.
(Ord. 02-93, passed 10-14-1993)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES GENERALLY
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES GENERALLY
Section
Abortion
   
130.01   Definitions
   
130.02   Abortion prohibited within city limits
   
130.03   Abortion performed on city residents
   
130.04   Abortion-inducing drugs prohibited
   
130.05   Prohibited human trafficking
   
130.06   Private right of action
   
130.07   Affirmative defenses
   
130.08   Severability
 
   
130.99   Penalty
ABORTION
§ 130.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABORTION. The act of using, prescribing, administering, procuring or selling
of any instrument, medicine, drug or any other substance, device or means with
the purpose to terminate the pregnancy of a woman, with knowledge that the
termination by any of those means will with reasonable likelihood cause the
death of an unborn child. The term does not include:
      (1)   In vitro fertilization or fertility treatments of any type;
      (2)   The use, prescription, administration, procuring or selling of Plan
B, morning-after pills, intrauterine devices or any other type of contraception
or emergency contraception; or
      (3)   An act performed with the purpose to:
         (a)   Save the life or preserve the health of the unborn child;
         (b)   Remove a dead unborn child caused by spontaneous abortion; or
         (c)   Remove an ectopic pregnancy, the implantation of a fertilized
egg or embryo outside of the uterus.
   ABORTION-INDUCING DRUGS. Mifepristone, misoprostol and any drug or
medication that is used to terminate the life of an unborn child. The term does
not include:
      (1)   Plan B, morning-after pills, intrauterine devices or any other type
of contraception or emergency contraception; or
      (2)   Drugs or medications that are possessed or distributed for a
purpose that does not include the termination of a pregnancy, such as
misoprostol that is possessed or distributed for the purpose of treating
stomach ulcers.
   ABORTION DOULA SERVICES. Acts that aid or abet abortions by providing
informational, logistical, emotional or physical support that would make
someone an accomplice to abortion under the principles of complicity set forth
in Tex. Penal Code, § 7.02. The term does not include:
      (1)   The provision of truthful information regarding the availability of
abortion services that are legally permitted under the law of the jurisdiction
in which they offered; or
      (2)   The provision of emotional support to a woman who has completed an
abortion.
   ABORTION FUND. A corporation, organization, government or governmental
subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association
or any other legal entity that exists for the purpose of aiding or abetting
elective abortions, and that pays for, reimburses or subsidizes in any way the
costs associated with obtaining an elective abortion.
   ABORTION PROVIDER. A person, corporation, organization, government or
governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership,
association or any other legal entity that performs elective abortions.
   AFFILIATE. A person or entity who enters into with another person or entity
a legal relationship created or governed by at least one written instrument,
including a certificate of formation, a franchise agreement, standards of
affiliation, bylaws or a license, that demonstrates:
      (1)   Common ownership, management or control between the parties to the
relationship;
      (2)   A franchise granted by the person or entity to the affiliate; or
      (3)   The granting or extension of a license or other agreement
authorizing the affiliate to use the other person’s or entity’s brand name,
trademark, service mark or other registered identification mark.
   ELECTIVE ABORTION. Any abortion that is not performed or induced in response
to a medical emergency.
   FERTILIZATION. The fusion of a human spermatozoon with a human ovum.
   INTERACTIVE COMPUTER SERVICE. Any information service, system or access
software provider that provides or enables computer access by multiple users to
a computer server, including specifically a service or system that provides
access to the internet and such systems operated or services offered by
libraries or educational institutions.
   MEDICAL EMERGENCY. A life-threatening physical condition aggravated by,
caused by or arising from a pregnancy that, as certified by a physician, places
the woman in danger of death or a serious risk of substantial impairment of a
major bodily function unless an abortion is performed.
   UNBORN CHILD. An individual organism of the species Homo sapiens in any
stage of gestation from fertilization until live birth.
   WOMAN and WOMEN. Any person whose biological sex is female, including any
person with XX chromosomes and any person with a uterus, regardless of any
gender identity that the person attempts to assert or claim.
(Ord. 01122023A, passed 1-12-2023)
§ 130.02 ABORTION PROHIBITED WITHIN CITY LIMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to procure or perform an elective
abortion of any type and at any stage of pregnancy in the city. The prohibition
in this section extends to drug-induced abortions in which any portion of the
drug regimen is ingested in the city, and it applies regardless of where the
person who performs or procures the abortion is located.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly aid or abet an
abortion described in division (A) above. The prohibition in this section
includes, but is not limited to, the following acts:
      (1)   Knowingly providing transportation to or from an abortion provider;
      (2)   Giving instructions over the telephone, the internet or any other
medium of communication regarding self-administered abortion or self-managed
abortion, regardless of where the person giving the instructions is located;
      (3)   Offering or providing money, digital currency or other resources
with the knowledge that it will be used to pay for off-set, or reimburse the
costs of an abortion or the costs associated with procuring an abortion,
including any type of donation to an abortion provider or abortion fund that
performs or aids or abets abortions in violation of this section;
      (4)   Performing or providing any type of work or services for an
abortion provider or abortion fund that performs or aids or abets abortions in
violation of this section, regardless of whether such work or services is done
on a paid, contract or volunteer basis;
      (5)   Coercing or pressuring a pregnant woman to have an abortion against
her will; and
      (6)   Engaging in any conduct that would make one an accomplice to an
abortion performed in violation of this section under the principles of
complicity set forth in Tex. Penal Code, § 7.02.
   (C)   No provision of this section may be construed to prohibit any conduct
protected by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, as made applicable
to state and local governments through the Supreme Court’s interpretation of
the Fourteenth Amendment, or by Texas Constitution, Article 1, § 8.
   (D)   Under no circumstance may the mother of the unborn child that has been
aborted, or the pregnant woman who seeks to abort her unborn child, be subject
to prosecution or penalty under this section.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any other law, the requirements of this section shall
be enforced exclusively through the private civil actions described in §
130.05. No direct or indirect enforcement of this section may be taken or
threatened by the city, or by any officer or employee of this city, by any
means whatsoever, and no violation of this section may be used to justify or
trigger the enforcement of any other law or any type of adverse consequence
under any other law, except as provided in §
130.06. This section does not preclude or limit the enforcement of any other
law or regulation against conduct that is independently prohibited by such
other law or regulation, and that would remain prohibited by such other law or
regulation in the absence of this section.
(Ord. 01122023A, passed 1-12-2023) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 ABORTION PERFORMED ON CITY RESIDENTS.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city to protect its unborn residents from
individuals and organizations that aid or abet the killing of unborn children,
and to protect the unborn from those who seek to kill or otherwise harm them,
to the maximum extent permissible under state and federal law. The prohibitions
in this section and chapter shall apply extraterritorially to the maximum
extent permitted by the Constitution of the United States and the Texas
Constitution.
   (B)   Except as provided by division (C) below, it shall be unlawful for any
person to knowingly aid or abet an elective abortion performed on a resident
the city, or to attempt to aid or abet such an abortion, regardless of where
the abortion is or will be performed. The prohibition in this division (B)
includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Offering or knowingly providing transportation to or from an
abortion provider;
      (2)   Giving instructions over the telephone, the internet, an
interactive computer service or any other medium of communication regarding
self-administered or self-managed abortion or the means of obtaining elective
abortions;
      (3)   Offering, providing or lending money, digital currency, resources
or any other thing of value with the knowledge or intent that it will be used
to pay for, off-set or reimburse the costs of an elective abortion or the costs
associated with obtaining an elective abortion;
      (4)   Providing or arranging for insurance coverage of an elective
abortion;
      (5)   Offering or providing abortion doula services for an elective
abortion;
      (6)   Providing referrals to an abortion provider for a woman seeking an
elective abortion;
      (7)   Coercing, pressuring or encouraging a pregnant woman to have an
elective abortion; and
      (8)   Engaging in any conduct that would make one an accomplice to an
elective abortion under the principles of complicity set forth in Tex. Penal
Code, § 7.02.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other law, division (B) above does not prohibit:
      (1)   Abortions performed or induced in response to a medical emergency,
or any conduct that aids or abets or attempts to aid or abet such abortions;
      (2)   Speech or conduct protected by the First Amendment of the United
States Constitution, as made applicable to the states through the Supreme Court
of the United States’ interpretations of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United
States Constitution or by the Texas Constitution, Article 1, § 8;
      (3)   Conduct that the city is forbidden to regulate under federal or
state law;
      (4)   Conduct taken by a pregnant woman who aborts or seeks to abort her
unborn child;
      (5)   The provision of basic public services, including fire and police
protection and utilities, by a governmental entity or a common carrier to an
abortion provider, an abortion fund or an affiliate of an abortion provider or
abortion fund in the same manner as the entity provides those services to the
general public; and
      (6)   Conduct taken at the behest of federal agencies, contractors or
employees that are carrying out duties under federal law, if a prohibition on
that conduct would violate the doctrines of preemption or intergovernmental
immunity.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other law, the requirements of this section shall
be enforced exclusively through the private civil actions described in §
130.06. No direct or indirect enforcement of this section may be taken or
threatened by the city, or by any officer or employee of this city, by any
means whatsoever, and no violation of this section may be used to justify or
trigger the enforcement of any other law or any type of adverse consequence
under any other law, except as provided in §
130.06. This section does not preclude or limit the enforcement of any other
law or regulation against conduct that is independently prohibited by such
other law or regulation, and that would remain prohibited by such other law or
regulation in the absence of this section.
(Ord. 01122023A, passed 1-12-2023) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 ABORTION-INDUCING DRUGS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except as provided by division (B) below, it shall be unlawful for any
person to:
      (1)   Manufacture, possess or distribute abortion-inducing drugs in the
city;
      (2)   Mail, transport, deliver or provide abortion-inducing drugs in any
manner to or from any person or location in the city; or
      (3)   Engage in any conduct that would make one an accomplice to the
conduct described in divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above under the principles of
complicity set forth in Tex. Penal Code, § 7.02.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other law, division (A) above does not prohibit:
      (1)   Speech or conduct protected by the First Amendment of the United
States Constitution, as made applicable to the states through the Supreme Court
of the United States’ interpretations of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United
States Constitution or Texas Constitution, Article 1, § 8;
      (2)   Conduct that the city is forbidden to regulate under federal or
state law;
      (3)   Conduct taken by a pregnant woman who aborts or seeks to abort her
unborn child;
      (4)   The possession, distribution, mailing, transporting, delivery or
provision of abortion-inducing drugs for a purpose that does not include
termination of a pregnancy;
      (5)   The possession of abortion-inducing drugs resulting from an effort
to entrap individuals or entities that violate this section; or
      (6)   Conduct taken at the behest of federal agencies, contractors or
employees that are carrying out duties under federal law, if a prohibition on
that conduct would violate the doctrines of preemption or intergovernmental
immunity.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other law, the requirements of this section shall
be enforced exclusively through the private civil actions described in §
130.06. No direct or indirect enforcement of this section may be taken or
threatened by the city, or by any officer or employee of this city, by any
means whatsoever, and no violation of this section may be used to justify or
trigger the enforcement of any other law or any type of adverse consequence
under any other law, except as provided in §
130.06. This section does not preclude or limit the enforcement of any other
law or regulation against conduct that is independently prohibited by such
other law or regulation, and that would remain prohibited by such other law or
regulation in the absence of this section.
(Ord. 01122023A, passed 1-12-2023) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.05 PROHIBITED HUMAN TRAFFICKING.
   (A)   Except as provided by division (B) below, it shall be unlawful for any
person to knowingly transport any individual for the purpose of prostitution or
debauchery, or for any other immoral purpose, or attempt or conspire to do so.
This section shall apply only if the transportation of such individual begins,
ends or passes through the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly aid or abet the
conduct described in division (A) below. The prohibition in this section
includes, but is not limited to, the following acts:
      (1)   Offering, providing or lending money, digital currency or other
resources with the knowledge that it will be used to pay for, off-set or
reimburse the costs of transportation prohibited by division (A) above; and
      (2)   Engaging in any conduct that would make one an accomplice to a
violation of division (A) above under the principles of complicity set forth in
Tex. Penal Code, § 7.02.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   DEBAUCHERY. Any sexual activity for which any person can be charged
with a criminal offense under state or federal law, including the production of
child pornography, as defined in 18 U.S.C. § 2256(8).
      (2)   ANY OTHER IMMORAL PURPOSE. Elective abortion, as defined in §
130.01.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, this section shall not
apply to:
      (1)   Speech or conduct protected by the First Amendment of the United
States Constitution, as made applicable to the states through the Supreme Court
of the United States’ interpretations of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United
States Constitution or Texas Constitution, Article 1, § 8;
      (2)   Conduct that the city is forbidden to regulate under federal or
state law;
      (3)   Conduct taken by a pregnant woman who aborts or seeks to abort her
unborn child; or
      (4)   Conduct taken at the behest of federal agencies, contractors or
employees that are carrying out duties under federal law, if a prohibition on
that conduct would violate the doctrines of preemption or intergovernmental
immunity.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any other law, the requirements of this section shall
be enforced exclusively through the private civil actions described in §
130.06. No direct or indirect enforcement of this section may be taken or
threatened by the city, or by any officer or employee of this city, by any
means whatsoever, and no violation of this section may be used to justify or
trigger the enforcement of any other law or any type of adverse consequence
under any other law, except as provided in §
130.06. This section does not preclude or limit the enforcement of any other
law or regulation against conduct that is independently prohibited by such
other law or regulation, and that would remain prohibited by such other law or
regulation in the absence of this section.
   (F)   Under no circumstance may any penalty or punishment be imposed on the
individual who is transported or attempted to be transported in violation of
division (A) above.
(Ord. 01122023A, passed 1-12-2023) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.06 PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, other than the city, and any officer or employee of
the city, has standing to bring and may bring a civil action against any person
or entity that:
         (a)   Violates any provision of §§
130.02 through
130.05; or
         (b)   Intends to violate any provision of §§
130.02 through
130.05.
      (2)   Provided, that no lawsuit may be brought under this section against
a provider or user of an interactive computer service if such a lawsuit would
be preempted by 47 U.S.C. § 230(c).
   (B)   If a claimant prevails in an action brought under this section, the
court shall award:
      (1)   Injunctive relief sufficient to prevent the defendant from
violating §§
130.02 through
130.05;
      (2)   Nominal and compensatory damages if the plaintiff has suffered
injury or harm from the defendant’s conduct, including, but not limited to,
loss of consortium and emotional distress;
      (3)   Statutory damages in an amount of not less than $10,000 for each
violation of §§
130.02 through
130.05; and
      (4)   Costs and attorney’s fees.
   (C)   Notwithstanding division (B) above, a court may not award relief under
division (B)(3) or (B)(4) above in response to a violation of division (A)(1)
above if the defendant demonstrates that a court has already ordered the
defendant to pay the full amount of statutory damages under division (B)(3)
above in another action for that particular violation of §§
130.02 through
130.05.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other law, a person may bring an action under this
section not later than the sixth anniversary of the date the cause of action
accrues.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any other law, the following are not a defense to an
action brought under this section:
      (1)   Ignorance or mistake of law;
      (2)   A defendant’s belief that the requirements or provisions of this
subchapter are unconstitutional or were unconstitutional;
      (3)   A defendant’s reliance on any court decision that has been vacated,
reversed or overruled on appeal or by a subsequent court, even if that court
decision had not been vacated, reversed or overruled when the cause of action
accrued;
      (4)   A defendant’s reliance on any state or federal court decision that
is not binding on the court in which the action has been brought;
      (5)   A defendant’s reliance on any federal statute, agency rule or
action, or treaty that has been repealed, superseded or declared invalid or
unconstitutional, even if that federal statute, agency rule or action, or
treaty had not been repealed, superseded or declared invalid or
unconstitutional when the cause of action accrued;
      (6)   Non-mutual issue preclusion or non-mutual claim preclusion;
      (7)   The consent of the plaintiff or the unborn child’s mother to the
abortion;
      (8)   Contributory or comparative negligence;
      (9)   Assumption of risk; and
      (10)   Any claim that the enforcement of this chapter or the imposition
of civil liability against the defendant will violate the constitutional rights
of third parties, except as provided by §
130.07.
   (F)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense if a person sued under this
section:
         (a)   Was unaware that it was engaged in conduct described in §§
130.02 through
130.05; and
         (b)   Took every reasonable precaution to ensure that it would not
violate §§
130.02 through
130.05.
      (2)   The defendant has the burden of proving an affirmative defense
under this subchapter by a preponderance of the evidence.
   (G)   This section may not be construed to impose liability on any speech or
conduct protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution, as
made applicable to the states through the United States Supreme Court’s
interpretation of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution,
or of the Texas Constitution, Article 1, § 8.
   (H)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other law, neither the city, nor any officer
or employee of the city of may:
         (a)   Act in concert or participation with anyone who brings suit
under this section;
         (b)   Establish or attempt to establish any type of agency or
fiduciary relationship with a person who brings suit under this section;
         (c)   Make any attempt to control or influence a person’s decision to
bring suit under this section or that person’s conduct of the litigation; or
         (d)   Intervene in any action brought under this section.
      (2)   This subchapter does not prohibit a person or entity described by
this division (H) from filing an amicus curiae brief in the action, so long as
that person or entity does not act in concert or participation with the
plaintiff or plaintiffs who sue under this section or violate any provision of
divisions (H)(1)(a) through (H)(1)(d) above.
   (I)   Notwithstanding any other law, a court may not award costs or
attorneys’ fees to a litigant who is sued under this section.
   (J)   Notwithstanding any other law, a civil action under this section may
not be brought:
      (1)   Against the woman upon whom the abortion was performed or induced
or attempted to be performed or induced in violation of this subchapter, or
against a pregnant woman who intends or seeks to abort her unborn child in
violation of this subchapter;
      (2)   Against any person or entity that performs, aids or abets, or
attempts or intends to perform or aid or abet an abortion at the behest of
federal agencies, contractors or employees that are carrying out duties under
federal law, if a prohibition on that abortion would violate the doctrines of
preemption or intergovernmental immunity;
      (3)   Against any common carrier that transports a pregnant woman to an
abortion provider, if the common carrier is unaware that the woman intends to
abort her unborn child; or
      (4)   By any person who impregnated a woman seeking an abortion through
an act of rape, sexual assault or incest, or by anyone who acts in concert or
participation with such a person.
   (K)   Notwithstanding any other law, a civil action under this section may
be brought only in the district courts of the state and may not be considered
by any municipal or county court.
(Ord. 01122023A, passed 1-12-2023)
§ 130.07 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES.
   (A)   (1)   A defendant against whom an action is brought under §
130.06 may assert an affirmative defense to liability under this section if:
         (a)   The imposition of civil liability on the defendant will violate
constitutional or federally protected rights that belong to the defendant
personally; or
         (b)   The defendant:
            1.   Has standing to assert the rights of a third-party under the
tests for third-party standing established by the Supreme Court of the United
States; and
            2.   Demonstrates that the imposition of civil liability on the
defendant will violate constitutional or federally protected rights belonging
to that third party.
      (2)   The defendant shall bear the burden of proving the affirmative
defense in this division (A) by a preponderance of the evidence.
   (B)   Nothing in this section or chapter shall limit or preclude a defendant
from asserting the unconstitutionality of any provision or application of this
chapter as a defense to liability under, or from asserting any other defense
that might be available under any other source of law.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other law, no court may apply the law of another
state or jurisdiction to any civil action brought under §
130.06, unless Article VI of the Constitution of the United States or the
constitution or laws of the state compels it to do so.
(Ord. 01122023A, passed 1-12-2023)
§ 130.08 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   Mindful of Leavitt v. Jane L., 518 U.S. 137 (1996), in which in the
context of determining the severability of a state statute regulating abortion
the Supreme Court of the United States held that an explicit statement of
legislative intent is controlling, it is the intent of the city that every
provision, section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or word in this
subchapter, and every application of the provisions in this subchapter to every
person, group of persons or circumstances, are severable from each other.
   (B)   If any application of any provision in this subchapter to any person,
group of persons or circumstances is found by a court to be invalid, preempted
or unconstitutional, for any reason whatsoever, then the remaining applications
of that provision to all other persons and circumstances shall be severed and
preserved, and shall remain in effect. All constitutionally valid applications
of the provisions in this subchapter shall be severed from any applications
that a court finds to be invalid, preempted or unconstitutional, because it is
the city’s intent and priority that every single valid application of every
provision in this subchapter be allowed to stand alone.
   (C)   The city further declares that it would have enacted this subchapter,
and each provision, section division, sentence, clause, phrase or word, and all
constitutional applications of the provisions of this subchapter, irrespective
of the fact that any provision, section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or
word, or applications of this subchapter were to be declared invalid, preempted
or unconstitutional.
   (D)   If any provision of this subchapter is found by any court to be
unconstitutionally vague, then the applications of that provision that do not
present constitutional vagueness problems shall be severed and remain in force,
consistent with the severability requirements of divisions (A), (B) and (C)
above.
   (E)   No court may decline to enforce the severability requirements of
divisions (A), (B), (C) and (D) above on the ground that severance would
rewrite the ordinance or involve the court in legislative or lawmaking
activity. A court that declines to enforce or enjoins a state or city official
from enforcing a statute or ordinance is never rewriting a statute or engaging
in legislative or lawmaking activity, as the statute or ordinance continues to
contain the same words as before the court’s decision. A judicial injunction or
declaration of unconstitutionality:
      (1)   Is nothing more than an edict prohibiting enforcement that may
subsequently be vacated by a later court if that court has a different
understanding of the law;
      (2)   Is not a formal amendment of the language in a statute or
ordinance; and
      (3)   No more rewrites a statute or ordinance than a decision by the
executive not to enforce a duly enacted statute or ordinance in a limited and
defined set of circumstances.
   (F)   If any state or federal court disregards any of the severability
requirements in divisions (A), (B), (C), (D) or (E) above, and declares or
finds any provision of this chapter facially invalid, preempted or
unconstitutional, when there are discrete applications of that provision can be
enforced against a person, group of persons or circumstances without violating
federal or state law, then that provision shall be interpreted, as a matter of
city law, as if the city had enacted a provision limited to the persons, group
of persons or circumstances for which the provision’s application will not
violate federal or state law, and every court shall adopt this saving
construction of that provision until the court ruling that pronounced the
provision facially invalid, preempted or unconstitutional is vacated or
overruled.
(Ord. 01122023A, passed 1-12-2023)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
151.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
152.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
153.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      
154.   ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 150: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
150.01   Recreational vehicles and travel trailers for residential purposes
   
150.02   Future Land Use and Thoroughfare Plan adopted
   
150.03   Addressing standards
 
   
150.99   Penalty
§ 150.01 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND TRAVEL TRAILERS FOR RESIDENTIAL PURPOSES.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE or TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle or similar portable
structure designed for recreational use and travel having no foundation other
than wheels, jacks, blocks or skirting, having 600 square feet or less of
enclosed area, and so designed or constructed as to permit occupancy for
dwelling or sleeping purposes; provided, however, a mobile home or manufactured
home is not a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE or TRAVEL TRAILER, and, for purposes of
determining the distances specified herein, the term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE and
TRAVEL TRAILER includes any portable, prefabricated, temporary room, commonly
called a cabana, that is attached to such RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   (B)   Unlawful actions.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to reside, or occupy for the
purpose of residing, in any recreational vehicle or travel trailer within the
city limits.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to install, locate or place any
recreational vehicle or travel trailer on any lot or parcel of land within the
city, with the intent that any person shall reside in or occupy such
recreational vehicle or travel trailer; provided that it shall be a defense to
this division (B)(2) that such recreational vehicle or travel trailer is
located on a lot or parcel on which an occupied primary residence exists and
such recreational vehicle or travel trailer is located temporarily for use by
guests or members of the household of the owner or occupant of the primary
residence, and the temporary occupancy does not exceed 30 days in any calendar
year.
   (C)   Special use permit; application and duration of special use permit.
      (1)   A person may submit an application for a special use permit to
authorize the person to reside, or occupy for the purpose of residing, in a
recreational vehicle or travel trailer within the city limits. The application
must be in writing and must provide a written description of the reasons and
necessity for a special use permit to authorize the person to reside or occupy
for the purpose of residing in a recreational vehicle or travel trailer within
the city limits. The application must set forth a time period for which the
applicant wishes to reside or occupy a recreational vehicle or travel trailer
within the city in excess of thirty 120 days.
      (2)   The City Council shall consider all applications for a special use
permit under this section. The City Council may reject any application or
approve any application after consideration of the application. If the
application for a special use permit is approved, the City Council shall
establish the duration of the special use permit period and shall set an
expiration date for the special use permit.
(Ord. passed - -2023) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.02 FUTURE LAND USE AND THOROUGHFARE PLAN ADOPTED.
   (A)   The Future Land Use and Thoroughfare Plan, together with the maps and
report which are attached to Ordinance 02-01 and incorporated herein for all
purposes, is hereby adopted by the City Council as a long-range planning guide
for the city.
   (B)   This plan is intended to constitute the Comprehensive or Master Plan
of the city, for all matters related to long-range guidance relative to zoning
decisions, land subdivision, thoroughfare construction and growth management.
(Ord. 02-01, passed 4-12-2001)
§ 150.03 ADDRESSING STANDARDS.
   (A)   There is hereby established the following addressing standards for
numbering property and naming public streets/roads within the incorporated
areas of the city structures within this area are subject to addressing in
accordance with this order.
   (B)   Street naming and property numbering procedures shall be established
in conjunction with the platting and subdivision requirements of the city.
      (1)   A survey and inventory of all public street names within the city
boundaries shall be prepared by the city for use with addressing procedures.
Property needing street naming or number assignment on public streets/roads
will be identified. Duplicate names or similar sounding names will be repealed
and renamed on the recommendation of the City Council.
      (2)   The street name criteria shall be as follows:
         (a)   Non-duplicative of existing names, limited to 30 characters, no
similar sounding names. Directionals are to be spelled out (north); and
         (b)   Name changes are considered for historical or clarification
purposes and are limited to consideration only by the City Council. Name
changes must meet same criteria established for new street names. Petition for
change must be presented with signatures from three-fourths of property owners
abutting the street. Development along street and traffic volume may be
considered as additional criteria.
      (3)   The property numbering criteria shall be as follows:
         (a)   Number assignment is based upon a grid system: center point
within the community, with axis forming base lines, north-south line being FM
436 and east-west line being at Lanham Street; and
         (b)   Number assignment progresses from the center point outward each
direction, with the interval distance of 90 feet allowed for each number. Odd
numbers will be on the south and east and even numbers will be on the north and
west.
      (4)   If a private road has only a single-family structure and the
entrance to the private road is from a named road, then the private road will
be treated as a driveway and address assigned at the named road.
      (5)   Final approval of new street names and name change requests resides
with the City Council. Street name adoption or changes must comply with
criteria established under these standards.
   (C)   Addressing standards shall include requirements of property owners and
inhabitants to post assigned property number at curbside and/or structure. The
number must be visible from the street and not be obscured. Residential posting
may be no less than three inches high; business structure posting may be no
less than six inches high. Grace period for incorporating this requirement are
within two months of new address notification.
   (D)   Within 60 days of notification, property address number signage should
be posted. After 61 days, if no number sign is posted, the enforcement shall
consist of the proper authority which is the city posting such number and to
apply applicable charges to the resident or property owner. Charges for posting
such number by the city shall be paid in the Municipal Court plus penalty and
court costs, if deemed necessary. The city reserves the right to enforce this
section in its Municipal Court and may access a fine up to $200 for non-
compliance.
   (E)   Street signs should be erected at all intersections of public roads
regardless of current route markings from state, federal or local designation.
For new property development, the signage will be required at the expense of
the developer. Signs must conform to guidelines established by the city. Block
number ranges should be included on signs.
   (F)   Trailer parks and apartment buildings are required to follow numbering
guidelines established by the city at owner’s cost. Penalties will apply for
non-compliance. Trailer parks must have road identification and trailer spaces
identified by a numbering system (example: Road A Spaces 1 - 26). Each trailer
will post the applicable number on the road side of trailer and must be at no
less than three inches high and visible from the road. Apartment buildings and
complexes must also comply with identification plan developed by the city. When
an apartment complex contains more than one building, a road identification
sign will be required with same requirements as for trailer parks. Apartments
must all have identifying numbers and letters with all being visible, uniform
and no less than three inches high.
   (G)   The city in its Municipal Court will access a minimum fine of $200 to
anyone found guilty for the unlawful removal of any street sign, stop sign or
yield sign in the city.
(Ord. 02-91, passed 10-10-1991) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate §
150.01, or shall fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements
thereof, within the city limits shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall
be liable for a fine not to exceed the sum of $2,000. Each day the violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense. Such penalty shall be in addition
to all the other remedies provided herein.
(Ord. passed - -2023)
CHAPTER 151: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Building Codes
   
151.01   International Building Code and amendments
   
151.02   International Residential Code and amendments
   
151.03   Prior versions
Regulations Generally
   
151.15   Authority
   
151.16   Purpose and scope
   
151.17   Definitions
   
151.18   Permit, bond and insurance required
   
151.19   Application for permit
   
151.20   Issuance of permits and licenses; expiration; transfer; suspension or
revocation
   
151.21   Inspections
   
151.22   Stop-work orders; occupancy and use violations
   
151.23   Certificate of occupancy or completion
   
151.24   Variances
   
151.25   Enforcement generally; notices; citations
   
151.26   Abatement of dangerous conditions without notice
   
151.27   Abatement hearing
   
151.28   Assessment of costs of abatement; lien
   
151.29   Appeals
   
151.30   Enforcement methods
   
151.31   Duties of utility service providers
   
151.32   Prima facie evidence of responsibility for violation
Building Official
   
151.45   Office created; appointment; acting Building Official
   
151.46   Qualifications
   
151.47   Duties
   
151.48   Right of entry
   
151.49   Inspectors and other employees
   
151.50   Liability
   
151.51   Cooperation of other officials
   
151.52   Violations
Fees
   
151.65   Scope of services
   
151.66   Inspection fees
 
   
151.99   Penalty
BUILDING CODES
§ 151.01 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE AND AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of
the City Secretary, being marked and designated as the International Building
Code, 2021 Edition, including all Appendix chapters, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the
city establishing the minimum regulations governing the conditions and
maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the
standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and
conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for
occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for
human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures in connection
with the city’s dangerous building regulations and Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code,
Chapter 214; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of such International Building Code, 2021 Edition, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., on file in the office of the City Secretary
are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this section as if fully set
out in this chapter.
   (B)   The 2021 International Building Code is amended as follows.
      (1)   Each reference to “Jurisdiction” or location for insertion of name
of jurisdiction shall mean the “City of Little River-Academy, Texas.”
      (2)   Each reference to the “Board of Appeals” is amended to mean and
refer to the “Board of Adjustment.”
      (3)   Permits are required for fences greater than six feet in height.
      (4)   Guard rails are required for any wall greater than 48 inches in
height, retaining or otherwise, with a walkable surface to the wall. Slopes
greater than three to one (3:1) are not considered to be walkable. A temporary
guard rail may be required to be maintained during construction.
      (5)   Wood frame construction for residential or multi-family cannot
exceed three stories.
   (C)   The 2021 International Building Code is further amended as set out in
ordinance passed from time to time by the governing body, made a part of this
section as if herein set out in full.
(Ord. passed 10-14-2021)
§ 151.02 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE AND AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of
the City Secretary, being marked and designated as the International
Residential Code, 2012 Edition, including all Appendix chapters, published by
the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Residential Code
of the city establishing the minimum regulations governing the conditions and
maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the
standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and
conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for
occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for
human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures in connection
with the city’s dangerous building regulations and Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code,
Chapter 214; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of such International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., on file in the office of the City Secretary
are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this section as if fully set
out in this chapter.
   (B)   The 2012 International Residential Code is further amended as follows.
      (1)   Each reference to “Jurisdiction” or location for insertion of name
of jurisdiction shall mean the “City of Little River-Academy, Texas.”
      (2)   Each reference to the “Board of Appeals” is amended to mean and
refer to the “Board of Adjustment.”
      (3)   Section R103.1 is deleted.
      (4)   Section R105. Permits.
         (a)   A permit is required for an accessory structure if the floor
area exceeds 120 square feet.
         (b)   A permit is required for a fence greater than six feet in
height.
      (5)   Section R112.1 is hereby amended to provide that the composition of
the Board of Adjustment of the city shall be as designated and appointed by the
City Council.
      (6)   Section R112.3 that refers to and provides for the qualification
requirements for members of the “Board of Adjustment and Appeals” is hereby
deleted.
      (7)   Any reference or requirement that requires a written application
for appeal to be filed within 20 days after the decision of a code official is
deleted.
      (8)   Section 113.4 is amended to provide that any person, firm,
corporation, organization or entity that violates a provision of this code, or
fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000. Each day a
violation occurs constitutes a separate offense.
      (9)   Appendix C (Exit Terminals for Direct Vent Appliances), Appendix E
(Manufactured Housing), Appendix G (Swimming Pools, Hot Tubs and Spas) and
Appendix J (Existing Buildings and Structures) are adopted by ordinance.
      (10)   Table R301.2(1). Design Criteria.
         (a)   Ground snow load: 0 to 5.
         (b)   Wind design: 105 miles per hour (no special topographical
effect).
         (c)   Seismic design category: A.
         (d)   Weathering: negligible.
         (e)   Frost line depth: less than 6 inches.
         (f)   Termites: moderate.
         (g)   Winter design temperature: 32 degrees.
         (h)   Summer design temperature: 90 degrees - hot and humid
environment.
         (i)   Flood hazard: current FEMA maps;
         (j)   Mean annual temperature: 70 degrees.
         (k)   Rainfall: 4.25 inches per hour, 100 year.
      (11)   Section R311.1. Means of Egress.
         (a)   311.l (a) Front door shall be a minimum of 36 inches wide and 78
inches tall.
         (b)   Window seats may count as the finished floor height only where a
windowsill cannot feasibly be below 44” for egress, due to first floor
encroachment below the window.
      (12)   Section P3114. The building official may approve the use of air
admittance valves as a vent of last resort.
      (13)   Part VIII Electrical is deleted in its entirety. Electrical
systems shall be installed under the 2023 National Electrical Code and local
amendments.
(Ord. passed 10-14-2021)
§ 151.03 PRIOR VERSIONS.
   All other ordinances relating to the adoption of prior versions of the
International Building Code and International Residential Code, and any other
earlier or prior codes, are hereby amended in their entirety to read as
provided in this chapter, and all other ordinances or parts thereof in conflict
herewith are amended to the extent of such conflict only. In the event of a
conflict or inconsistency between this chapter and any other code or ordinance
of the city, the terms and provisions of this chapter shall govern.
(Ord. passed 10-14-2021)
REGULATIONS GENERALLY
§ 151.15 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the police powers and authority given
general law cities by the constitution, codes and general laws of the state,
including, but not limited to, Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, Chapter 51; Tex. Loc.
Gov’t Code, Chapter 54; Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, Chapter 214; and the Tex. Health
and Safety Code.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
§ 151.16 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard
life, limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling
the design, construction, quality of materials, use, occupancy, location and
maintenance of all buildings and structures within the city and other such
equipment regulated herein. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all
construction, site clearance, alteration, moving and repair of any building or
structure within the city.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
§ 151.17 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building located on the same lot as a
principal building, the activity of which is clearly integral with or
incidental to the permitted use of the principal building.
   ALTERATIONS. Any change, addition or modification in construction, including
any change in structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions,
columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be referred to
herein as altered or reconstructed.
   APPROVED. Having paid all permit fees and receiving the written approval of
the Building Official, or appropriate inspector, as the result of an
investigation and, if necessary, tests conducted by the Building Official or
appropriate enforcement official of the city.
   BUILDING. Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof or
other covering, and designed or used for the shelter or enclosure of any
person, animal or property of any kind, including tents, awnings or vehicles
situated on private property.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL (INSPECTOR). The person, his or her staff or employees, or
entity designated by the city or appointed to perform the duties and
responsibilities set forth herein, or, if none has been appointed, the chief
executive officer. Where the inspection is for plumbing, electrical or other
such inspection or permitting, the INSPECTOR designated to perform such
specific duties is the BUILDING OFFICIAL for such project.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY OR COMPLETION. A written certificate issued by the
Building Official authorizing use and occupancy of a structure upon the
satisfactory completion of any work or operations authorized by the city’s
building permit or other permit or same in occupancy. No occupancy of any new
or altered portion of any structure or building, or any such building or
structure for which there is a change requiring a permit, shall take place
until a written certificate titled CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY or CERTIFICATE OF
COMPLETION therefor shall have been issued by the Building Official.
   CITY ATTORNEY or CORPORATE COUNSEL. The attorney appointed to represent the
city.
   CITY OFFICIAL. The legally designated head of a city department or his or
her authorized representative when acting in an official capacity.
   DWELLING. A building used for residential purposes.
   DWELLING UNIT. A residential unit designed to accommodate one household.
   FIRE CHIEF. The Chief of the Fire Department or his or her authorized
representative.
   FIRE MARSHAL. The person designated by the Fire Chief to be in charge of
fire prevention activities, fire inspections and fire and arson investigations
for the city.
   HEALTH OFFICER or HEALTH INSPECTOR. The legally designated head of the City
Health Department or his or her authorized representative, or, where none, the
head of the County Health Department or his or her authorized representative.
   OCCUPANT. Any person who rents, leases or appears to reside, rent or lease a
building, structure or property through custody of the premises or who has the
legal right to possession of such premises.
   OWNER. Any person who holds any interest in the legal title of a building,
structure or property or who has the legal right of possession thereof.
   PERMIT. A written document or certification issued by the Building Official
permitting the specific construction, alteration or extension requiring a
permit under the provisions of this chapter and regulations stated herein.
   PLOT PLAN or SITE PLAN. A graphic representation, drawn to scale, in a
horizontal plane, delineating the outlines of the land included in the plan and
all proposed use locations, accurately dimensioned, the dimensions also
including the relation of each use to that adjoining and to the boundary of the
property.
   POLICE CHIEF. The legally designated Chief of the Police Department of the
city, or his or her authorized representative.
   REPAIR. The reconstruction, renovation or renewal of any part of an existing
building or structure for the purpose of its maintenance or improvement.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTIES or RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The owner or occupant, including
the person in custody of the building or property and/or any mortgagee or
lienholder.
   UTILITY SERVICE. Its common meaning and shall specifically include, but not
be limited to, electric, water, wastewater, gas and telephone service.
   VARIANCE. A modification of the literal provisions of this chapter granted
when strict enforcement of this chapter would cause undue hardship caused by
circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is
granted.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
§ 151.18 PERMIT, BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permits generally.
      (1)   No building or structure or part thereof shall be constructed,
erected, altered, moved or placed within the city unless all appropriate
permits to comply with this chapter shall have first been issued for such work.
No permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the city for a
building or for a private sewage facility upon any lot in a subdivision or
confirming plat for which a final plat has not been approved by the city and
filed for record, or upon any lot or parcel in the city or any lot in a
subdivision in which the standards contained in the city’s subdivision
regulations, as amended, or referred to therein, have not been complied with in
full. No site clearance, excavation, grading or landfill on public or private
land shall commence unless all applicable permits shall have first been issued
for such work.
      (2)   Any owner or occupant may personally make minor improvements and
ordinary repairs on any structure without a permit; provided that such
improvements and repairs conform to all applicable building laws and codes. The
Building Official shall have the right to inspect all such improvements or
repairs and determine whether a permit is necessary.
   (B)   Moving permit. No building or structure or part thereof shall be moved
onto or over the city streets unless a permit shall have first been issued for
such move.
   (C)   Bond or deposit.
      (1)   Before any permit pursuant to this chapter is issued, the applicant
shall file with the city a corporate surety bond, approved by the City
Attorney, or a cash deposit with the city, which deposit shall be placed in an
escrow account in accordance with the following table.
Estimated Cost of Construction Surety Bond Cash Deposit
Estimated Cost of Construction Surety Bond         Cash Deposit
$0 to $500                     None                None
$500.01 to $1,000              $250                $250
$1,000.01 to $2,000            $500                $50
$2,000.01 to $5,000            $1,000              $100
$5,000.01 to $10,000           $2,500              $250
$10,000.01 to $30,000          $10,000             $1,000
$30,000.01 and above           Percentage of costs Percentage of costs
 
      (2)   When applications are submitted where the costs of the total
project are estimated to be more than $30,000, the Building Official may
require that a bond or deposit in an amount based on a percentage of the cost
of the project in question shall be tendered prior to issuance of a permit. The
Building Official may require a larger or smaller bond or deposit when, in his
or her opinion, the nature of the permit indicates such a need. Such bond shall
be conditioned upon the applicant’s compliance with this chapter and other
ordinances of the city and shall secure and may be used for the payment of any
and all damages to persons or property (including the city) which damages arise
out of, or are caused by, any act or conduct of or authorized by the applicant.
   (D)   Insurance.
      (1)   Before a construction project is started for which a bond or
deposit is required under this chapter, each person applying shall furnish to
the city evidence that he or she has procured public liability and property
damage insurance in the following amounts:
         (a)   For damages arising out of bodily injury or death of one person
in any one accident: $100,000;
         (b)   For damages arising out of bodily injury or death of two or more
persons in any accident: $300,000; and
         (c)   For injury or destruction of property in any one accident:
$100,000.
      (2)   Such insurance shall be kept in full force and effective during the
period of time for which a bond or deposit shall be issued for the premises
occupied. The city may waive this insurance request for minor construction
projects.
   (E)   Exemptions. State, county and federal agencies are exempt from the
bond and deposit requirements.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.19 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Generally. To obtain a permit under this chapter, the applicant shall
first file an application therefor in writing. Each such application shall be
accompanied by the required fee and shall:
      (1)   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for
which application is made;
      (2)   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done, by lot,
block, tract and house or structure and street address, or similar description
that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed work;
      (3)   Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended;
      (4)   Be accompanied by plans and specifications as required in divisions
(B) and (C) below;
      (5)   State the valuation of the proposed work;
      (6)   Be signed by the permittee, or his or her authorized agent, who may
be required to submit evidence to indicate authority; and
      (7)   Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the
Building Official.
   (B)   Site plan. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied
by a site plan drawn to scale, together with such additional copies as the
Building Official may determine to be necessary for review by other city
officials. The site plan shall contain the following:
      (1)   A legal description of the land included on the site plan and of
the lot; the addresses and telephone numbers of the owner, the builder and the
designer or architect;
      (2)   Lot and block number, and street number as approved by the U.S.
Postal Service;
      (3)   The actual shape, location and dimensions of the lot, an arrow
pointing north and the lot area of the land included in the site plan;
      (4)   Erosion and sedimentation controls in use during construction;
      (5)   Location and dimensions of easements and setback requirements;
      (6)   Floodplain elevations, showing the floodway and that portion of the
lot which is subject to inundation by the 100-year flood;
      (7)   Location of existing and proposed walks, driveways, off-site
parking design and access roads;
      (8)   The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such structures
upon it, including, in residential areas, the number of dwelling units the
building is intended to accommodate;
      (9)   Existing and proposed grades and drainage systems and structures
with topographic contours at intervals not exceeding two feet;
      (10)   The architectural design, shape, size and location of all
buildings or other structures to be erected, altered or moved and of any
buildings or other structures already on the lot;
      (11)   Site clearance and excavation plans;
      (12)   Exterior lighting plans; and
      (13)   Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may
be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being
complied with.
   (C)   Construction plans. Construction plans and specifications for all
contemplated construction on the site shall be provided to the Building
Official, and such plans shall include at least the following information:
      (1)   Scaled floor plan of each floor and of the basement, if any, for
each building;
      (2)   Plan of all attached terraces, porches or covered walkways, and/or
attached or detached garage or carport and accessory buildings, parking lots
and driveways, and all other structures as herein defined. All setback
dimensions shall be indicated on the plans;
      (3)   Location and size of all permanently installed construction and
equipment, such as closets, storage, plumbing fixtures, appliances and the
like;
      (4)   Location and symbols of all electrical equipment, including
switches, outlets, fixtures and the like;
      (5)   Exterior elevations:
         (a)   All exterior elevations;
         (b)   Wall and roof finish materials;
         (c)   Dimensions of overhang;
         (d)   Height from finished ground grade; and
         (e)   Undisturbed and finished ground grade line.
      (6)   Structural section:
         (a)   Cross-section of typical wall construction details; and
         (b)   Scale plan of foundation and pertinent section of typical beams,
footings and the like.
      (7)   Architect/engineer seal, when applicable (only if required by state
law).
         (a)   Architects or engineers shall affix their seal, actual signature
and date of affixation to all original construction drawings, including index
sheets identifying all drawings covered, addendums and change orders which are
developed and issued under the direct supervision or authorship of the
architect as contract documents.
         (b)   Those sheets or pages prepared by consultants (structural,
mechanical, electrical and the like) retained by the architect or engineer
shall also bear the seal and registration number of the consultant responsible
therefor. The architect’s seal on the work of his or her consultants shall be
applied only after the seal of the consultant has been applied and shall attest
only to the architect’s coordination of the consultant’s work with that of the
architects and does not imply the architect’s practice of engineering or other
consultant’s specialty. The engineer’s seal on the work of his or her
consultants shall be applied only after the seal of the consultant has been
applied and shall attest only to the engineer’s coordination of the
consultant’s work with that of the engineer’s and does not imply the engineer’s
practice of architecture or other consultant’s specialty.
         (c)   An architect’s seal is required on plans relating to new
commercial permits. An engineer’s seal is required when mandated by state law,
city ordinance or the technical codes.
      (8)   Erosion and sedimentation control plan to be used during
construction; and
      (9)   Such other information as deemed reasonably necessary by the
Building Official. If a geotechnical report or engineer’s foundation plans are
required, the applicant may provide a report covering the soil conditions
typical to the area and may provide a typical foundation plan for such
conditions. The applicant would not have to submit a separate report or a
separate plan for each individual site.
   (D)   License required. Any work required to be performed by a licensed
operator must have such license submitted at the time of application for a
permit. The permit may only be issued in the name of the licensed operator. No
other person may perform services or work requiring a license unless such
person is permitted by the terms of this chapter, has a valid permit for the
work or service and has a current valid license from the state to perform the
services or work.
   (E)   Verification of compliance with Architectural Barriers Act. For all
public and private commercial projects in excess of $50,000, the owner shall be
required to verify compliance with the Texas Architectural Barriers Act or
claim exemption.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.20 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS AND LICENSES; EXPIRATION; TRANSFER; SUSPENSION OR
REVOCATION.
   (A)   Review of application. The application, plans, specifications and
other data filed in support of a permit or license shall be reviewed by the
Building Official or other inspector. The City Engineer may be asked by the
Building Official to review the permit application and plans to ensure
compliance with this chapter and other applicable city ordinances, codes,
standards and specifications, and good engineering practices. If the Building
Official determines that the work described in an application and the required
plans, specifications and other data comply with this chapter and other
applicable ordinances, and that all fees have been paid, he or she shall issue
the permit or license, as applicable, to the applicant.
   (B)   Permit fees. Applicable fees pursuant to city ordinances and as set
forth in the this chapter shall be paid, including, but not limited to, all
professional fees, engineer and attorney fees incurred by the city for or with
respect to the review, processing and approval of the application for the
approval of the permit.
   (C)   Approval or denial of permit. When the Building Official issues a
permit where plans are required, the approved plans and specifications shall be
endorsed or stamped “APPROVED.” The approved plans and specifications shall not
be changed, modified or altered without authorization from the Building
Official. All work shall be done in accordance with the approved plans.
Approval of an application for a permit is not guaranteed and approval does not
authorize deviation from any ordinance or statute. The applicant must complete
all relevant information requested by the Building Official in the format
required in a timely fashion to the Building Official. All applications denied
must be endorsed or stamped “DENIED.” The Building Official shall indicate the
reason for denial in writing to the applicant. The applicant may appeal the
decision of the Building Official as provided in this chapter as set forth
herein by filing a notice of appeal with the City Secretary specifying the
grounds for appeal therein. The duration of time required for review of permit
applications and plans shall depend on the availability of the Building
Official.
   (D)   Issuance of permit for part of work. The Building Official may issue a
permit for construction of part of a building, structure or building service
equipment before the entire plans and specifications for the whole building,
structure or building service equipment have been submitted or approved, when
information and detailed statements have been filed with the city which the
Building Official determines adequately comply with requirements of this
chapter. The holder of a permit issued under this division (D) may proceed with
construction at his or her own risk, without assurance that the permit for the
entire building or structure will be approved. No vested right shall arise
under a permit issued under this division (D).
   (E)   Validity of permit. The issuance of a permit and the approval of plans
and specifications is not a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any
provision of this chapter or any other city ordinance. Issuance of a permit
based on plans, specifications and other data shall not prevent the Building
Official from thereafter requiring the correction oferrors in the plans,
specifications and other data, or from preventing building operations being
carried on continued when in violation of this chapter or other applicable city
ordinances. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel any
requirement or provision of this chapter shall be valid.
   (F)   Expiration and extension or permit.
      (1)   A building permit expires if work authorized by the permit is not
commenced within 180 days. An extension may be granted by the Building Official
for good cause. This extension must be requested in writing before the permit
expires and must be granted in writing to be effective.
      (2)   A building permit expires, if work authorized by the permit, once
begun, is suspended or abandoned for more than 180 days. A single extension of
up to 180 days may be granted by the Building Official for good cause. The
extension must be requested before the permit expires and must be granted in
writing to be effective.
      (3)   After a building permit has expired, no work shall be commenced
until a new permit has been applied for, fees paid and the permit has been
issued by the Building Official.
   (G)   Suspension, withholding or revocation.
      (1)   For good cause, the Building Official may suspend, withhold or
revoke a permit or license issued by the city. Good cause may include, but is
not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Failure or refusal to permit inspection of a site, location or
building where work is being performed under a current permit;
         (b)   Failure or refusal to stop work and correct deficiencies when
duly notified as described in §
151.22;
         (c)   Fraud or misrepresentation in obtaining a permit or license;
         (d)   Violation on more than one occasion, either willfully or
maliciously, or by reason of incompetence, of any provisions of the technical
codes;
         (e)   Refusal to comply with the lawful requirements of the Building
Official, bad faith or unreasonable delay in the performance of any
installation, alteration or changes required by the Building Official or the
correction of any defect pointed out by the Building Official;
         (f)   Consumption of alcoholic beverages, intoxication or use of
narcotics during construction which may create a dangerous work environment or
workers being impaired by the use of narcotics on a permitted work site;
         (g)   Existing adjudication of insanity of the permittee or licensee;
         (h)   Conviction of the permittee or licensee, who are to be
contractors on a site, of defrauding any person to whom he or she has rendered
or intends to render services;
         (i)   Using a permit or license for work that is not actually
performed or supervised, when permitted by the permittee or licensee; and
         (j)   Securing a permit under any pretense for construction or
installation concerning which the applicant has no valid contract.
      (2)   Each permittee shall have a fiduciary duty to supervise any person
performing work at a site for which the permittee holds a permit. The permittee
shall be responsible for any violation of this chapter by any person performing
work at a site for which the permittee holds a permit.
      (3)   The Building Official may withhold the issuing or renewal of a
license or permit to an applicant for the same reason and by the same process
used for revocation or suspension described in this division (G).
   (H)   Transfer.
      (1)   No license or permit issued in accordance with this chapter shall
be assignable or transferable.
      (2)   No work shall be performed by any person not the holder of a
license required by this chapter.
      (3)   No person shall employ another person for doing work for which a
license is required unless such person proposed to be employed is the holder of
the proper license.
      (4)   No licensee shall assign or in any other manner convey his or her
license, the use thereof or any rights thereunder to anyone by power of
attorney or any other process. Should any licensee violate this division (H),
the license theretofore issued to him or her under this chapter shall by that
act alone become null and void. However, any such prior assignment or other
conveyance made by a licensee shall not be an effective or valid assignment of
such license after its expiration date.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.21 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Generally. Before issuing a permit, the Building Official may examine
or cause to be examined any building and electrical, gas, mechanical or
plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to
enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install or change the occupancy or use.
The Building Official shall inspect all buildings, structures and electrical,
gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon
completion of the work for which a permit was issued. Prior to issuing a
certificate of occupancy to any premises, the Building Official may conduct a
thorough inspection of the premises for which a certificate of occupancy is
requested. The Building Official shall make a record of every such examination
and inspection and of all apparent violations.
   (B)   Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the Building
Official, the Building Official shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection
of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record
shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of
the building regulations.
   (C)   Use of inspection services. The Building Official may make, or cause
to be made, the inspections required by this chapter. The Building Official may
accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that
after investigating the Building Official is satisfied as to their
qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of
the technical codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in
writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service.
   (D)   Inspection prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or
completion. The Building Official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at
various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and
a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure and electrical,
gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of
the certificate of occupancy or completion.
   (E)   Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until
the permit holder or his or her agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous
place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and
located in such position as to permit the Building Official or representative
to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be
maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of
occupancy or completion is issued by the Building Official.
   (F)   Required inspections. The Building Official, upon notification from
the permit holder or his or her agent, shall make the following inspections and
such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of
the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his or her agent of any
violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical codes:
      (1)   Building.
         (a)   Foundation inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated
and forms erected;
         (b)   Frame inspection. To be made after the roof, all framing,
fireblocking and bracing is in place, and all concealed wiring, all pipes,
chimneys, ducts and vents are complete; and
         (c)   Final inspection. To be made after the building is completed and
ready for occupancy.
      (2)   Electrical.
         (a)   Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are
excavated, conduit or cable installed and before any backfill is put in place;
         (b)   Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof framing,
fireblocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or
ceiling membranes; and
         (c)   Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all
required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected
and the structure is ready for occupancy.
      (3)   Plumbing.
         (a)   Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are
excavated, piping installed and before any backfill is put in place;
         (b)   Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, fireblocking and
bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior
to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes; and
         (c)   Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all
plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is
ready for occupancy.
      (4)   Mechanical.
         (a)   Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are
excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill
is put in place;
         (b)   Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing,
fireblocking and bracing is in place and all ducting and other concealed
components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling
membranes; and
         (c)   Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, the
mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is
ready for occupancy.
   (G)   Other inspections. In addition to the required inspections specified
in this section, the Building Official shall make or require to be made any
other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and other laws which are enforced by the city.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
§ 151.22 STOP-WORK ORDERS; OCCUPANCY AND USE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Stop-work orders. Whenever any building work is being done contrary to
the provisions of this chapter or another controlling ordinance or statute
governing the building, the Building Official may order the work stopped by
notice verbally or in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing
such work to be done, and the city shall post a stop-work order on the property
adjacent to the posted building permit, and any such persons shall forthwith
stop such work until authorized by the Building Official to proceed with the
work. If no permit has been issued, all work shall stop until a permit has been
properly issued and all errors corrected to the satisfaction of the Building
Official. The Building Official may also issue a work correction order, which
shall be served upon any persons who are working on a certain aspect of the
construction project. The work on other aspects of the construction not in
violation of the city’s ordinances may proceed, but work shall cease as to that
aspect in violation of the city’s ordinances.
   (B)   Occupancy and use violations. Whenever any structure is being used
contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the city zoning regulations
applicable to such structure, lot, parcel or tract of property upon which the
structure is located or the city subdivision regulations applicable to such
structure, lot, parcel or tract upon which the structure is located, the
Building Official may order such use discontinued and the structure, or portion
thereof, vacated by notice served on any person causing such use to be
continued. Such person shall discontinue the use within ten days after receipt
of such notice or make the structure, or portion thereof, comply with the
requirements of this chapter. If the Building Official determines that any
building, structure or premises have not been brought into compliance within
the requisite time period, the Building Official may by written notice, as
provided in §
151.27, immediately revoke the certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
§ 151.23 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY OR COMPLETION.
   (A)   Required. No building or structure shall be occupied, and no change in
the existing occupancy or classification of a building or structure or portion
thereof shall be made, until the Building Official has issued a certificate of
occupancy therefor, as provided herein, and such permit is current and not
revoked. Prior to any connection of utilities or transfer of utilities from one
name to and/or from one location to another, the primary occupant must have
been issued a certificate of occupancy or a temporary certificate of occupancy.
   (B)   Change in use. Changes in the character or use of a building or
structure shall not be made except as specified by this chapter and the
technical codes adopted by the city.
   (C)   Issuance. After final inspection, when it is found that the building
or structure complies with the provisions of this chapter, the city zoning
regulations applicable to such lot, parcel or tract of property upon which the
structure is located and the city subdivision regulations applicable to such
structure, lot, parcel or tract upon which the structure is located, the
Building Official shall issue a certificate of occupancy or completion, which
shall contain the following:
      (1)   The use and occupancy for which the certificate is issued;
      (2)   A certification that the building or structure complies with the
provisions of this chapter;
      (3)    The permit number of the building or structure;
      (4)    The address of the building or structure;
      (5)    The name and address of the owner and occupant;
      (6)   A description of that portion of the building or structure for
which the certificate is issued;
      (7)   A statement that the described portion of the building or structure
complies with the requirements of this chapter for the group and division of
occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified; and
      (8)   The name of the Building Official.
   (D)   Temporary certificate. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be
issued by the Building Official for the use of a portion or portions of a
building or structure prior to the completion of the entire building or
structure. The temporary certificate shall state thereon the duration for which
the certificate is issued and, where no duration is indicated, the certificate
shall be for no more than 180 days from the date of issuance.
   (E)   Non-conforming uses. A certificate of occupancy shall be required for
all lawful non-conforming uses of land or buildings created by any ordinance of
the city identifying the lawful non-conforming use. Application for such
certificate of occupancy for a non-conforming use shall be filed with the
Building Official by the owner or primary occupant of the building or land
occupied by such non-conforming use within one year of the effective date of
this chapter. It shall be the duty of the Building Official to issue a
certificate of occupancy for a lawful non-conforming use, or refusal of the
Building Official to issue a certificate of occupancy for such non-conforming
use shall be evidence that said non-conforming use was either illegal or did
not lawfully exist.
   (F)   Connection of utilities. No person shall make connections from a
utility source which is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is
required to any building or system until released by the Building Official and
a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued.
   (G)   Temporary connection of utilities. The Building Official may authorize
the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of
fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use
under a temporary certificate of occupancy.
   (H)   Authority to disconnect utilities in case of emergency. The Building
Official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service
to the building, structure or system regulated by the technical codes in case
of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or
property. The Building Official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever
possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system,
of the decision to disconnect, if possible, prior to taking such action. If not
notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building,
structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical
thereafter.
   (I)   Authority to disconnect utilities for failure to obtain certificate of
occupancy. The Building Official shall have authority to authorize
disconnection of utility services to any building, structure or system
regulated by the technical codes for which a certificate of occupancy has been
revoked or is required and has never been issued to the current occupant after
written notice and an opportunity to correct as provided in §§
151.26 and
151.27. Before utilities may be disconnected, the Building Official shall send
a notice specifying that the owner or occupant must bring the property into
compliance or the utilities will be disconnected and indicating that the owner
or occupant may appeal to the Board of Adjustment within ten days of the date
of the letter.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.24 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Any person may apply for a variance of any provision of this chapter
by submitting a written application to the Building Official citing the
specific provision of this chapter for which a variance is sought and setting
forth with particularity the reasons for such request. The Building Official
shall review such an application and forward the application to the Board of
Adjustment for consideration and approval or denial. If a person wants to
protest the decision of the Board of Adjustment, an appeal must be made to the
district court of competent jurisdiction within ten days of the denial as
provided in §
151.28.
   (B)   A person may not proceed with any operation for which a permit or
variance is required by this chapter unless and until the appropriate permit or
variance has been granted.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
§ 151.25 ENFORCEMENT GENERALLY; NOTICES; CITATIONS.
   (A)   Enforcement officers. The Building Official, his or her
representatives, and any officer charged with enforcement of the ordinances of
the city, including any peace officer of the city, may enforce the provisions
of this chapter.
   (B)   Citations. If an officer charged with the enforcement of this chapter
shall determine that a situation exists which immediately affects or threatens
the health, safety and well-being of the general public, and that immediate
action is necessary, such officer may take such action as shall be necessary,
including issuing citations for violations of the terms and provisions hereof
to the owner, occupant and/or responsible party for the property upon which
such condition exists, as may be deemed appropriate and necessary. 
   (C)   Eminent threat. If an officer charged with enforcement of this chapter
determines a situation constitutes an immediate threat to the public health,
safety and welfare and the owner, occupant or responsible party for the
property is absent or fails to immediately remedy the violation, the City
Council may, at a regular session or at an emergency session called for the
purpose of considering the issue, upon evidence heard, determine that an
emergency exists and order such action as may be required to protect the public
safety and welfare. In such event, the city may prosecute an action in any
court of competent jurisdiction to recover its costs.
   (D)   Failure to correct conditions. If any owner, occupant or responsible
party shall fail or refuse to remedy any of the conditions prohibited by this
chapter within ten days after written notice to do so, the city may do such
work or cause the same to be done, and pay therefor, and charge the expenses in
doing or having such work done or improvements made to the property, and such
charge shall be a personal liability of such owner(s), occupant(s) and/or
responsible parties to the city.
   (E)   Service of notice. Notices required pursuant to this chapter shall be
in writing. Such notices may be served upon such owner(s), occupant(s) and/or
responsible party as follows: in person by an officer or employee of the city;
by certified letter addressed to such owner, occupant and/or responsible party
at his or her post office address; or, if personal service may not be had, or
the owner, occupant or responsible party’s address be not known, then notice
may be given by publishing a brief summary of such order at least once in the
official newspaper of the city or by posting a notice on or near the front door
of each building on the property upon which the violation relates, or, if no
building exists, by posting notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into
the ground on the property to which the violation relates. The notice shall
state “Building and Construction Regulations,” “To Whom It May Concern” and a
brief statement of the violation(s). Service of the notice by any one of the
above methods, or by a combination thereof, shall be deemed sufficient notice.
   (F)   Refusal of notice. If an owner is mailed a notice in accordance with
division (D) above and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as
refused or unclaimed, the validity of the notice is not affected, and the
notice is considered as delivered.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
§ 151.26 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS CONDITIONS WITHOUT NOTICE.
   Whenever an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person
exists as a result of any building or premises violations or conditions on any
lot, parcel or premises within the city, the city may abate the nuisance
without notice to the owner. If the utility connections to the property need to
be disconnected to the property to prevent further risk or damage, the Building
Official may direct that the necessary utilities be disconnected. In the event
the city abates the nuisance under this section, the city shall forward notice
to the owner within ten days in the manner set forth herein.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
§ 151.27 ABATEMENT HEARING.
   (A)   Notice; right of appeal. In addition to any other remedy provided in
this chapter and cumulative thereto, the Building Official, after giving to the
owner, occupant and/or responsible party of the property ten days’ notice in
writing, as provided herein, may cause any of the work or improvements
mentioned in this chapter to be done at the expense of the city, and charge the
utility bill of the property on which such work or improvements are done as
well as cause all of the actual cost to the city to be assessed on the real
estate or lot on which such expenses occurred; provided that the owner,
occupant and/or responsible party of any such real estate may appeal to the
Board of Adjustment from the order of the Building Official by filing an
appeal, as provided in §
151.29, within ten days after receipt of the notice provided for above, stating
that such real estate complied with the provisions of this chapter before the
expiration of a ten-day period and requesting a hearing.
   (B)   Appeal hearing. The Board of Adjustment shall set a date, within 30
days from the date of the appeal, for hearing the appeal to determine whether
the real estate complied with the provisions of this chapter before the
expiration of such ten-day period.
   (C)   Effect of appeal. The authority of the Building Official to proceed to
cause such work to be done shall not be suspended while an appeal from the
order is pending.
   (D)   Compliance prior to abatement. If it shall be determined by the Board
of Adjustment, the premises complied with the provisions of this chapter before
the expiration of the ten-day period, then no personal liability of the owner
or occupant shall arise nor shall any lien be created against the premises upon
which such work was done.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
§ 151.28 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS OF ABATEMENT; LIEN.
   (A)   Authority. Cumulative of the city’s remedy by fine, as set forth
herein, the city may do such work or cause the same to be done to remedy such
condition and to remove such matter from such owner’s premises at the city’s
expense and cause the same to be added to the utility bill of such property and
assess the same against the real estate or lot or lots upon which such expense
is incurred.
   (B)   Assessment of costs. Expenditures plus 10% per annum interest on the
expenditures from the date of such payment by the city shall be added to the
next billing cycle for utility bills for the real estate or lot or lots, if not
already paid. Payment shall be due and payable in full by the owner or occupant
at the time of payment of such utility bill. If the property is unoccupied, no
utilities shall be furnished to the property where the work occurred until such
obligation, as herein set out, payable to the city for abatement of any
nuisance described herein is paid in full.
   (C)   Lien. Upon filing with the County Clerk of a statement by the City
Secretary or designee of such expenses, the city shall have a privileged lien
upon said real estate or lot or lots, second only to tax liens and liens for
street improvements, to secure the expenditure so made and 10% per annum
interest on the amount from the date of such payment so made by the city.
   (D)   Suit to recover costs. The city may, additionally, institute suit and
recover such expenses and foreclose such lien in any court of competent
jurisdiction, and the statement so filed with the County Clerk or a certified
copy thereof shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended in any such work
or improvements to remedy such condition or remove any such matter.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
§ 151.29 APPEALS.
   (A)   Right of appeal; filing.
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any person aggrieved by
a decision of an officer or Building Official acting under this chapter or any
officer, department, board or bureau of the city affecting a property under
this chapter may appeal such decision to the Board of Adjustment.
      (2)   Such appeal shall be made by filing with the office of the Board of
Adjustment within ten days of the action or incident being appealed. A note of
appeal specifying each and every ground for appeal shall accompany the appeal
and state thereon “Notice of Appeal.” The officer, department, board or bureau
from which the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all of the
papers constituting the record from which the action appealed from is taken.
   (B)   Notice of hearing. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it and shall give public
notice of the hearing and due notice to the parties in interest.
   (C)   Findings of fact. The Board of Adjustment shall file findings of fact
within a reasonable time after the final decision of the Board of Adjustment is
announced. The findings shall be in writing filed in the office of the City
Secretary. Filing of the minutes of the meeting of the Board of Adjustment
meeting at which the appeal hearing was held shall constitute a filing of the
findings of fact absent a more specific filing prior to filing the minutes.
   (D)   Appeal of decision of Board of Adjustment. Any party aggrieved by the
decision of the Board of Adjustment shall have ten days from the date of the
filing of the findings of fact to file an appeal with the District Court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (E)   Conflicting provisions. The Board of Adjustment shall serve and act as
the Board of Appeals established under this chapter. The provisions of
established by city ordinance governing membership of the Board of Adjustment,
member qualifications, alternate members, notice of Board meetings and Board
decisions pertaining to dangerous and substandard buildings shall control in
the event of a conflict with such provisions governing the Board of Appeals set
forth in the building codes adopted under this chapter.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
§ 151.30 ENFORCEMENT METHODS.
   (A)   No building permit, certificate of occupancy, plumbing permit,
electrical permit or utility tap shall be issued by the city for or with
respect to any lot, tract or parcel of land within the city limits, after the
effective date of this chapter, except in compliance with all then-applicable
requirements of this chapter, the city zoning ordinance provisions applicable
to the property and the city subdivision regulations applicable to the
property.
   (B)   This chapter and any code or provision adopted by this chapter may be
further enforced by civil injunction and other civil and criminal judicial
proceedings, either at law or in equity, and in lieu of or in addition to any
other authorized enforcement or action taken. Any person who violates any term
or provision of this chapter with respect to any land, property, building or
development within the city may also be fined as well as charged all other
penalties, civil and criminal, as provided herein and by state law.
   (C)   Upon the request of the City Council, the City Attorney or other
authorized attorney shall file an action in the District Court to enjoin the
violation or threatened violation of this chapter, or to obtain declaratory
judgment, and to seek and recover court costs and attorney fees, and/or to
recover damages in an amount sufficient for the city to undertake any
construction or other activity necessary to bring about compliance with a
requirement regarding the property and established pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
§ 151.31 DUTIES OF UTILITY SERVICE PROVIDERS.
   No utility service provider using the rights-of-way of the city to access
any customer within the city limits shall connect or reconnect utility services
to such customer after the effective date of this chapter unless and until the
customer has provided proof that the structure to be serviced has a current and
valid certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy. Each
utility service provider utilizing city rights-of-way to provide services to
any customer within the city limits shall cooperate with the Building Official
to terminate services as provided herein and shall provide information
concerning the services provided to any customer within the city limits to the
Building Official to carry out the duties of the Building Official under the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.32 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATION.
   In any prosecution charging a violation of this chapter governing the
failure to comply with any notice or order or failure to apply for a building
permit or other permit or license required herein, proof that the particular
property described in the complaint was in violation of any section of this
chapter, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at
the time of such notice or order or at the time when work was performed without
a permit, the registered owner of such property, shall constitute in evidence a
prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such property was the
person who failed to comply with the notice or order or failed to apply for a
permit for the time during which such violation occurred.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
BUILDING OFFICIAL
§ 151.45 OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT; ACTING BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   Office created. The office of Building Official is hereby created, and
the executive official in charge shall be known as the Building Official.
   (B)   Appointment. The Building Official shall be the employee or a non-
employee consultant designated from time to time by the City Council to perform
the duties of the position.
   (C)   Acting Building Official. During temporary absence or disability of
the Building Official, the appointing authority shall designate an acting
Building Official.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
§ 151.46 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The Building Official shall be in good health and physically capable of
making the necessary examinations and inspections. The Building Official shall
not have any interest whatever, directly or indirectly, in the sale or
manufacture of any material, process or device entering into or used in or in
connection with building construction, alterations, removal and demolition.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
§ 151.47 DUTIES.
   (A)   Permits. The Building Official shall receive applications required by
the technical codes, issue permits and furnish the prescribed certificates. He
or she shall examine the premises for which permits have been issued and shall
make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied with
and that construction is conducted safely. He or she shall enforce all
provisions of the Building Code and, when requested by proper authority, or
when the public interest so requires, make investigations in connection with
matters referred to in the codes and render written results on the same. To
enforce compliance with the law, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to
secure the necessary safeguards during construction or to require adequate exit
facilities in buildings and structures, he or she shall issue such notices or
orders as may be necessary.
   (B)   Inspections. Inspections required under the provisions of the
technical codes shall be made by the Building Official or his or her duly
appointed assistant. The Building Official may accept reports of inspectors or
recognized inspection services, after investigation of their qualifications and
reliability. No certificate called for by any provision of the technical codes
shall be issued on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified to
by a responsible officer of such service.
   (C)   Records required. The Building Official shall keep permanent
comprehensive records of applications, all permits issued, any and all fees
collected, certificates issued, inspections made, reports rendered and of
notices or orders issued for each property accurately reflecting the names,
physical location of the property and dates on each document.
   (D)   Records to be open to public inspection. All such records shall be
open to public inspection for good and sufficient reasons at the stated office
hours, but shall not be removed from the office of the Building Official
without his or her written consent.
   (E)   Monthly reports. The Building Official shall make written reports to
his or her immediate superior once each month, or more often if requested,
including statements of permits and certificates issued and orders promulgated.
   (F)   Fees. The Building Official shall keep a permanent, accurate account
of all fees and other monies collected and received under this chapter, the
names of the persons upon whose account the same were paid, and the date and
amount thereof, together with the location of the building or premises to which
they relate.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
§ 151.48 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of
this chapter, or whenever the Building Official or his or her authorized
representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any
building or upon any premises any condition which makes such building or
premises unsafe or constitutes a violation of this chapter, the Building
Official or his or her authorized representative may enter such building or
premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty
imposed upon the Building Official by this chapter; provided that if such
building or premises be occupied, he or she shall first present proper
credentials and demand entry, and if such building or premises be unoccupied he
or she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other
persons having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry.
If such entry is refused, the Building Official or his or her authorized
representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure
entry.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
§ 151.49 INSPECTORS AND OTHER EMPLOYEES.
   In accordance with the procedure and with the approval of the City Council,
the Building Official may appoint such number of officers, inspectors and
assistants, and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time. With
the approval of the City Council, he or she may deputize such employees as may
be necessary to carry out the functions of the Building Official.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
§ 151.50 LIABILITY.
   The Building Official, members of the Board of Adjustment or any employee
charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting in good faith and without
malice for the city in the discharge of his or her duties, shall not thereby
render himself or herself liable personally and he or she is hereby relieved
from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act performed or by reason of any act or omission
in the discharge of his or her duties. Any suit brought against the Building
Official or such employee by any act or omission by him or her in the discharge
of his or her duties under any provision of this chapter, shall be defended by
the City Attorney, an attorney appointed by the city’s insurance carrier until
final determination of the proceedings.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
§ 151.51 COOPERATION OF OTHER OFFICIALS.
   The Building Official may request and shall receive so far as may be
necessary in the discharge of his or her duties, the assistance and cooperation
of other officials of the city.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
§ 151.52 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or
the technical codes adopted herein, or shall fail to comply therewith, or with
any of the requirements thereof, within the city limits, shall be deemed guilty
of an offense and shall be liable for a fine in accordance with the penalties
set forth in this chapter, and each day the violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense. Such penalty shall be in addition to all the other remedies
provided herein.
   (B)   Any person who shall remove a notice of violation or a placard posted
pursuant to this chapter from a property prior to correction of the
deficiencies indicated thereon shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor offense.
   (C)   Any person who shall knowingly or intentionally provide false
information on any application required pursuant to this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor offense.
   (D)   Any person who shall occupy or shall authorize another person to
occupy a building, or any part thereof, without having received a certificate
of occupancy in compliance herewith, within the city limits, shall be deemed
guilty of an offense and shall be liable for a fine in accordance with the
penalty provision set forth in this chapter. Each day the violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense. Such penalty shall be in addition to all
the other remedies provided herein. A person in violation of this chapter as
described in this division (D) shall also be liable for an administrative
penalty of $100 per calendar day that the violation occurs. The Building
Official (or designee) shall give notice to the person of the violation and
shall give notice of the administrative penalty due that is established by the
section. The person may request a hearing regarding the Building Official’s
determination with the Municipal Court Judge, who is hereby designated as the
hearing officer pursuant to Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, § 54.044, by submitting a
written request to the Building Official within 15 days of the Building
Official’s determination. The hearing shall be held in accordance with Tex.
Loc. Gov’t Code, § 54.044.
   (E)   On motion of the city or the Judge of Municipal Court, any person
convicted under this chapter or placed on deferred adjudication or other form
of deferral who is assessed a penalty and who does not pay the penalty in full
as ordered by the court may be assessed the penalty against the defendant’s
property in the same manner as a judgment in a civil suit by order of the
Municipal Judge pursuant to Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure, Article 45.047, as
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
FEES
§ 151.65 SCOPE OF SERVICES.
   The contractor will be designated as a third-party contracted building
inspector by the city and will perform building inspection services, including
administrative duties, plan review and/or inspections for all assigned
projects, and will be compensated per the fee schedule in §
151.66. Services may include, without limitation, the following work activities
following the issuance of a work order request from the city representative:
   (A)   Building inspection services on a per project basis;
   (B)   Generation and completion of permit-related documents for city files
and public information;
   (C)   Process applicant inquiries and notifications regarding permit fees,
submittal documents and permitting;
   (D)   Processing permits to include coordination with city, developers,
builders and consultants;
   (E)   Coordination of plan review of new residential and all commercial
projects;
   (F)   Perform plan review of miscellaneous permits and residential remodels
or alterations;
   (G)   Issuance of permits and certificate of occupancy certificates for
residential and commercial developments;
   (H)   Monthly status reports to city;
   (I)   Attend city and pre-construction meetings when requested;
   (J)   Assessment and interpretation of adopted building codes;
   (K)   Conduct builder meetings upon request;
   (L)   Attend City Council and Board of Adjustment (Building Standards Board)
meetings as requested; and
   (M)   Prepare staff reports for Building Code updates, interpretations and
demolition determinations as needed.
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
§ 151.66 INSPECTION FEES.
New and Existing Residential Construction Fee
New and Existing Residential Construction Fee
CSI/backflow preventer                    $65
FEMP and E (E-Energy)                     $85
FEMP and E and G (E-IECC, G-Gas rough)    $100
Final C/O                                 $100
Final C/O duplex                          $125
Foundation (slab or piers)                $65
Gas line (yard line)                      $40
Gas rough (FEMP stage)                    $65
Gas test (after T. final, prior to final  $50
C/O)
Gypsum nailing                            $65
Insulation (IECC)                         $65
Miscellaneous single inspection           $65
(electric, plumbing and the like)
Plumbing rough-in (soil)                  $65
Pool bonding (prior to concrete)          $65
Pool final                                $65
Re-inspection                             One-half of original fee, minimum $30
Sewer drain (yard line)                   $40
Sprinkler/irrigation final                $65
Sprinkler/irrigation rough                $65
Temp final service (set electrical meter) $40
Temp final service duplex (set electrical $65
meters)
Temporary service pole                    $40
Water line (yard line)                    $40
 
Manufactured Housing Placement             Fee
Electrical/sewer/water/gas (if applicable) $65
Permanent electrical pole                  $40
Remodel of Existing Dwelling Fee
Remodel of Existing Dwelling                  Fee
Electrical                                    $65
FEMP and E (E-Energy)                         $85
FEMP and E and G (E-IECC, G-Gas rough)        $100
FEP (framing/electrical/plumbing)             $85
FEP and E (E-Energy)                          $85
Final                                         $100
Foundation                                    $65
Framing                                       $65
Gas test (after T. Final, prior to Final C/O) $50
Gas rough (FEMP stage)                        $65
Mechanical                                    $65
Plumbing                                      $65
 
Miscellaneous Inspections         Fee
Unsafe structure/condemn property    $150
 
Commercials                                                 Fee
Holidays and weekends                                       To be determined*
Individual inspections (depends on the size of the project) To be determined*
Plan review (depends on the size of the project)            To be determined*
Re-inspections                                              To be determined*
*Amount to be approved by city before the commencement of services.
Any inspections requested that differ from the list above will be added and
the fee applied accordingly.
Items needed for commercial building inspections before performing
inspections:
Current blueprints
COMCHECK is a computer-based software that allows builders to input
construction information and verify compliance with the Energy Code. Providing
us with this printout will enable the inspector to verify that the builder
complies with the Energy Code during the inspection.
New and Existing Residential Construction Fee
New and Existing Residential Construction Fee
Irrigation final                          $10
Plumbing final/CSI                        $25
Plumbing rough-in #1 (DWV)                $15
Plumbing rough-in #2 (water)              $15
Plumbing rough-in (water and DWV)         $25
Plumbing (top-out)                        $25
Re-inspection                             One-half of original fee, minimum $15
Water line and sewer drain (yard lines)   $25
For municipalities that only require plumbing inspections in their ETJ.
 
Future Possible Inspections                   Fee
Gas line (yard line)                          $15
Gas rough (FEMP stage)                        $20
Gas test (after T. Final, prior to final C/O) $25
Sewer drain (yard line)                       $15
Water line (yard line)                        $15
For municipalities that only require plumbing inspections in their ETJ.
 
(Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating this chapter shall be fined for each and every day
during which any violation is committed, continued or permitted in an amount
not to exceed $2,000.
(Ord. passed 10-14-2021; Ord. 122022 PO, passed 12-8-2022)
CHAPTER 152: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Statutory authorization
   
152.02   Findings of fact
   
152.03   Statement of purpose
   
152.04   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
152.05   Definitions
   
152.06   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
152.07   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
152.08   Establishment of development permit
   
152.09   Compliance
   
152.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
152.11   Interpretation
   
152.12   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
152.25   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
   
152.26   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
152.27   Permit procedures
   
152.28   Variance procedures
Flood Hazard Reduction
   
152.40   General standards
   
152.41   Specific standards
   
152.42   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
152.43   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones)
   
152.44   Floodways
 
   
152.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The Legislature of the state has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Tex.
Water Code, § 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units
to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City
Council does ordain this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-11-2008)
§ 152.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation,
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
(Ord. passed 9-11-2008)
§ 152.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area.
(Ord. passed 9-11-2008)
§ 152.04 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Ord. passed 9-11-2008)
§ 152.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan
or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-
velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport and deposition;
and unpredictable flow paths.
   APEX. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow
path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial
fan flooding can occur.
   APPURTENANT STRUCTURE. A structure which is on the same parcel of property
as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to
the use of the principal structure.
   AREA OF FUTURE CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD. The land area that would be
inundated by the 1% annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions
hydrology.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH or VO zone on a
community’s flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual chance
of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may
be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed
rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone
A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE,
AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate
map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for Zones
A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-30 or VE that indicates the water surface elevation
resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that
level in any given year. Also called the BASE FLOOD.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or supporting foundation system.
   CRITICAL FEATURE. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. For insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which
has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls,
shear walls, posts, piers, pilings or columns.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM
or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. EXISTING
CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as existing structures.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an
examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (such as, mudflow) and/or
flood-related erosion hazards.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). See FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY. 
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source (see definition of FLOODING).
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which funds
have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area
within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
   FLOODWAY. See REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use, which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The LOWEST FLOOR of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirement of § 60.3 of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community’s flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of
an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation
adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is built on a single chassis; 400
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. See AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes
substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued;
provided the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building,
including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as
well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either: any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions;
or any alteration of a historic structure; provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain
management regulation. (For full requirements, see § 60.6 of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations.)
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or
other evidence of compliance required in § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3),
(e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations
are presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
(Ord. passed 9-11-2008)
§ 152.06 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the
jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. passed 9-11-2008)
§ 152.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled
“The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Bell County, Texas, and Incorporated
Areas” dated September 26, 2008, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps
(FIRM) dated September 26, 2008, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted
by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-11-2008)
§ 152.08 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-11-2008)
§ 152.09 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.
(Ord. passed 9-11-2008) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.10 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions.
   (B)   However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant
or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. passed 9-11-2008)
§ 152.11 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be considered as minimum requirements, liberally construed in favor of the
governing body and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.
(Ord. passed 9-11-2008)
§ 152.12 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes.
   (A)   This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
   (B)   This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community
or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder.
(Ord. passed 9-11-2008)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 152.25 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Mayor is hereby appointed the Floodplain Administrator to administer and
implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44
C.F.R. (emergency management and assistance for National Flood Insurance
Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
(Ord. passed 9-11-2008)
§ 152.26 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
   (A)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the
proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes,
will be reasonably safe from flooding;
   (C)   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter;
   (D)   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments
of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334) from which prior approval is required;
   (E)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation;
   (F)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB), prior to
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
   (G)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained;
   (H)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with §
152.07, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a
federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of §§
152.40 through
152.44;
   (I)   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain
Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and
AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot at any point within the community; and
   (J)   Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. Chapter I, § 65.12 of the National
Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in Zones A1-30, AE and AH, on the community’s FIRM which increases
the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot; provided
that the community first completes all of the provisions required by § 65.12 of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
(Ord. passed 9-11-2008)
§ 152.27 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to
the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her and may include,
but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
      (1)   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
      (2)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-
residential structure shall be floodproofed;
      (3)   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the non-residential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing
criteria of §
152.41(B);
      (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
      (5)   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with §
152.26.
   (B)   Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the Flooplain
Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
      (1)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (3)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (4)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (5)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (6)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      (7)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      (8)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable; and
      (9)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use.
(Ord. passed 9-11-2008)
§ 152.28 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Appeal Board, as established by the community, shall hear and
render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination
made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
   (C)   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board
may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
   (D)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
   (E)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
   (F)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in §
152.42(B) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-
half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
   (G)   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
chapter (§
152.03).
   (H)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (I)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
   (J)   Prerequisites for granting variances:
      (1)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon showing a good and sufficient
cause; a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and a determination that the granting of
a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
      (3)   Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
   (K)   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that the criteria outlined in this
section are met; and the structure or other development is protected by methods
that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional
threats to public safety.
(Ord. passed 9-11-2008)
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 152.40 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required
for all new construction and substantial improvements.
   (A)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
   (B)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage.
   (D)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharge from the systems into flood waters.
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. passed 9-11-2008)
§ 152.41 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has
been provided as set forth in §§
152.07,
152.26(H) or
152.42(C), the following provisions are required.
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement),
elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional
engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the
Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this division (A) as proposed in
§
152.27(A)(1), is satisfied.
   (B)   Non-residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other non-residential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this division (B). A record of such certification which includes the
specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (C)   Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood
waters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria.
      (1)   A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area
of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject
to flooding shall be provided.
      (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one-foot above
grade.
      (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices; provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   (D)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a
community’s FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes
must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
      (2)   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM on sites outside
of a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or
subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, be
elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
      (3)   Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved
on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30,
AH and AE on the community’s FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of
division (D) above be elevated so that either:
         (a)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the
base flood elevation; or
         (b)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers
or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less
than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
   (E)   Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM either be on the
site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, be fully licensed and ready for
highway use, meet the permit requirements of §
152.27(A), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes
in division (D) above. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is
on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions.
(Ord. passed 9-11-2008)
§ 152.42 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with §§
152.02 through
152.04.
   (B)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain
development permit requirements of §§
152.08,
152.27 and this subchapter.
   (C)   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development, including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever
is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to §§
152.07 or
152.26(H).
   (D)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.
   (E)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
(Ord. passed 9-11-2008)
§ 152.43 STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES).
   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in §
152.07 are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood
hazards associated with flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding
or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply.
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the
base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the
depth number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet if no
depth number is specified).
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential
structures:
      (1)   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the
base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the
depth number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet if no
depth number is specified); or
      (2)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed
so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO Zone, or below the base
flood elevation in an AH Zone, level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads of effects of buoyancy.
   (C)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this
section, as proposed in §
152.27 are satisfied.
   (D)   Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.
(Ord. passed 9-11-2008)
§ 152.44 FLOODWAYS.
   Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in §
152.07 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris,
potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall
apply.
   (A)   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   (B)   If division (A) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. Chapter I, § 65.12 of the National
Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may permit encroachments
within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base
flood elevations; provided that the community first completes all of the
provisions required by § 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations.
(Ord. passed 9-11-2008) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this court order
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this court
order by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations
of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this court order or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction, thereof be fined
not more than $500 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
(Ord. passed 9-11-2008)
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Authority
   
153.002   Purpose and policy
   
153.003   Adequate public facilities
   
153.004   Minimum standards
   
153.005   Adequacy of specific facilities
   
153.006   Enforcement
   
153.007   Definitions
   
153.008   Jurisdiction
   
153.009   Grading permit
General Platting Regulations
   
153.020   Platting required; exceptions
   
153.021   Preliminary plat required
   
153.022   Plat vacation
   
153.023   Replat
   
153.024   Minor plats
   
153.025   Amending plats
Easement Dedications and Rough Proportionality
   
153.040   Easements
   
153.041   Dedication requirements
   
153.042   Rough proportionality determination
   
153.043   Rough proportionality approval
   
153.044   Appeals procedure
   
153.045   City Council decision
   
153.046   Action following decision of City Council
   
153.047   Appeal of City Council decision
Requirements for Plat Submittal
   
153.060   Submittal
   
153.061   Completeness determination
   
153.062   Preliminary plat submittal requirements
   
153.063   Revised preliminary plat
   
153.064   Final plat; submittal requirements
   
153.065   Final plat; required format and information
   
153.066   Final plat dedication, statements and waivers
   
153.067   Construction plans for public improvements
   
153.068   Minor plat submittal requirements
   
153.069   Amending plat submittal requirements
   
153.070   Replat submittal requirements
Procedures for Plat Approval
   
153.085   General provisions
   
153.086   Expiration of plats
   
153.087   Project expiration
   
153.088   Minor plat processing
   
153.089   Amending plat processing
   
153.090   Recording of plat
Public Works Improvements
   
153.105   General standards
   
153.106   Common areas
   
153.107   Fire and police access
   
153.108   Timing of public works improvements
   
153.109   Sanitary waste collection access
   
153.110   Retaining walls
   
153.111   Fiscal assurance
   
153.112   Maintenance and warranty of improvements
   
153.113   Inspection and acceptance of public improvements
Street and Right-of-Way Requirements
   
153.125   General
   
153.126   Street and driveway access
   
153.127   Right-of-way requirements
   
153.128   Street design standards
   
153.129   Deferral of obligation
   
153.130   Paving requirements
   
153.131   Private streets
   
153.132   Sidewalks
   
153.133   Street appurtenances
   
153.134   Traffic impact analysis required
   
153.135   Alleys
Water, Sewer and Drainage Improvements
   
153.150   Water and sewer improvements
   
153.151   Extension of water and sanitary sewer mains
   
153.152   Oversized water and sanitary sewer mains
   
153.153   Drainage improvements
   
153.154   Water and sewer pro rata
   
153.155   Fire hydrants and fire lanes
Electric Utility Requirements
   
153.170   Undergrounding required
   
153.171   Owner to bear cost
   
153.172   Exceptions to undergrounding requirement
Miscellaneous Requirements
   
153.185   Lotting requirements
   
153.186   Sight triangle requirement
   
153.187   Monuments and markers
   
153.188   Digital data requirements
   
153.189   Homeowners’ or property owners’ associations
   
153.190   Developer’s agreement
   
153.191   Variances
   
153.192   Factors to consider
   
153.193   Authority to impose conditions
   
153.194   Waivers for Planned Development Districts
   
153.195   Park land dedication
 
   
153.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and laws of
the state, including Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, Chapter 212, as amended.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.002 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
 
   (A)   Generally. These subdivision regulations are designed and intended to
achieve the following purposes and shall be administered so as to achieve the
following purposes:
      (1)   To promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
community and the safe, orderly and healthful development of the city;
      (2)   To establish adequate policies and procedures to guide development
of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction;
      (3)   To provide for the establishment of minimum specifications for
construction and engineering design criteria for public works improvements to
maintain land values, reduce inconveniences to residents of the area and to
reduce related unnecessary costs to the city for correction of inadequate
facilities that are designed to serve the public;
      (4)   To ensure that development of land and subdivisions shall be of
such nature, shape and location that utilization will not impair the general
welfare;
      (5)   To ensure against the dangers of fires, floods, erosion, landslides
or other such menaces;
      (6)   To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the city and to
ensure appropriate development with regard to these natural features;
      (7)   To realistically and harmoniously relate new development of
adjacent properties;
      (8)   To provide the most beneficial circulation of traffic throughout
the city, having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the
streets and highways, and pedestrian traffic movements; and to provide for the
proper location and width of streets;
      (9)   To ensure that public facilities for water supply, drainage,
disposal of sanitary and industrial waste, and parks are available for every
building site and with adequate capacity to serve the proposed development
before issuance of a certificate of occupancy or release of utility connections
or final inspection within the boundaries of the plat;
      (10)   To assure that new development adequately and fairly participates
in the dedication and construction of public works improvements that are
necessitated by or attributable to the development or that provide value or
benefit that makes the development feasible;
      (11)   To help prevent pollution, assure the adequacy of drainage
facilities, control storm water runoff, safeguard the water table and encourage
the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the city and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction in order to preserve the integrity, stability and
beauty of the community and the value of the land; and
      (12)   To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and
layout of the land, while preserving the land use intensity as established in
the zoning regulations of the city.
   (B)   Policy. To carry out the purposes herein stated, it is the policy of
the city to guide and regulate the subdivision and development of land in such
a manner as to promote orderly growth both within the city, and where
applicable, within its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
   (C)   Disapproval. Proposed plats or subdivisions which do not conform to
the policies and regulations shall be denied, or, in lieu of denial,
disapproved conditioned on conformance with conditions.
   (D)   Nexus. There shall be an essential nexus between the requirement to
dedicate rights-of-way and easements and/or to construct public works
improvements in connection with a new subdivision and the need to off-set the
impacts on the city’s public facilities systems created by such new
development.
   (E)   Compliance with federal regulations. The applicant is responsible for
compliance with applicable federal regulations which may apply to a
development, including any required permits or approvals from the United States
Army Corps of Engineers, the Environmental Protection Agency and the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.003 ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES.
   (A)   Generally. Land proposed to be subdivided must be served adequately by
essential public facilities and services, including water and sanitary sewer
facilities, roadway and pedestrian facilities, drainage facilities and park
facilities. An application for a plat or development may be denied unless
adequate public facilities necessary to support and serve the development exist
or provision has been made for the facilities, whether the facilities are to be
located within the property being platted or off-site.
   (B)   Dedication. It is necessary and desirable to provide for dedication of
rights-of-way and easements for public works improvements to support new
development at the earliest stage of the development process.
   (C)   Mitigation. The city desires to assure that impacts of new development
are mitigated through contributions of rights-of-way, easements and
construction of capital improvements, and that a new development be required to
contribute not more than its proportionate share of such costs.
   (D)   Conformance. Proposed public works improvements serving new
development shall conform to and be properly related to the public facilities
elements of the city’s adopted Comprehensive Plan, other adopted master plans
for public facilities and services, and applicable capital improvements plans,
and shall meet the service levels specified in such plans.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.004 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   (A)   Generally. The standards established in this chapter for dedication
and construction of public works improvements are based upon engineering
studies and historical usages and demands by different categories of
development. These regulations identify certain minimum requirements and sizes
for utilities, roadways, parks and other facilities that the City Council has
determined to be necessary in order to provide the minimum level of service
necessary to protect or promote the public health, safety and welfare and to
assure the quality of life currently enjoyed by the citizens of the city. It is
the intent of these regulations that no development occurs until and unless
these minimum levels of service are met. Therefore, each subdivision in the
city shall be required to dedicate, construct and/or upgrade required
facilities and infrastructure to a capacity that meets these minimum levels.
   (B)   Basis for standards. For each category of public infrastructure, a
minimum standard of infrastructure, and in some cases, service level, has been
developed based upon historic studies and construction projects of the city and
other cities. These minimum standards take into consideration the soil
conditions and topographic configuration of the city, and other historical use
and performance experiences of the city that reflect the minimum level of
facilities and services that must be built to meet the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the city.
   (C)   Denial if adequate levels not met. In order to maintain prescribed
levels of public facilities and services for the health, safety and general
welfare of its citizens, the city may require the dedication of easements and
rights-of-way for or construction of on-site or off-site public works
improvements for water, sanitary sewer, road, drainage or park facilities to
serve a proposed development, or require the payment of fees in lieu thereof.
If adequate levels of public facilities and services cannot be provided
concurrent with the schedule of development proposed, the city may deny the
subdivision until the public facilities and services can be provided, or
require that the development be phased so that the availability and delivery of
facilities and services coincides with the demands for the facilities created
by the development.
   (D)   Reimbursement. Whenever the City Council determines that levels of
service in excess of these minimum standards are necessary in order to promote
the orderly development of the city, the owner shall qualify for reimbursement
for any costs in excess of the minimum levels of service through city
participation, to the extent funds are available by a pro rata reimbursement
agreement or other means adopted by the city.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.005 ADEQUACY OF SPECIFIC FACILITIES.
   (A)   Water. All lots, tracts or parcels on which development is proposed
shall be connected to a public water system which has capacity to provide water
for domestic use and fire protection. Minimum fire flow pressures shall be as
required by the city. Additional standards and requirements are defined in §§
153.150 through
153.155.
   (B)   Wastewater. All lots, tracts or parcels on which development is
proposed shall be served by an approved means of wastewater collection and
treatment. The City Engineer shall be responsible for determining the approved
means of wastewater collection and treatment. The city may require the phasing
of development and/or improvements in order to maintain adequate wastewater
capacity. Additional standards and requirements are defined in §§
153.150 through
153.155.
   (C)   Streets and thoroughfares.
      (1)   New development within the city must be supported by an adequate
network of thoroughfares. Thoroughfares are an essential component of the
city’s street network and are necessary to accommodate the continuing growth
and development. It is necessary and desirable to obtain rights-of-way for off-
site, abutting and internal thoroughfares to support new development at the
time of platting or development of the land. The city desires to assure both
that development impacts are mitigated through contributions of thoroughfare
rights-of-way and improvements and that a subdivision contribute not more than
its fair share of thoroughfare costs.
      (2)   Proposed roads shall provide a safe, convenient and functional
system for vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian circulation and shall be properly
related to the applicable thoroughfare plan and any amendments thereto, and
shall be appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics of each
proposed subdivision or development. Additional standards and requirements are
set forth in §§
153.125 through
153.135.
   (D)   Drainage. Drainage improvements serving new development shall be
designed to prevent overloading the capacity of the downstream drainage system.
The city may require the phasing of development, the use of control methods
such as retention or detention or the construction of off-site drainage
improvements, in order to mitigate the impacts of the proposed subdivision.
Drainage improvements serving new development shall accommodate runoff from the
entire upstream drainage area and shall be designed to prevent overloading the
capacity of the downstream drainage system. Additional standards and
requirements are defined in §§
153.150 through
153.155.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.006 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Building permits. Except as provided in §
153.020, no permit for building, construction, repair or plumbing or electrical
work on any tract shall be issued until the approval and filing of a plat in
the county plat records.
   (B)   Utility service.
      (1)   The city shall be under no obligation to furnish any public
utilities or allow any city services unless and until a plat meeting all rules,
regulations and requirements of this chapter has been approved and filed in the
county plat records.
      (2)   A person commits an offense if the person provides water or sewer
service to any lot or tract of land or any part thereof unless and until a plat
of such tract of land meeting the requirements of division (B)(1) above has
been filed of record with the county.
   (C)   Legal action, In addition to pursuing the penalties and fines provided
§
153.999, the city may bring additional legal action to ensure compliance with
this chapter, including injunction, abatement or other appropriate action or
proceeding.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.007 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rules. For the purpose of this chapter, the following rules
shall be applied in constructing, interpreting or otherwise defining the terms
and provisions hereof.
      (1)   The word “shall” is mandatory and the word “may” is permissive.
      (2)   The phrase “used for” shall include the phrases “arranged for,”
“designed for,” “intended for” and “occupied for,” and shall apply exclusively
to physical uses.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning. Words and terms used in this chapter, but not defined in
this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed thereto in the zoning regulations
of the city. Words and terms defined in this chapter and the zoning regulations
shall be read in harmony unless there exists an irreconcilable conflict, in
which case the definition contained in this chapter shall control.
      ACREAGE, GROSS. The acreage included within the boundary of a
subdivision.
      ACREAGE, NET. The acreage included within the boundary of a particular
subdivision, but excluding all public rights-of-way.
      ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES. Facilities determined to be capable of
supporting and servicing the physical area and designated intensity of the
proposed subdivision as determined by the city and based upon specific levels
of service.
      ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL. The City Manager, or the City Manager’s
designated representative, authorized to enforce and administer the terms of
this chapter.
      ADMINISTRATIVELY COMPLETE. An application for a preliminary plat, replat
or final plat shall be considered administratively complete upon the occurrence
of all of the following: the city staff and the City Engineer have determined
that the application for a preliminary plat, replat and/or final plat meets all
requirements of applicable city ordinance so that it may be reviewed by the
Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council; the preliminary plat, replat
and/or final plat has been placed on a duly posted agenda for the Planning and
Zoning Commission or City Council; and the Planning and Zoning Commission or
City Council has taken action on the preliminary plat, replat and/or final
plat.
      ALLEY. A public or private right-of-way which affords a secondary means
of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a
street, and which may be used for public utility purposes.
      APPLICANT. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or the owner’s
authorized representative.
      BASE FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
      BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets
and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shore lines of waterways
or boundary lines of municipalities.
      BOND. Any form of security, other than a cash deposit, to be used as
surety or as a guarantee in an amount and form satisfactory to the city.
      BUILD. To erect, convert, enlarge, reconstruct, restore or alter a
building or structure.
      BUILDING. Any structure which is built for the support, shelter or
enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or moveable property of any kind.
      BUILDING, LINE. A line, generally parallel to a lot line or street right-
of-way, located the required distance to provide the minimum yards established
by the zoning regulations, as amended, to limit the area in which buildings are
permitted.
      BUILDING, MAIN. A building in which the principal use of the lot on which
it is situated is conducted. In a residential district, any dwelling shall be
deemed to be a MAIN BUILDING on the lot on which it is situated.
      BUILDING SETBACK LINE. The line on a plat delineating the nearest point
to which a building or other structure may be located to a street line, alley
line or building lot line.
      CERTIFIED PLANNER. A member in good standing of the American Institute of
Certified Planners.
      CITY ENGINEER. A person appointed to serve as City Engineer or authorized
to act in such capacity.
      COMMISSION or PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The PLANNING AND ZONING
COMMISSION of the city, or a Board of Adjustment and Appeals, as applicable.
      COMMON AREA. A private lot(s) established, owned and maintained by a
homeowners’ association or a property owners’ association.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A series of planning documents intended to guide the
growth and development of the city and its adjoining areas including, but not
limited to, the city’s Comprehensive Land Use Plan, Thoroughfare Plan, Master
Water Plan, Master Wastewater Plan and Parks/Trail Master Plan.
      COUNTY PLAT RECORDS. The plat records of the county.
      CUL-DE-SAC. The street or part of a street having one common entry and
exit and no other entry and/or exit.
      CURVILINEAR DESIGN. Any street segment which is designed with a degree of
curvature not less than 3°30’ and not greater than 22°55’, and which shall off-
set a minimum distance of 30 feet, said off-set being measured perpendicular to
the initial tangent line of the curve.
      DENSITY, GROSS. The number of dwelling units per gross acre.
      DENSITY, NET. The number of dwelling units per net acre.
      DESIGN STANDARDS. The documents (design criteria and improvements)
adopted by the city that establish the minimum criteria for the design of
public works improvements.
      DEVELOPER. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or developed, or
the DEVELOPER’S representative. A subdivider is a DEVELOPER.
      DEVELOPMENT. Any activity that requires the submission of a plat or the
securing of a building permit, or any human-made change to real estate,
including, but not limited to, construction of a building or structure, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage
of equipment or materials. A subdivision is a DEVELOPMENT.
      EASEMENT. A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property
owner to; and/or for; the use by the public, a corporation or another person.
      EASEMENT, COMMON ACCESS. An easement intended to provide shared access to
and from a development. It may be public or private.
      EASEMENT, DRAINAGE (D.E., D. + U.E.). An easement for the purpose of the
overland or underground transfer of storm water.
      EASEMENT, EMERGENCY ACCESS. An easement for the purpose of ingress,
egress, access and passage to and across private property for police, fire and
other governmental vehicles and personnel.
      EASEMENT, MAINTENANCE AND ACCESS. An easement for the purpose of
accessing and maintaining private structures located adjacent to a common lot
line, typically used along the zero lot line property lines within a
subdivision.
      EASEMENT, PEDESTRIAN ACCESS. An easement for the purpose of pedestrian
ingress, egress and passage to and across private property.
      EASEMENT, PRIVATE. An easement granted by a property owner to a specified
person, group of persons or entity in, on, across, over or under property for a
specified use or uses.
      EASEMENT, PUBLIC. An easement granted to the public or governmental
agency in, on, across, over or under property for a specified use or uses.
      EASEMENT, SCREENING. An easement granted to a homeowners’ or property
owners’ association for the construction and perpetual maintenance of a
screening device along the perimeter of a subdivision.
      EASEMENT, UTILITY. An easement for the installation, maintenance and
operation of water, sewer, electric, telephone, cable, gas and other similar
utilities.
      ENGINEER. A person who has been licensed and registered by the State
Board of Registration for Professional Engineers to engage in the practice of
engineering in this state and listed in state records as civil.
      ESCROW. Money placed in the possession of the city to guarantee the
performance of an obligation.
      EXACTION REQUIREMENT. A requirement imposed as a condition of approval
for a plat or other permit to accomplish the following:
         (a)   Dedicate an interest in land for a public works improvement;
         (b)   Construct a public works improvement; or
         (c)   Pay a fee in lieu of constructing a public works improvement.
      EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION. The unincorporated area, not a part of any
other municipality, which is contiguous to the corporate limits of the city,
the outer boundaries of which are measured from the extremities of the
corporate limits of the city outward for such distances as prescribed in Tex.
Loc. Gov’t Code, Chapter 42, as amended, according to the total population of
the city and by interlocal agreements with surrounding cities.
      FEEDER LINE. An electrical line that emanates from an electrical
substation or hub for distribution throughout a local area.
      FILING DATE. The date a preliminary plat, replat or final plat is
considered by the city to be administratively complete and is heard by either
the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council.
      FLOODWAY. The channel of a watercourse and the adjacent floodplain that
must be reserved to convey the base flood without cumulatively increasing the
base flood elevation more than a designated height.
      FLOODPLAIN. Any land area inundated by the base flood.
      FRONTAGE. The side of a lot, parcel or tract abutting a street right-of-
way and ordinarily regarded as the frontal orientation of the lot.
      LATERAL LINE. An electrical line that emanates from a feeder line and is
used for distribution to smaller areas of consumers, and is usually connected
to a feeder line through a sectionalizing device such as a fuse or
disconnection switch.
      LOCAL RESIDENTIAL OR MINOR STREET. A public thoroughfare which is
intended primarily to serve as access to residential property within a
neighborhood interior or limited residential district and is not aligned or
located to attract other than limited local traffic movements.
      LOT. A parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by a
recorded plat which is recognized as a separate legal entity for transfer of
title.
      MARKER. A permanent iron rod generally used on lot corners, points of
curvature and tangency.
      MONUMENT. A permanent concrete survey monument generally used on
subdivision property corners adjacent to public.
      NON-RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION. A subdivision developed primarily for non-
residential uses.
      OFF-SITE. Any premises not located within the area of the property to be
platted.
      OWNER. A person who has a fee simple title in land, or a person acting on
behalf of or through authority granted by the OWNER.
      PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT. A plan outlining the proposed use(s) of a tract or
tracts of land, which provides the city fair notice of the intended project and
the nature of the permit sought. It includes an application for approval of a
plat or an application for approval of a zoning change or site plan which
contains, at a minimum, a graphic depiction or sketch of the tract and
describes the proposed uses of land and their location within the tract(s) and
the general layout of streets and parks or other open spaces. It does not
include any information or exhibit presented to city staff for the purpose of
seeking information regarding the applicable regulations or the Commission or
City Council unless the information or exhibit is required to be submitted with
the permit application.
      PLAT. A plan or map of a subdivision of land showing all the essential
dimensions and other information essential to comply with the plat standards of
this chapter. A PLAT may be a preliminary plat, final plat, replat, amending
plat, minor plat or development plat.
      PLAT, AMENDING. A plat which meets the requirements as set forth in Tex.
Loc. Gov’t Code, § 212.016.
      PLAT, FINAL. A plat which substantially conforms to the approved
preliminary plat if required, and contains all or a portion of the property
within the approved preliminary plat. A FINAL PLAT as referred to in this
chapter may also refer to replats, amending plats and minor plats.
      PLAT, MINOR. A plat which includes four or fewer lots and that fronts an
existing street, and that does not require the creation of any new street or
any public improvements.
      PLAT, PRELIMINARY. The preliminary drawing or drawings, described in
these regulations, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision
to be submitted to the Commission and City Council for approval.
      PLAT, VACATION. A plat that meets the requirements as set forth Tex. Loc.
Gov’t Code, § 212.016, as amended.
      PUBLIC FACILITIES SYSTEM. With respect to water, sanitary sewer, roadway,
drainage or parks, the facilities owned or operated by or on behalf of the city
to provide services to the public, including existing and new developments and
subdivisions. The PUBLIC FACILITIES SYSTEM includes improvements to roads owned
by the county or the state to the extent such improvements are necessitated by
and attributable to a proposed development or subdivision.
      PUBLIC WORKS IMPROVEMENT or PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. A water, sanitary sewer,
roadway, drainage or park facility that is intended to be dedicated to become a
part of one or more of the city’s public facilities systems.
      REPLAT. A plat which revises currently platted lots or combines platted
and unplatted property.
      RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION. A subdivision developed primarily for
residential uses as enumerated in the city’s zoning regulations.
      RETAINING WALL. A structure constructed and erected between lands of
different elevations to protect structures and/or prevent erosion by retaining
or restraining lateral forces of soil or other materials.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. Land conveyed by plat, or other legal instrument, to the
public ownership and use for roadways, utilities and other public improvements.
Land dedicated as RIGHT-OF-WAY shall be owned by the city, whereas land
dedicated by easement is owned by the landowner with a right of use given to
the city.
      ROADWAY. The traveled portion of a street upon which vehicles traverse
and circulate, to include the area from back-to-back of the outer curb lines,
or where curbs do not exist, said ROADWAY includes the traveled area from the
outer edges of the surfaced and prepared portion of the ROADWAY, excluding
shoulders and the like.
      SERVICE LINE. An electrical line which, through a transformer, supplies
electricity to a customer’s service entrance.
      STREET. All property which is contained within fixed boundaries commonly
referred to as right-of-way lines, for the primary purpose of vehicular
movement and circulation, and in which traveled roadways exist, along with
various service utilities and sidewalks for pedestrian circulation.
      STREET, ARTERIAL. A through street designed for the movement of heavy
traffic volume, intended to carry traffic from collector streets to state/
county highways.
      STREET, INTERNAL. Generally, a street whose entire width is contained
within a development.
      STREET, MINOR COLLECTOR. A street which is local in character and use but
due to its configuration within the development, serves as a collector of local
streets, thereby connecting them to a collector street.
      STREET, PERIMETER. A street which abuts a development or one whose width
lies partly within a development and partly without.
      STREET, PRIVATE. A street that is privately-owned and maintained and that
is not dedicated to the public for general use and maintenance.
      STREET, RESIDENTIAL. A street which is continuous through several
districts and is intended as a connecting street between residential districts
and a collector street providing access to major streets, business districts or
places of employment.
      SUBDIVIDE. The act or process of creating a subdivision.
      SUBDIVIDER. A person who subdivides or seeks to subdivide land into two
or more lots or to construct a structure on land that has not been platted.
      SUBDIVISION. The division of a tract or parcel of land situated within
the city or the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction into two or more parts for
the purpose of sale, lease or development. A division of a tract includes a
division regardless of whether it is made by using a metes and bounds
description in a deed of conveyance or a contract for a deed, by using a
contract of sale or other executory contract to convey, or by using any other
method. A SUBDIVISION includes a replat and a one-lot SUBDIVISION of a tract
which has not been previously platted. A division of land into parts greater
than five acres, where each part has access and no public improvement is being
dedicated, shall not constitute the SUBDIVISION of land.
      SURVEYOR. A person registered as a registered professional SURVEYOR or
licensed professional land SURVEYOR by the State Board of Land Surveying.
      SYSTEM-RELATED FACILITY. A public works improvement or expansion that is
for the use or benefit of the overall water, sanitary sewer, roadway, drainage
or park facilities systems, as applicable. A SYSTEM-RELATED FACILITY has
capacity larger than needed to serve a single new development and exceeds the
minimum standards required. A SYSTEM-RELATED FACILITY may include a public
works improvement that is reflected in the capital improvement plan or the
Comprehensive Plan. A SYSTEM-RELATED FACILITY may be located off-site, within
the development site or on the perimeter of the development site.
      THOROUGHFARE PLAN. The master plan of major and secondary streets and
highways which is a part of the city’s Comprehensive Plan and adaptations,
amendments or supplements thereto as adopted by the City Council.
      TRACT. All contiguous property in common ownership.
      TRANSMISSION LINE. An electrical line operated at a nominal voltage of
60,000 volts or higher that brings electricity from a generating plant to an
electrical substation.
      UTILITY. A company providing electrical, telephone, cable television or
cable- or wire-based data transmission services within the city.
      UTILITY PROVIDER. A person that provides a public or private utility or
service to the general public, including, but not necessarily limited to, a
municipal water, sewer or drainage utility, electric company, telephone
company, natural gas company and a cable television provider.
   ZONING REGULATIONS. The comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city as
adopted.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.008 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   Applicability. Subject to the provisions of this section, the
regulations of this chapter shall apply to all land within the corporate limits
and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city.
   (B)   Utilities. The city shall be under no obligation to extend utilities
beyond the limits of the area for which the city has a certificate of
convenience and necessity (CCN) from the State Commission on Environmental
Quality or its successor. For property located within the city’s CCN, the city
shall extend utilities per the city’s utility extension policy.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.009 GRADING PERMIT.
   (A)   Offense. A person commits an offense if the person clears, grades,
fills, dredges and constructs public streets, utilities or storm water or other
improvements which may affect adjacent or surrounding properties without first
obtaining a grading permit.
   (B)   Application. Application for the permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the administrative official and shall be submitted with a fee,
which shall be established by the City Council. The permit application shall
describe the property and the nature of the development, and shall be
accompanied by construction plans and specifications adequate to describe the
improvements. The plans shall show the existing contours and the proposed
contours in either one-inch or two-inch vertical intervals. All plans
accompanying permits for any work within a floodplain shall be certified by an
engineer.
   (C)   Plans. The site grading plans shall demonstrate the following:
      (1)   The work will not have any appreciable change in the site drainage
characteristics or shall show the site modification and any mitigation measures
necessary to accommodate the change;
      (2)   The grading will not adversely affect adjacent property owners;
      (3)   The grading will, to the extent possible, preserve trees and unique
natural features (natural creeks, rock outcrops, karst features and the like)
in the site grading area such that the applicant demonstrates a valid reason
for the removal of any protected trees, along with a description on how
existing protected trees will be protected from damage during construction;
      (4)   That provision has been made for temporary and permanent erosion
control measures; and
      (5)   All required federal and state approvals have been obtained. The
administrative official shall issue the permit when all conditions of this
chapter have been satisfied.
   (D)   Post grading maintenance. A person commits an offense if the person
owns or develops property for which a grading permit has been issued and fails
to maintain all temporary erosion control devices, as specified in the approved
storm water pollution plan and grading permit, until permanent erosion controls
have been established and approved by the city.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
GENERAL PLATTING REGULATIONS
§ 153.020 PLATTING REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Generally. Platting is required for the following purposes:
      (1)   To create a building site and obtain a building permit on a single
lot or tract;
      (2)   To subdivide a lot or tract into two or more parcels for
development of the parcels;
      (3)   To combine lots or tracts; and
      (4)   To amend a plat.
   (B)   Exemptions. The following land divisions are exempt from the
requirements of these regulations:
      (1)   Sale, inheritance or gift of land by metes and bounds description,
of a tract of land upon which no improvements, development, subdivision or
alteration is intended;
      (2)   Use of existing cemeteries complying with all state and local laws
and regulations;
      (3)   A division of land created by order of a court of competent
jurisdiction; and
      (4)   A division of land that results in the creation of two or more
parcels, each of which is greater than five acres, when each parcel has direct
access to an existing public street, and no dedication of public facilities is
required.
   (C)   Exceptions for alterations. No construction shall commence upon a
tract prior to the recordation of a plat of the tract in the county plat
records, except that a building permit may be issued on an unplatted tract
within the city for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   Residentially developed property not exceeding five acres in size
may obtain a building permit for additions to the main structure if such
addition does not exceed 50% of the main structure;
      (2)   Adding an accessory building or structure on an unplatted
residentially developed lot; provided a primary structure exists on the
unplatted lot;
      (3)   Restoring any residential building or structure on an unplatted
residentially developed lot, destroyed by fire, explosion or any other casualty
or an Act of God where the extent of the destruction is not more than 50% of
the current value of the structure; or
      (4)   Replacement of a mobile home previously legally permitted and used
or occupied as a residential dwelling with a HUD-code manufactured home.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.021 PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Generally. Approval of a preliminary plat is required for any proposed
subdivision within the city which proposes five or more lots or proposes any
public works improvements prior to approval of a final plat. When subdividing a
tract which proposes four or fewer lots, the owner may elect to submit an
application for approval of a final plat or a minor plat without obtaining
approval of a preliminary plat. Any resubdivision of existing platted lots
shall require the submittal and approval of a replat or an amending plat.
   (B)   Inside city. Within the city limits, a plat may be approved in two
stages: a preliminary plat and a final plat.
   (C)   Within ETJ. Within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, only
a final plat is authorized, unless the land to be platted is subject to an
approved developer’s or development agreement, in which case a preliminary plat
may be authorized by the agreement.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.022 PLAT VACATION.
   (A)   General requirements. The following must be submitted with any request
to vacate a plat:
      (1)   A complete plat vacation application form, as provided by the city,
signed by all owners and identifying the plat to be vacated;
      (2)   A non-refundable plat vacation processing fee in the amount
established by City Council;
      (3)   The signatures of approval of all representatives of all utilities
serving the subdivision must be on the vacating instrument; and
      (4)   If improvements have been constructed within the area of an
easement, the easement must be dedicated by separate instrument prior to the
recording of the plat vacation.
   (B)   Submission to Council. The request shall be placed before the
Commission. Upon approval, it will be forwarded to the City Council for action.
   (C)   Effect of plat vacation. Upon the execution and recording of the
vacation instrument, the vacated plat or portion thereof shall have no effect.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.023 REPLAT.
   (A)   Requirements. A replat of a subdivision is controlling over the
preceding plat without vacation of the plat if the plat:
      (1)   Is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property being
replatted;
      (2)   Is approved by the City Council after a public hearing on the
matter at which parties in interest and citizens have an opportunity to be
heard;
      (3)   Does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions;
and
      (4)   When applicable, in compliance with division (B) below.
   (B)   Replat for residential lots. If any of the proposed property to be
replatted, within the immediate preceding five years, was limited by any
interim or permanent zoning classification to residential use for not more than
two residential units per lot, or if any lot in the approved subdivision was
limited by deed restriction to residential use for not more than two
residential units per lot, notice of the public hearing shall be given in
accordance with state law.
   (C)   Note on plat. A replat shall contain a note describing the purpose of
the change or modification framed in a bold line so as to be distinctly visible
on the face of the plat.
   (D)   Process. The application process, approval process, criteria for
approval and recordation of a replat shall comply with the processes as
provided for a final plat, as applicable.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.024 MINOR PLATS.
   (A)   Applicability. An application for approval of a minor plat may be
filed only when all of the following circumstances apply:
      (1)   The proposed division results in four or fewer lots;
      (2)   All lots in the proposed subdivision front onto an existing public
street and the construction or extension of a street or alley is not required;
and
      (3)   The plat does not require any right-of-way dedication and/or type
extension of any municipal facilities or public improvements to serve any lot
within the subdivision.
   (B)   Criteria for decision. The administrative official, or the City
Council on appeal, shall decide whether to approve, conditionally approve or
deny the minor plat application based upon the following criteria:
      (1)   The minor plat application is consistent with all zoning
requirements for the property and all other requirements of this chapter;
      (2)   All lots to be created by the plat already are adequately served by
all required utilities and services; and
      (3)   The plat does not require the extension of any municipal facilities
or public improvements to serve any lot within the subdivision.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.025 AMENDING PLATS.
   An amending plat may be submitted in accordance with Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, §
212.016, as amended and may be approved by an administrative official so long
as the plat is in accordance with Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code and no dedication of
right-of-way is required. Any corrections or conditions not listed in the
statutory criteria for an amending plat will require full resubmittal of the
plat and will be treated as a replat.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
EASEMENT DEDICATIONS AND ROUGH PROPORTIONALITY
§ 153.040 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Easements for drainage, walkways, access and other comparable
purposes shall generally be located along the side or rear or front lot lines
and/or drainage flow lines and shall be labeled “Drainage Easement,”
“Pedestrian Access Easement,” “Common Access Easement,” “Maintenance and Access
Easement,” “Emergency Access Easement” or other specifically appropriate
labeling on the final plat.
      (2)   Unless otherwise recommended by the City Engineer, easements for
all other public utilities shall be located within public rights-of-way or
front lot lines and shall be labeled “Utility Easement” on the final plat.
      (3)   Unless otherwise recommended by the City Engineer, the developer
shall dedicate a 15-foot general utility easement along the front lot line of,
each lot and any side lot line that is adjacent to a street. Easements shall be
larger when the City Engineer determines necessary special conditions warrant.
      (4)   To facilitate access from roads to schools, parks and playgrounds,
the city may require perpetual unobstructed access easements for pedestrian or
bicycle traffic.
      (5)   Easements dedicated on the plat shall be deemed dedicated to the
public and to the city unless specified otherwise.
      (6)   Private streets shall be labeled as “Emergency Access and Utility
Easements” in order to facilitate access for police, fire and other public
safety and governmental vehicles and personnel and franchise utility and solid
waste disposal vehicles and personnel.
      (7)   The width of easements for utility providers other than the city,
such as for water, gas, electric, telephone, cable television or internet,
shall be as required by that particular entity. It shall be the applicant’s
responsibility to determine appropriate easement widths required by other
utility companies.
      (8)   Wherever possible, easements shall be centered along front lot
lines rather than across the interior or rear of lots.
      (9)   Easements shall be dedicated as specified in the zoning
regulations. If necessary for the extension of water or sewer mains, storm
drainage or other utilities, easements of greater width may be required along
lot lines or across lots. In all cases, easements shall connect with easements
already established in adjoining property to facilitate placement of utilities.
   (B)   Drainage easement or right-of-way.
      (1)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway or
channel, there shall be provided a storm drainage easement conforming
substantially with such course and of such additional width as may be
designated by the City Engineer, according to proper engineering
considerations. The required width shall, under normal conditions, be measured
from the centerline of creeks, ditches or drainage channels, conform to the
requirements set forth by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and/or the city and shall be sufficient to
accommodate the 25-year flood return elevation.
      (2)   Utilities may be permitted within a drainage or floodplain easement
only if approved by the City Engineer.
   (C)   Drainage piping requirement. Any drainage piping that is to be
dedicated to the city shall be in an easement with a minimum width of the
structure (such as, pipe diameter or box width) plus 15 feet.
   (D)   On-site easements. All necessary on-site easements shall be
established on the plat and not by separate instrument, and they shall be
labeled for the specific purpose, and to the specific entity if other than the
city, for which they are being provided.
   (E)   Off-site easements. Any necessary easements not shown on the plat
shall be procured by separate instrument, in a form approved by the City
Attorney and shall be the developer or property owner’s responsibility. If the
developer cannot obtain a required off-site easement, then the developer may
request that the city assist in the acquisition of the easement. The developer
must make an offer in writing, based on the fair market value of the easement,
to the property owner from whom the easement is being sought. All costs of
obtaining the easement shall be the responsibility of the developer or property
owner and the city must be reimbursed for any costs incurred including its
attorney’s fees, condemnation award and any fees or expenses of litigation
whether at the trial or the appellate level or both.
   (F)   Common access easements and cross access easements. To reduce the
congestion created by a number of drives along streets while maintaining
adequate access to developments, the city may require that common access
easements or cross access easements be dedicated at the corners of lots not
intended for low-medium density residential developments when adjacent to lots
of a similar use. These easements will typically be 16 feet in width and 35
feet in length but may vary given the shape of the particular tract and traffic
patterns.
   (G)   Floodplain easement. Flood damage prevention and floodplain easement
requirements are as follows.
      (1)   The 100-year floodplain shall be delineated and cited on the plat.
Floodplain easements shall be provided along natural drainageways and lakes or
reservoirs. Floodplain easements shall encompass all areas beneath the water
surface elevation of the 25-year flood, plus such additional width as may be
required to provide ingress and egress to allow maintenance of the banks and
for the protection of adjacent property as determined and required by the City
Engineer.
      (2)   Modification of existing drainage courses shall only be done using
methods and procedures compliant with Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA), National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality (TCEQ), U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and Texas Parks and
Wildlife policies, as applicable.
      (3)   The city shall maintain areas within floodplain easements.
Maintenance of floodplain areas outside of floodplain easements shall be the
responsibility of the property owner.
      (4)   The city shall have the right to have the ingress and egress for
the purpose of performing maintenance work or to alleviate any undesirable
conditions that may occur within floodplain easements.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.041 DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Division of property. Every owner of property which an application for
approval of a development has been submitted shall be required to dedicate to
the city that portion of such property as is necessary for the orderly
development of streets, roadways, thoroughfares, utilities, drainage
improvements or other public purposes. Such dedication requirements shall be a
prerequisite to plat approval.
   (B)   Effect of approval/disapproval on dedication. The approval of a plat
is not considered an acceptance of any proposed dedication and does not impose
on the city any duty regarding the maintenance or improvement of any dedicated
parts until the city makes an actual appropriation of the dedicated parts by
entry, use or improvement. The disapproval of a plat is considered a refusal by
the city of the offered dedication indicated on the plat.
   (C)   Dedication and construction of improvements. The developer shall
dedicate all rights-of-way and easements for, and shall construct capital
improvements within the rights-of-way or easements for those water, wastewater,
road or drainage improvements needed to adequately serve a proposed development
consistent with the applicable master facilities plans, whether the facilities
are located on, adjacent to or outside the boundaries of the property being
developed.
   (D)   Facilities impact studies. The city may require that a developer
prepare a comprehensive traffic impact study, drainage study or other public
facilities study to assist the city in determining whether a proposed
development will be supported with adequate levels of public facilities and
services concurrent with the demand for the facilities created by the
development. A study shall identify at a minimum the adequacy of existing
facilities and the nature and extent of any deficiencies, and the capital
improvements needed to meet the adopted level of service assuming development
at the intensity proposed in the development application. The study shall be
subject to approval by the City Engineer. The city also may require, at the
time of approval of a subsequent development application, an update of a public
facilities study approved in connection with a prior development application.
   (E)   Timing of dedication and construction; deferral of obligation. The
obligation to dedicate rights-of-way for, or to construct one or more public
works improvements to serve a new development may be deferred until approval of
a subsequent phase of the subdivision, upon written request of the property
owner, or at the city’s own initiative. As a condition of deferring the
obligation, the city shall require that the subdivider enter into a developer’s
agreement, specifying the time for dedication of rights-of-way for or
construction of capital improvements serving the development.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.042 ROUGH PROPORTIONALITY DETERMINATION.
   (A)   Determination. Prior to a decision on an application for approval of a
plat or permit for which an exaction requirement is required as a condition of
approval, the City Engineer shall affirm that each exaction requirement to be
imposed as a condition of plat or permit approval is roughly proportionate to
the demand created by the development on the city’s public facilities systems,
taking into consideration the nature and extent of the development proposed. In
making this determination, the City Engineer may consider the following:
      (1)   Categorical findings and recommendations of the Heart of Texas
Council of Governments in developing standard specifications for public works
improvements;
      (2)   The proposed and potential use of the land;
      (3)   The timing and sequence of development in relation to availability
of adequate levels of public facilities systems;
      (4)   Impact fee studies, traffic impact studies, drainage studies or
other studies that measure the demand for services created by developments and
the impact on the city’s public facilities system;
      (5)   The function of the public works improvements in serving the
proposed subdivision or development;
      (6)   The degree to which public works improvements necessary to serve
the proposed subdivision are supplied by other developments;
      (7)   The anticipated participation by the city in the costs of necessary
public works improvements;
      (8)   The degree to which acceptable private infrastructure improvements
to be constructed and maintained by the developer will off-set the need for
public works improvements;
      (9)   Any reimbursements for the costs of public works improvements for
which the proposed subdivision is eligible; and/or
      (10)   Any other information relating to the impacts created by the
proposed subdivision or development on the city’s public facilities systems.
   (B)   Affirmation. Based upon the proportionality determination, the City
Engineer shall affirm that the exaction requirements of this chapter or other
ordinance requiring the permit, as applied to the proposed subdivision or
development, does not impose costs on the applicant for public works
improvements that exceed those roughly proportionate to the impact of the
proposed subdivision or development.
   (C)   Additional information. The City Engineer may require that the
applicant, at its expense, submit any information or studies that may assist in
making the proportionality determination.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.043 ROUGH PROPORTIONALITY APPROVAL.
   (A)   Generally. An applicant for an approval of a plat or permit which
imposes an exaction requirement as a condition of approval may file an appeal
to contest any exaction requirement, other than impact fees, imposed as a
condition of approval or in which the failure to comply is grounds for denying
the application.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of a proportionality appeal is to assure that an
exaction requirement imposed on a proposed development as a condition of
approval does not result in a disproportionate cost burden on the developer,
taking into consideration the nature and extent of the demands created by the
proposed development on the city’s public facilities systems.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.044 APPEALS PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Requirements for appeal. An applicant seeking approval of a plat or
any other type of permit or zoning for which an exaction requirement is imposed
shall file a written appeal with the City Secretary within ten days of the date
the Commission or other city official takes action applying the exaction
requirement. The applicant shall submit eight copies of the appeal. A separate
appeal form shall be submitted for each exaction requirement for which relief
is sought. The City Secretary shall forward the appeal to the City Council for
consideration.
   (B)   Postponement of action on plat. The applicant may request postponement
of consideration of the applicant’s plat application by pending preparation of
the study required by division (D) below, in which case the applicant shall
also waive the statutory period for acting upon a plat for the time necessary
for the City Council to decide the appeal.
   (C)   Basis for appeal. The appeal shall allege that application of the
exaction requirement is not roughly proportional to the nature and extent of
the impact created by the proposed subdivision or development on the city’s
public facilities systems and does not reasonably benefit the proposed
subdivision or development.
   (D)   Study required. The applicant shall submit to the City Engineer three
copies of a study in support of the appeal that includes, with respect to each
specific exaction requirement appealed, the following information, within 30
days of the date of appeal:
      (1)   Model of the subdivision’s water, sanitary sewer, roadway, drainage
or park system, as applicable, from the point of connection to the existing
public system, employing standard measures of capacity and equivalency tables
relating the type of development proposed. Impacts on the existing public
system will be reviewed by the city to determine if system upgrades are
necessary. If the proposed subdivision is to be developed in phases, such
information also shall be provided for the entire development, including any
phases already developed;
      (2)   Comparison of the capacity of the applicable city utility to be
consumed by the proposed subdivision or development with the capacity to be
supplied to such systems by the proposed exaction requirement. In making this
comparison, the impacts on the city’s public facilities systems from the entire
subdivision shall be considered;
      (3)   Comparison of the capacity of the applicable city public facilities
systems to be consumed by the proposed subdivision or development with the
capacity to be supplied to such systems by the proposed exaction requirement.
In making this comparison, the impacts on the city’s public facilities systems
from the entire subdivision shall be considered;
      (4)   The amount of any city participation in the costs of oversizing the
public works improvements to be constructed by the applicant in accordance with
the city’s requirements;
      (5)   Comparison of the minimum size and capacity required by city
standards for the applicable public facilities systems to be utilized by the
proposed subdivision or development with the size and capacity to be supplied
by the proposed exaction requirement; and
      (6)   Any other information that shows the alleged disproportionality
between the impacts created by the proposed development and the exaction
requirement imposed by the city.
   (E)   Evaluation. The City Engineer shall evaluate the appeal and supporting
study and shall make a recommendation to the City Council based upon the City
Engineer’s analysis of the information contained in the study and utilizing the
same factors considered by the Engineer in making the original proportionality
determination.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.045 CITY COUNCIL DECISION.
   (A)   Appeal hearing. After the applicant certifies to the City Secretary
that all evidence has been submitted, the City Secretary shall schedule the
appeal on an agenda of a meeting of the City Council, and shall cause the
applicant to be notified, at the address given on the appeal form, of the date
and place at which the Council will consider the appeal. The City Council shall
endeavor to decide the appeal within 30 days of the date of final submission of
any evidence by the applicant. The applicant shall be allotted time to present
his or her appeal at the City Council meeting and may introduce other testimony
and shall be allotted 30 minutes to present testimony in support of the appeal.
The City Council shall endeavor to endeavor to base its decision on the
criteria listed in §§
153.042(A) and 153.044(D).
   (B)   Action. The City Council may:
      (1)   Deny the appeal and impose the exaction requirement in accordance
with the City Engineer’s recommendation or the Commission’s decision on the
plat or other development application;
      (2)   Grant the appeal, and waive in whole or in part an exaction
requirement to the extent necessary to achieve proportionality; or
      (3)   Grant the appeal, and direct that the city participate in the costs
of acquiring land for or constructing the public works improvement.
   (C)   Factors. In deciding an appeal, the City Council shall determine
whether application of the exaction requirement is roughly proportional to the
nature and extent of the impact created by the proposed subdivision on the
city’s public facilities systems for water, sanitary sewer, roadway, drainage
or park facilities, as applicable, and reasonably benefits the subdivision. In
making such determination, the Council shall consider:
      (1)   The evidence submitted by the applicant; and
      (2)   The City Engineer’s report and recommendation, considering in
particular the factors identified in §§
153.042(A) and
153.044(D).
   (D)   Additional information. The City Council may require the applicant or
the City Engineer to submit additional information that it deems relevant in
making its decision.
   (E)   Modification. The applicant shall not be deemed to have prevailed in
the event that the City Council modifies the exaction requirement.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.046 ACTION FOLLOWING DECISION OF CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   Decision to modify. If the City Council finds in favor of the
applicant and waives the exaction requirement as a condition of plat approval,
or modifies the exaction requirement to the extent necessary to achieve rough
proportionality, the applicant shall resubmit the plat application to the
Commission within 30 days of the date the City Council takes action, with any
modifications necessary to conform the plat with the City Council’s decision.
If the applicant fails to conform the plat to the City Council’s decision
within the 30-day period provided, the relief granted by the City Council on
the appeal shall expire.
   (B)   Decision to waive. If the City Council finds in favor of an applicant
for any other permit and waives the exaction requirement as a condition of
permit approval, or modifies the exaction requirement to the extent necessary
to achieve rough proportionality, the applicant shall resubmit the permit
application to the responsible official within 30 days of the date the City
Council takes action, with any modifications necessary to conform the
application with the City Council’s decision. If the applicant fails to do so,
the relief granted by the City Council shall expire.
   (C)   Denial of appeal. If the City Council denies the appeal and the
applicant has executed a waiver of the statutory period for acting upon a plat,
the city shall place the plat application on the agenda of the Commission
within 30 days of the City Council’s decision.
   (D)   Additional dwelling units. If the plat application is modified to
increase the number of residential dwelling units or the intensity of non-
residential uses, the City Engineer may require a new study to validate the
relief granted by the City Council.
   (E)   New appeal required. If the plat application for which relief was
granted is denied on other grounds, a new appeal shall be required on any
subsequent application.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.047 APPEAL OF CITY COUNCIL DECISION.
   An applicant may appeal the decision of the City Council to the County or
District Court of the county in which the development is located within 30 days
of the date that the Council issues its final decision.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
REQUIREMENTS FOR PLAT SUBMITTAL
§ 153.060 SUBMITTAL.
   (A)   Pre-application conference. A property owner or applicant may request
a pre-application conference with the administrative official for purposes of
identifying requirements that are applicable to a proposed plat. The conference
between a developer and city staff is intended to be of mutual benefit to the
developer and the community by determining the suitability and type of
development of a tract of land. This step also involves considerable planning
which precedes actual preparation of the preliminary plat. The request shall be
made in writing on a form prepared by the administrative official and shall
state that any proposed development concept discussed at the pre-application
conference is not intended as a plan for development or application for plat
approval. If the request for the meeting is to present a plan for development
or application presenting a plan for development or plat that describes the
property, the proposed uses for the property and the permit which is sought,
the administrative official shall process the plan or application unless the
applicant executes a form that the plan is submitted only for the purpose of
requesting information and is not intended to constitute an application.
   (B)   General development plan. The applicant shall prepare a general
development plan for all subdivisions of five lots or greater which will
require public infrastructure improvements, or the tract initially proposed for
platting is only a portion of a larger landholding of the development; or the
tract is complicated by unusual physical, utility, land use, ownership or other
conditions. The general development plan shall include:
      (1)   The arrangement and correlation of street pattern, particularly
collector streets and major street system, to provide good traffic circulation
throughout the neighborhood and impact on existing streets;
      (2)   The general location and size of school sites, park and recreation
areas, and other public areas;
      (3)   The location of shopping centers, multi-family residential and
other land uses;
      (4)   The proposals for water, sewer, drainage and retention/detention
systems in relation to master plans where they exist for these facilities;
      (5)   The proposals for service as furnished by private utility
companies;
      (6)   A summary of uses by type, number and acreage; and
      (7)   Identification of any flood-prone areas and general proposals for
such areas.
   (C)   Processing of general development plan. The administrative official
shall process the general development plan as an application unless the
applicant executes a form that the plan is submitted only for the purpose of
requesting information and is not intended to constitute an application. A
preliminary plat may not be submitted until the city has accepted the general
development plan.
   (D)   Application. An applicant shall submit a written application for plat
approval to the administrative official on forms prepared by the city, together
with all required documents, such as studies, drawings, exhibits or other
ordinance requirements, in sufficient size and number as required by the
administrative official, and any reasonable information requested by the
administrative official to assist the city in its review of the application.
The owner, applicant or other authorized agent shall sign the application.
Proof of agency shall be submitted by affidavit signed by all owners. The city
may require evidence of fee simple title to the property.
   (E)   Preparation and reproductions. Each plat shall be prepared by an
engineer or surveyor, trained and experienced in subdivision design. In
addition to prints, the applicant shall also provide final plats in PDF format.
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to verify the number of prints
and Mylars required for all submittals. A Mylar of the final plat to be
recorded bearing all appropriate signatures shall be submitted to the city for
its records. Large format documents submitted for review shall be printed in
landscape format with the title block located on the lower right corner. All
large format documents shall be folded in the following manner.
   (F)   Fees. The applicant shall consent in the application to be responsible
for payment of legal and engineering and any other professional fees incurred
by the city in connection with the processing of the application. Approval of
the final plat or minor or amending plat shall be conditional until the
applicant has paid the fees or has given security such as posting a deposit or
bond.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.061 COMPLETENESS DETERMINATION.
   (A)   Requirements for processing applications. Every application for
approval of a plat or plan for development shall include the following:
      (1)   A completed application form signed by the owner or the owner’s
authorized agent;
      (2)   Every item, study and document required by this chapter or other
applicable ordinances for the type of plat being submitted, or required for a
plan for development;
      (3)   An application for approval of a plat or plan for development for
property located within the city shall be accompanied by a copy of the zoning
ordinance or other certification verifying that the proposed use for which the
application is submitted is authorized by the zoning district in which the
property is located;
      (4)   A plat or plan for development application must conform to the
zoning regulations applicable to the property at the time of the application,
except as otherwise provided herein; and
      (5)   An agreement to pay all fees incurred with the review and
processing of the application, and a deposit, if payment has not been timely
made for previous applications.
   (B)   Proper zoning required. If a zoning change is contemplated for the
property, the zoning change must be completed before the approval of any
preliminary plat of the property. The City Council shall not approve a plat or
plan for development which does not comply with the zoning requirements until
any available relief from the Board of Adjustment has been obtained.
   (C)   Additional requirements. The administrative official and the City
Engineer may from time to time identify additional requirements for
applications that are not contained within but are consistent with the
application contents and standards set forth in this chapter.
   (D)   Incomplete application. The processing of an application by any city
employee prior to the time the application is determined to be administratively
complete shall not be binding on the city as the official acceptance of the
application for filing.
   (E)   Expiration of application. An application for approval of a plat or
plan for development shall be deemed to expire on the forty-fifth day after the
application is submitted to the administrative official for processing if the
applicant fails to provide documents or other information necessary to meet the
requirements of this chapter as specified in the determination provided to the
applicant.
   (F)   Denial of application. No vested rights accrue solely from the filing
of an application that has expired pursuant to this section, or from the filing
of a complete application that is subsequently denied.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.062 PRELIMINARY PLAT SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Applicability. A preliminary plat must be prepared and approved for
all subdivisions within the corporate limits of the city which do not meet the
requirements for a minor plat or amending plat. A preliminary plat is neither
authorized nor required in the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction, unless
expressly authorized by an agreement between the city and the developer.
   (B)   Submission. The developer shall prepare and submit copies of the
preliminary plat to the administrative official in the quantity as is
determined, from time to time by the administrative official. An application
lacking required documentation or information shall be returned to the
applicant as provided by §
153.061.
   (C)   Phasing. The preliminary plat shall be submitted on the entire tract
proposed to be subdivided, regardless of whether the applicant intends to final
plat only a portion of the tract. Any phasing must be shown on the preliminary
plat. Any portion of a final plat that developed in sections or phases must
correspond to the sections or phases on the preliminary plat. In the event the
developer chooses to submit a final plat that does not agree with the phasing
plan contained on an approved preliminary plat, the administrative official may
require the preliminary plat must be resubmitted with amended phasing
indicated.
   (D)   Required information. The preliminary plat shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   The case number in the lower left hand corner of the plat. (The
case number shall be provided by staff after the first submittal);
      (2)   North arrow, graphic and written scale in close proximity. The
preferred scale is one inch = 100 feet;
      (3)   Appropriate title, such as, preliminary plat, to include
subdivision name, which shall not duplicate that of another subdivision, city,
county, state, survey and abstract, total gross acreage, number of lots and
date of preparation;
      (4)   Name and address and phone number and email address of record owner
(s), and subdivider, if different. Note volume and page of current deed record
ownership;
      (5)   Name, address and phone numbers and e-mail addresses of engineer,
planner and/or surveyor responsible for preparing the plat;
      (6)   Name of record owner and corresponding deed record volume and page
for all adjacent unplatted tracts within 100 feet, to include owners across any
adjacent right-of-way;
      (7)   All adjacent platted property within 100 feet shown in dashed
lines, labeling lot and block numbers, subdivision name, street names and plat
record reference;
      (8)   Location of city limit lines and/or extraterritorial jurisdiction
lines;
      (9)   Existing zoning noted on this tract and adjacent tracts and any
proposed zoning labeled as such with appropriate setback lines;
      (10)   All existing easements on or adjacent to this tract shown and
labeled as to type and size;
      (11)   The location of existing or approved street intersections on the
perimeter of the subdivision or within 100 feet of the perimeter;
      (12)   Legal description of the land to include the current owner’s deed
record reference, survey and abstract, county, state, point of beginning tied
to survey corner or previously filed subdivision corner, or USGS monument;
      (13)   Graphic depiction of all boundary lines shown in heavy lines with
deed record dimensions or field surveyed dimensions if available. These should
match legal description;
      (14)   Existing right-of-way shown, labeled and dimensioned, such as,
public streets, highways, alleys, private drives, railroads and the like;
      (15)   Permanent structures and uses within the subdivision that will
remain;
      (16)   Lots and blocks labeled with numbers in consecutive order;
      (17)   Drainage, utility and pedestrian access easements labeled and
dimensioned;
      (18)   The proposed uses of the property and the proposed location of the
uses on the tract(s) including uses to be dedicated for schools, parks, open
spaces and other public uses, showing acreage;
      (19)   Approximate floodplain and floodway limits shown;
      (20)   The location and width of the proposed streets, roads, lots,
alleys, easements, widening of existing thoroughfares and other features, and
their location in relation to platted streets, alleys and easements in adjacent
subdivisions for a distance of 100 feet beyond the boundaries of the tract
shall be shown consistent with the thoroughfare plan or other adopted plan for
roads and streets;
      (21)   Present physical features on the tract, including natural and
artificial watercourses, ditches, ravines, culverts and bridges;
      (22)   A topographical map with contour intervals not greater than two
feet with all elevations shown thereon tied to the city datum plane;
      (23)   Profiles and cross sections of proposed streets and roads
sufficient to ascertain that the preliminary plat proposals will function in
accordance with the standards of the city;
      (24)   A complete and corrected preliminary water and sewer layout. This
may be combined with the drainage study and should show all intended easements
and other information required by the design standards; and
      (25)   The following certifications shall be placed on the preliminary
plat:
         (a)   Reviewed for preliminary approval:
            Planning and Zoning Commission Chairman          Date
            Attest:
            City Secretary                               Date
         (b)   Approved for preparation of final plat:
            Mayor, City of Little River-Academy                Date
            Attest:
            City Secretary                               Date
         (c)   A preliminary plat application shall be accompanied by a written
statement signed by the subdivider stating the developer will comply with all
city requirements in the proposed subdivision and all such proposals shall
conform to or exceed the standards for such improvements prescribed by the
city.
         (d)   A certification that all city taxes and fees have been paid.
   (E)   Preliminary drainage study. The applicant shall submit a preliminary
drainage study with the preliminary plat. A preliminary drainage study may also
be required by the city when reviewing a use other than the current land use.
Approval of the preliminary plat may be contingent on the acceptability of the
solutions proposed by the preliminary drainage study. The preliminary drainage
study shall be prepared, signed, sealed and dated by an engineer. The city may
waive the requirement of the preliminary drainage study or may waive certain
requirements where the City Engineer determines the impact of the proposed
development does not necessitate the review.
   (F)   Preliminary water and sewer utility plans. The applicant shall submit
a preliminary water and sewer utility plan. This plan shall indicate the
general location and approximate sizes of all existing and proposed public
water and sanitary sewer utilities, including off-site facilities and/or
oversized mains. The proposed water and sanitary sewer lines shall be designed
in accordance with the requirements established by the design standards. The
City Engineer may waive all or a portion of the requirements for the study
when, in the Engineer’s opinion, the impact of the proposed development does
not necessitate the review.
   (G)   Traffic impact analysis. For developments consisting of a minimum of
200 dwelling units (residential) or generating 2,000 or more one-way trips per
day (non-residential), the applicant shall submit a traffic impact analysis as
required by §
153.134 to determine the traffic generated by the proposed subdivision and to
demonstrate adequacy of the adjacent roadway systems. The City Engineer may
waive all or a portion of the requirement for the analysis depending upon the
size and potential impact of the proposed subdivision and the traffic to be
generated.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.063 REVISED PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   When, in the opinion of the administrative official, a final plat
deviates substantially from the approved preliminary plat, the applicant must
obtain approval of a revised preliminary plat prior to the submission of a
final plat.
   (B)   If an owner proposes substantive changes to a preliminary plat after
the City Council has approved it, a revised preliminary plat shall be prepared,
processed and approved before preparation of the final plat.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.064 FINAL PLAT; REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBMITTAL.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of a final plat is to assure that the division or
development of the land subject to the plat is consistent with all standards of
this chapter, zoning regulations and all other applicable ordinances, that
public improvements to serve the subdivision or development have been installed
and accepted by the city or that provision for such installation has been made.
   (B)   Applicability. Approval of a final plat shall be required prior to any
non-exempt subdivision of land and prior to any site preparation or grading
activities for a lot or tract of land that requires installation of public
improvements on or adjacent thereto. A final plat application shall not be
required for any land division that may be approved through the minor plat
procedures.
   (C)   Effect. Approval of a final plat authorizes the administrative
official to record the plat upon completion of public improvements or posting
of security, and authorizes the subdivider to install any public improvements
under approved construction plans.
   (D)   Application. After obtaining approval or conditional approval of a
preliminary plat and if required, fulfilling all requirements of the
preliminary plat approval, the applicant may submit an application for approval
of a final plat. The final plat shall be accompanied by a completed application
and shall be in accordance with all ordinance requirements.
   (E)   Phases. A final plat may include all or only a portion of the area of
the approved preliminary plat. If a final plat is approved in sections or
phases, each final plat of each section is to carry the name of the entire
subdivision, but is to be distinguished from each other section by a
distinguishing letter, number or subtitle designating the phase. Block numbers
shall run consecutively throughout the entire subdivision, even though such
subdivision may be finally approved in sections.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.065 FINAL PLAT; REQUIRED FORMAT AND INFORMATION.
   (A)   Sheet size. All final plats, replats, amending plats and minor plats
shall be drawn on a sheet size of 18 inches by 24 inches. In addition to county
submission requirements, one full size Mylar and one full size paper copy shall
be submitted, including four paper copies photographically reduced to eight and
one-half inches by 11 inches after obtaining original signatures for filing in
the county records. Where more than one sheet is needed, an index showing the
entire subdivision shall be added to the first sheet or provided on a sheet of
its own to be filed with the plat. The applicant shall submit copies of the
final plat in PDF format.
   (B)   Scale. The permissible scale: one inch = 100 feet. In cases of large
developments which would exceed the dimensions of the sheet at 100-foot scale,
plats may be on multiple sheets or to another known engineering scale, as
approved by the administrative official and in a format that will be acceptable
for eventual filing at the county.
   (C)   Requirements. The final plat shall contain or be accompanied by the
following information:
      (1)   Should more than one sheet be required for the layout, there shall
be included a key map showing the entire subdivision, drawn at a smaller scale,
with block number and street names. The key map is to be included upon the
first sheet or presented separately as a cover sheet the same size as the
large-scale sheet;
      (2)   The names, addresses, phone numbers and e-mail addresses of the
owner and, if different, the subdivider and of the surveyor and/or engineer
responsible for preparing the plat. The name of the subdivision and adjacent
subdivisions, the names of streets (to conform whenever possible to existing
street names) and numbers of lot and blocks, in accordance with alphabetical
block arrangements and numerical lot arrangement with accurate dimensions in
feet and decimals fractions of feet, with the length of radii and of arcs of
all curves, all angles, and with all other engineering information necessary to
reproduce the plat on the ground. Dimensions shall be shown from all angle
points;
      (3)   An accurate boundary survey and description of the property, with
bearings and distances referenced to survey lines and established subdivisions,
and showing the lines of adjacent lands and the lines of adjacent streets and
alleys, with their width and names. Streets, alley and lot lines in adjacent
subdivisions shall be shown in dashed lines;
      (4)   The case number, as provided by the staff, shall be shown in the
lower left-hand corner of the plat;
      (5)   North arrow, graphic and written scale in close proximity;
      (6)   Location map showing location of tract by references to existing
streets or highways;
      (7)   Appropriate title, such as, final plat, to include subdivision
name, city, county, state, survey and abstract, total gross acreage, number of
lots and date of preparation;
      (8)   Name of record owner and corresponding deed record volume and page
for all adjacent unplatted tracts within 100 feet, to include owners across any
adjacent right-of-way;
      (9)   All adjacent platted property within 100 feet shown in dashed
lines, labeling lot and block numbers, subdivision name, street names and plat
record reference;
      (10)   Location of city limit lines and/or extraterritorial jurisdiction
lines, all survey lines with survey names labeled;
      (11)   All existing easements on or adjacent to the tract shown and
labeled as to type and size with dimensional ties to property corners and
centerline or boundary dimensions and bearings;
      (12)   The locations, street names and dimensional centerline references
to existing or approved street intersections on the perimeter of the
subdivision or within 100 feet of the perimeter;
      (13)   Point of beginning labeled on plat;
      (14)   Two boundary corners geo-referenced by state plane coordinates in
accordance with §
153.187;
      (15)   Street right-of-way and right-of-way centerline dimensioned with
bearings, all streets having street names as approved by preliminary plat or
names dissimilar from any existing street names;
      (16)   Physical features relative to the property boundary, including
survey markers, and existing encroachments;
      (17)   The location and dimensions of all drainage and utility easements
and pedestrian access easements;
      (18)   All building setback lines (on all streets) labeled or noted per
the appropriate zoning;
      (19)   Lots to be dedicated for public use labeled as such, such as,
schools, parks, open spaces and the like, showing acreage and calculated
perimeter dimensions, and the entity responsible for maintenance. Also show any
private uses in same manner;
      (20)   Calculated dimensions of all lots, street right-of-way, easements
or common area lots and the like. All curve data should be labeled including
delta, radius, length and tangent. All lots must meet the minimum lot width,
depth and area requirements of the zoning district;
      (21)   Floodplain limit shown and labeled. Floodway limit shown and
labeled with dimensional ties to all lot corners;
      (22)   Minimum finish floor elevations shown on all lots impacted by
drainage easements or intended to be filled. Finish floor note shown on plat;
      (23)   For amending plats or replats, certification signed by all owners
concerning deed restrictions shown;
      (24)   Sight triangle note shown on the face of the plat, if applicable;
      (25)   Driveway access limitation note provided, if applicable;
      (26)   The following note shall appear on the face of the plat: “Selling
a portion of any lot within this addition by metes and bounds is a violation of
state law and city ordinance and is subject to fines and withholding of utility
services and building permits;”
      (27)   For collector or arterial streets which have limited or no
individual access, the following note may be required on the face of any plat
intended to be filed in the county plat records: “No lot within this addition
shall be allowed driveway access onto ___________________ Street;”
      (28)   Temporary paved turn-arounds which meet the requirements of the
design standards are to be provided at ends of streets more than one lot deep
that will be extended in the future. The following note should be placed on the
plat: “Cross-hatched area is temporary easement for turn-around until street is
extended [insert direction] in recorded plat;” and
      (29)   An application of a final plat shall be accompanied with the
following documentation in order for the plat to be officially approved and
recorded:
         (a)   Completed developer’s agreement, if applicable;
         (b)   Certificate of taxes paid from the City Tax Collector;
         (c)   Certificate of taxes paid from the County Tax Collector;
         (d)   Certificate of taxes paid from the School District Tax
Collector, as applicable;
         (e)   Any proposed or existing deed covenants/restrictions; and
         (f)   Approval blocks in the form required by §
153.066.
   (D)   Prerequisite to approval. Unless otherwise permitted by this chapter,
no final plat shall be accepted for review unless a preliminary plat has been
approved and is currently valid.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.066 FINAL PLAT DEDICATION, STATEMENTS AND WAIVERS.
   (A)   Requirements. The final plat shall contain a statement of dedication,
signed and acknowledged by the owner or owners and by all other parties who
have a mortgage or lienhold interest in the property, showing all restrictions,
reservations and/or easements, if any, to be imposed and reserved in connection
with the addition.
   (B)   Certificate of dedication. The plat shall contain a certificate of
dedication of all streets, public highways, alleys, parks and other land
intended for public use, signed by the owner or owners and by all other parties
who have mortgage or lien interests in the property and acknowledged before a
notary public. All deed restrictions that are to be filed with the plat shall
be shown or filed separately. The certificate of dedication shall be
substantially in the following form:
      (1)   Individual owner(s).
         STATE OF TEXAS
         COUNTY OF              
I (we) the undersigned owner(s) of the land shown on this plat, and designated
herein as the ________ addition to the city, and whose name is subscribed
hereto, hereby dedicate to the use of the public forever all rights-of-way,
streets, alleys, parks, water courses, drains, easements and public places
thereon shown for the purpose and consideration therein expressed. I (we)
further certify that all other parties who have a mortgage or lien interest in
the _________ addition have been notified and signed this plat.
I (we) further acknowledge that the dedications and/or exactions made herein
are proportional to the impact of the subdivision upon the public services
required.
                           Owner for                         
         STATE OF TEXAS
         COUNTY OF             
Before me, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared
            , known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the
foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he or she executed the same
for the purpose and consideration therein stated.
         Given upon my hand and seal of office this ____day of_______________,
20___.
         Notary Public in and for the State of Texas
         My Commission Expires:
      (2)   Lienholder’s ratification.
         STATE OF TEXAS
         COUNTY OF             
Whereas (lien holder name), acting by and through the undersigned, its duly
authorized agent, is (are) the lien holder(s) of the property described hereon,
does (do) hereby ratify all dedications and provisions of this plat as shown.
         (Typed name of authorized agent, title, lien holder)
Before me, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared
__________, known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the
foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he or she executed the same
for the purpose and consideration expressed and in the capacity therein stated
and as the act and deed of said _________________.
         Given upon my hand and seal of office this ____ day of _____________,
20___.
         Notary Public in and for the State of Texas
         My Commission Expires:
If no liens exist, add the following statement to the end of the plat
dedication:
         There are no liens against the property.
         Corporate or partnership dedication.
         STATE OF TEXAS
         COUNTY OF             
Whereas ___________, acting by and through the under signed, its duly
authorized agent, is the sole owner of a tract of land situated in the ______
Survey, Abstract ________, County of ______________, according to the deed
recorded in Volume______, Page ___, Deed Records, ____County, Texas, and more
particularly described as follows:
         [Insert legal description here]
         NOW, THEREFORE, KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
That, _______________ by and through the undersigned, its duly authorized
agent, does hereby adopt this plat designating the hereinabove described
property as, an addition to the City of Little River-Academy, Bell County,
Texas, and I (we) do hereby dedicate the rights of way, (alleys, parks) and
easements shown thereon to the public’s use unless otherwise noted.
   WITNESS my (our) hand(s) at Little River-Academy, Bell County, Texas this
the___day of _____________, 20___.
         STATE OF TEXAS
         COUNTY OF             
Before me, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared of a
corporation (partnership, JV) known to me to be the person(s) whose name(s)
subscribed to the above and foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that
he/they executed the same for the purpose and consideration expressed and in
the capacity therein stated and as the act and deed of said corporation
(partnership, JV).
         Given upon my hand and seal of office this ____ day of ____________,
20___.
         Notary Public in and for the State of Texas
         My Commission Expires:
   (C)   Surveyor certificate. The plat shall contain the following
certification by a surveyor to the effect that the plan represents a survey
made by him or her, and that all the necessary survey monuments are correctly
shown thereon:
This is to certify that I, ________________, a Registered Professional Land
Surveyor of the State of Texas, have prepared this plat of the above
subdivision from an actual survey on the ground; and that all monuments for lot
corners, angle points, and points of curvature shown thereon as set were placed
under my personal supervision in accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance of
the City of Little River-Academy.
      (Print name), Surveyor
      Texas R.P.L.S. No.             
      Date:                      
      (seal)
   (D)   Utility easement restriction statement. The plat shall contain the
following statement: “Any public utility, including the City of Little River-
Academy, shall have the right to remove all or part of any building, fences,
trees, shrubs, other growths or improvements which in any way endanger or
interfere with the construction, maintenance or efficiency of its respective
systems on any of the easements shown on the plat; and any public utility,
including the City of Little River-Academy, shall have the right at all times
of ingress and egress to and from and upon said easements for the purpose of
construction, reconstruction, inspection, patrolling, maintaining and adding to
or removing all or part of its respective systems without the necessity at any
time of procuring the permission of anyone.”
   (E)   Public open space easement restriction statement. The following full
statement of restrictions shall be placed in the dedication instrument or on
the face of the plat: “No structure, object or plant of any type may obstruct
vision from a height of 30 inches to a height of ten feet above the top of the
curb, including, but not limited to, buildings, fences, walks, signs, trees,
shrubs, cars, trucks and the like, in the public open space easement as shown
on the plat.”
   (F)   Drainage and floodplain easement restriction statement. The following
statement shall be placed in the dedication instrument or on the face of the
plat: “No construction or filling, without the written approval of the city,
shall be allowed within a drainage easement or a floodplain easement, and then
only after detailed engineering plans and studies show that no flooding will
result, that no obstruction to the natural flow of water will result; and
subject to all owners of the property affected by such construction becoming a
party to the request. Where construction is permitted, all finished floor
elevations shall be a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood elevation.”
   (G)   Waivers. The final plat shall contain a waiver of claim for damages
against the city occasioned by the establishment of grades or the alteration of
the surface of any portion of existing streets and alleys to conform to the
grades established in the subdivision.
   (H)   Approvals.
      (1)   The following approval blocks shall be executed after final
approval:
   I hereby certify that the above and foregoing plat of _______ addition to
the City of Little River-Academy, Texas, was approved by the City Council of
the City of Little River-Academy on the ____ day of _____________, 20___.
This approval shall be invalid unless the approved plat for such addition is
recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Bell, County, Texas, within two
years from said date of final approval. Said addition shall be subject to all
the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Little River-
Academy.
         WITNESS OUR HAND, this _____ day of ____________, 20___.
         City Secretary
      (2)   The following approvals shall be placed on a final plat, in a
manner that will allow the filing of the certificates by the proper party.
         Recommended for final approval:
         Chairman Planning and Zoning Commission       Date
         Attest:
         City Secretary                            Date
         Approved:
         Mayor, City of Little River-Academy, Texas       Date
         Attest:
         City Secretary                            Date
      (3)   The following approvals shall be placed on an amending or minor
plat:
         Approved:
         City Administrator
         Attest:
         City Secretary
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.067 CONSTRUCTION PLANS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. The applicant shall submit construction plans and profile
sheets for all public works improvements for review with the application for
approval of the final plat. Incomplete plans shall be returned to the
applicant. Design standards of the city in effect at the time of submission of
the plat shall be used, subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
   (B)   Specifically.
      (1)   Construction plans and profiles shall be prepared by an engineer
and drawn on 11-inch by 17-inch sheets, and shall include a cover sheet with
index, general site layout and required calculations.
      (2)   Each sheet shall include north point, scale and date. Bench mark
description to sea level datum shall be included with the plans.
      (3)   Each sheet shall show the seal and signature of the engineer who
prepared the plans and shall include the following, unless specifically
approved otherwise by the administrative official:
         (a)   A plan and profile of each street with top of curb grades shown.
Scale shall be one inch = 40 feet horizontally, and one inch = four feet
vertically; one inch = 20 feet horizontally, and one inch = four feet
vertically; or one inch = 50 feet horizontally, and one inch = five feet
vertically;
         (b)   The cross-section of proposed streets, alleys and sidewalks
showing the width and type of pavement, base and sub-grade, and location within
the right-of-way. These plan-profiles shall show the existing ground and the
proposed grade at five points of cross section; that is, at the centerline, the
back-of-curb lines and the property lines;
         (c)   A plan and profile of proposed sanitary sewers, with grades and
pipe sized indicated and showing locations of manholes, clean-outs and other
appurtenances, and a cross section of embedment;
         (d)   A plan of the proposed water distribution system showing pipe
sizes and location of valves, fire hydrants, fittings and other appurtenances,
with a section showing embedment;
         (e)   A plan to scale of all areas contributing storm water runoff or
drainage within and surrounding the proposed subdivision. Such plan shall
indicate size of areas, storm frequency and duration data, amounts of runoff,
points of concentration and other data necessary to adequately design drainage
facilities for the area. This should analyze upstream and/or downstream impacts
to ensure that the development does not adversely affect upstream or downstream
properties;
         (f)   A plan and profile showing size and location of proposed storm
sewers, showing hydraulic data, pipe grades and sizes, manholes, inlets, pipe
connections, culverts, outlet structures, bridges and other structures; and
         (g)   Profile views of individual improvements shall have no more than
two improvements on one sheet unless specifically approved by the City
Engineer.
   (C)   Responsibility. The purpose of the city review is to assure
conformance to city policies and standards. However, the city review is limited
to facts as presented on submitted plans. The city takes no project engineering
responsibility. The engineer certifying the plans is the engineer responsible
for the accuracy and completeness of the documents submitted for review and
actual construction.
   (D)   Corrections. The city reserves the right to require plan corrections
when actual conditions in the field which are found to be contrary to or
omitted from the previously submitted plan.
   (E)   Approval. If construction plans are approved, the plans shall be
marked approved and one set shall be returned to the applicant, and at least
two sets shall be retained in the city’s files. The developer shall provide
additional sets of the approved plans to the city, as specified by the City
Engineer, for use during construction. A full set of the city-approved and
stamped construction plans must be available for inspection on the job site at
all times.
   (F)   Revisions. If the conditions of approval require revision(s) to the
construction plans, one set shall be marked with objections noted (on the plans
themselves and/or in memo format) and returned to the applicant for correction,
whereupon the applicant’s engineer shall correct the plans as requested and
resubmit them for decision. A properly revised set of construction plans shall
be submitted to the City Engineer within 30 working days of receipt of the
notice of the City’s Engineer’s decision.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.068 MINOR PLAT SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Requirements. When a tract of land has not been previously platted and
recorded, the subdivider may elect to combine the preliminary and final plats
of a subdivision and submit an application for approval of a minor plat if the
tract:
      (1)   Involves four or less lots;
      (2)   Is to be subdivided without change of street location, right-of-way
dedication or without substantial effect on city services, drainage or adjacent
properties; and
      (3)   Does not require the extension of municipal facilities.
   (B)   Name. A minor plat may bear the name of the original survey and
abstract number in which said property is located as an addition. It is
subdivided into numbered lots out of that survey.
   (C)   Information. An application for approval of a minor plat shall contain
the information required by §
153.065 unless the administrative official determines additional information is
necessary to ascertain whether sufficient public infrastructure exists.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.069 AMENDING PLAT SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose. An amending plat is a plat which is solely for one or more of
the following purposes:
      (1)   To alter the interior lot line or change building setback lines for
purposes of a more buildable area without increasing the number of lots;
      (2)   To correct an error in course or distance;
      (3)   To add any course or distance that was omitted;
      (4)   To correct an error in the description of the real property;
      (5)   To indicate monuments set after death, disability or retirement
from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibility for
setting monuments;
      (6)   To show location or character of any monument which has been
changed in location or character or was incorrectly shown;
      (7)   To correct scrivener or clerical error or omission; may include,
but are not limited to lot numbers, acreage, street names and identification of
adjacent recorded plats;
      (8)   To correct error in course or distances of lot lines between two
adjacent lots where both lot owners join in the proposed revision and neither
lot is abolished but does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or
restrictions;
      (9)   To relocate a lot line in order to cure an encroachment of a
building improvement on a lot line or an easement;
      (10)   To relocate lot lines where all owners join in the application for
the plat amendment; provided that the amendment does not attempt to remove
recorded restrictions or covenants or change the number of lots; and
      (11)   To replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if:
         (a)   The owners of all those lots join in the application for
amending the plat;
         (b)   The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or
restrictions;
         (c)   The amendment does not increase the number of lots; and
         (d)   The amendment does not create or require the creation of a new
street or make necessary the extension of municipal facilities.
   (B)   Note on plat. Amending plats shall contain a note describing the
correction, framed in a bold line so as to be distinctly visible on the face of
the plat.
   (C)   Requirements. All requirements of §§ 153.61 and
153.065 shall be satisfied for submittal of an application for approval of an
amending plat and the following minimum certification shall be added to the
owner’s dedication on all amending plats: “This plat does not increase the
number of lots or alter or remove existing deed restrictions or covenants, if
any, on this property.”
   (D)   Conditions. No conditions except those pertaining to the accuracy or
clarity of the face of the plat or the provision of adequate utilities or
payment of delinquent fiscal charges shall be added as a condition of filing an
amending plat and no changes may be shown other than as specified in this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.070 REPLAT SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. The administrative official may require the applicant to
submit a revised preliminary plat prior to city approval of a replat involving
four or more lots. In addition, a final drainage study may be required if
determined necessary by the City Engineer.
   (B)   Waiver. The administrative official may waive the requirement for a
revised preliminary plat when the replat is without significant change of
street location, and without substantial effect on city services, drainage or
adjacent properties.
   (C)   Requirements. An application for approval of a replat shall include
all information required by §
153.061 and, if applicable, §
153.065, and the following minimum certification: “This plat does not alter or
remove existing deed restrictions or covenants, if any, on this property.” This
statement shall also be included in the owner’s dedication on all replats.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
PROCEDURES FOR PLAT APPROVAL
§ 153.085 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Authority for approval of minor and amending plats. The administrative
official is authorized to approve all minor plats and amending plats. The
filing date of a minor plat or amending plat is the date on which the applicant
receives the city’s initial comments on the minor plat or amending plat. An
applicant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the administrative official
may request that the plat be referred to the Commission, and then the Council,
for decision. If such a request is made, the filing date shall be in accordance
with division (F) below.
   (B)   Recommendation of Commission. The Commission shall review and
recommend approval, approval with conditions or disapproval on all preliminary
plats, replats and final plats.
   (C)   Approval by City Council. The City Council shall receive a
recommendation from the Commission on each preliminary plat, final plat and
replat and shall then make a final decision as to the approval, approval with
conditions or disapproval of these plats.
   (D)   Conformance. All preliminary plats, final plats and replats shall
substantially conform to any concept plan or plan for development or planned
development plan approved in accordance with the requirements of the zoning
regulations, as well as all other applicable ordinances, including, but not
limited to, the Comprehensive Plan and all standards for adequacy of public
facilities, where applicable. No final plat shall be approved until the city
has received a letter of approval from the City Engineer confirming their
approval of water and wastewater construction plans. Further, a final plat
shall conform to the approved preliminary plat except for minor changes
authorized under division (G) below.
   (E)   Plat review and conditional approval or disapproval. In the event the
Commission or Council conditionally approves or disapproves a preliminary plat,
final plat or replat, the Commission or Council shall provide an applicant a
written statement of the conditions for the conditional approval or reasons for
disapproval, in accordance with Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, § 212.0091, as amended.
After the conditional approval or disapproval of a preliminary plat, final plat
or replat, an applicant may submit to the Commission or Council a written
response that satisfies each condition for the conditional approval or remedies
each reason provided for the disapproval, in accordance with Tex. Loc. Gov’t
Code, § 212.0093, as amended. In the event the Commission or Council receives
such a response from an applicant, the Commission or Council shall determine
whether to approve or disapprove the applicant’s previously conditionally
approved or disapproved plat not later than the fifteenth day after the date
the response was submitted, in accordance with Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, §
212.0095, as amended.
   (F)   Filing date. The 30-day period for approval, approval with conditions
or disapproval of a plat, as established in Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, Chapter 212,
as amended, shall be the date the plat application is heard by either the
Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council. Pursuant to Tex. Loc. Gov’t
Code, § 212.009(b-2), as amended, upon application in writing by an applicant,
the Commission or City Council may approve one extension of the 30-day action
requirement; however, such extension shall not to exceed 30 additional days.
   (G)   Minor changes to preliminary plat. Minor changes in the design of the
subdivision subject to a preliminary plat may be incorporated in an application
for approval of a final plat without the necessity of filing a new application
for approval of a preliminary plat. Any substantial deviation in street layout
or alignment, lot size or configuration, utility and/or drainage layout, or
easements shall require submittal for consideration of a new preliminary plat.
All other proposed changes to the design of the subdivision subject to an
approved preliminary plat shall be deemed major amendments that require
submittal and approval of a new application for approval of a preliminary plat
before approval of a final plat.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.086 EXPIRATION OF PLATS.
   (A)   Preliminary plat. Approval of the preliminary plat expires three years
after the approval date. For a phased subdivision, any part of the preliminary
plat which has not been final platted shall expire after one year from the
completion of the previous phase if a new phase is not started.
   (B)   Other plats. A final plat, replat, amending or minor plat which has
not been recorded in the county records within two years from the date of
approval shall expire.
   (C)   Resubmittal. Upon the expiration of a plat, unless the city makes a
determination that the applicant has made progress, as that term is defined by
§
153.087, the applicant must resubmit an application for approval, including
payment of a fee and complete the review process.
   (D)   Extension and reinstatement procedure.
      (1)   Not later than 60 days prior to the lapse of approval for a
preliminary or final plat, the property owner may petition the City Council to
extend or reinstate the approval. The petition shall be considered at a public
meeting of the City Council.
      (2)   In determining whether to grant such request, the City Council
shall take into account the reasons for lapse, the ability of the property
owner to comply with any conditions attached to the original approval, the
extent to which the property owner agrees to abide by newly adopted subdivision
regulations and any changed conditions in the surrounding area which would make
an extension undesirable. The City Council shall extend its approval of the
plat or deny the request. In the event the City Council denies extension of the
preliminary or final plat, the property owner must submit a new application for
approval.
      (3)   The City Council may specify a shorter time for lapse of the
extended plat that is applicable to original approvals, but shall not extend
the period that a preliminary or final plat approval is valid to more than one
year from the date the original approval expires.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.087 PROJECT EXPIRATION.
   A project shall expire on the fifth anniversary of the date the application
for the first permit application for the project was filed with the city if no
progress has been made towards completion of the project. For purposes of this
section, PROJECT means an endeavor over which a regulatory agency exerts its
jurisdiction and for which one or more permits are required to initiate,
continue or complete the endeavor. A project shall expire on the fifth
anniversary of the date the application for the first permit for the project
was filed with the city if no progress has been made towards completion of the
project. Progress towards completion of the project shall include any one of
the following:
   (A)   An application for a final plat or plan for development is submitted
to a regulatory agency;
   (B)   A good-faith attempt is made to file with a regulatory agency an
application for a permit necessary to begin or continue towards completion of
the project;
   (C)   Costs have been incurred for developing the project including, without
limitation, costs associated with roadway, utility and other infrastructure
facilities designed to serve, in whole or in part, the project (but exclusive
of land acquisition) in the aggregate amount of 5% of the most recent appraised
market value of the real property on which the project is located;
   (D)   Fiscal security is posted with a regulatory agency to ensure
performance of an obligation required by the regulatory agency; or
   (E)   Utility connection fees or impact fees for the project have been paid
to a regulatory agency.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.088 MINOR PLAT PROCESSING.
   All minor plats will be accepted for review in accordance with §
153.061, plat review comments generated and a copy of this review given to the
applicant. It will be the applicant’s responsibility to revise the plat as
needed to receive approval from city staff. Upon approval of a minor plat, the
administrative official and City Secretary shall attest to the approval of the
plat by signing the plat. If the plat complies with §
153.090, the administrative official will file the plat in accordance with this
chapter. If the plat does not meet the requirements of this chapter, the
administrative official shall deny the plat.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.089 AMENDING PLAT PROCESSING.
   (A)   Generally. An amending plat will be accepted for review in accordance
with §
153.061. After an application for approval of an amending plat has been
determined to be complete, the administrative official shall forward the
application to other city departments for review to determine whether the
application complies with applicable ordinances. The administrative official
shall, within a reasonable time, generate plat review comments and notify the
applicant of same. It is the applicant’s responsibility to revise the
application to meet the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Administrative official shall take action upon the application. Upon
approval, the administrative official shall sign the plat. If the plat meets
the requirements of §
153.090, the administrative official will record the plat. If the plat does not
meet with requirements of this chapter, the administrative official shall deny
the plat.
   (C)   Alternative. Should any of the conditions imposed pursuant to this
chapter prove unacceptable to the applicant, the applicant may submit an
application for a replat. An amending plat may be submitted and processed as a
replat.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.090 RECORDING OF PLAT.
   (A)   Requirements. For a plat to be recorded after approval, all conditions
of approval must be satisfied, including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   All required fees shall be paid, including park dedication, if
required and tree replacement fees;
      (2)   All plats shall be provided in an electronic format approved by the
administrative official;
      (3)   All covenants required by ordinances shall be reviewed and approved
by the city;
      (4)   On-site easements and rights-of-way shall be properly described and
noted on the plat;
      (5)   Off-site easements and rights-of-way shall be dedicated by the
respective owners, approved by the city and filed of record with the county;
      (6)   All required abandonments of public rights-of-way or easements that
must be approved by the City Council and the abandonment ordinance numbers
shall be shown on the plat;
      (7)   Original tax certificates showing that all taxes are paid, as well
as a statement from the city that no outstanding monies are owed to the city
shall be presented from each taxing unit with jurisdiction of the real
property;
      (8)   A copy of the ownership and dedication statement from the plat
shall be submitted on separate letter or legal size paper, executed before a
notary public, with all original signatures;
      (9)   A copy of the executed developer’s agreement, if one was required
to be executed, shall be submitted;
      (10)   For proposed improvements that have yet to be constructed, the
required financial assurance and contractor’s proof of insurance for any
proposed public improvements;
      (11)   Monumentation required by §
153.187;
      (12)   For proposed improvements that have yet to be constructed,
evidence of approval of any necessary permits from the State Department of
Transportation, any utility district, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or any
other state or federal agency shall be submitted; and
      (13)   Any lienholder of the property to be platted must execute a
statement on the plat or a separate instrument subordinating the lienholder’s
interest to the plat and the dedications thereon.
   (B)   Proof of ownership. The applicant shall furnish the city proof of
ownership, covering the platted area dedicated to the city. The documents shall
reflect that the applicant has fee simple title to the property to be dedicated
with no encumbrances except for those liens for which consents have been filed
and shall be updated to the date the City Engineer releases the plat to be
filed with the County Clerk.
   (C)   Recording. Within 14 days after plat approval and compliance with all
stipulations of approval and the requirements of this section, the city shall
record the plat in the county plat records. The final plat shall not be
returned or released to the developer until recorded.
   (D)   Original signatures on Mylar. All revisions to the plat shall be made
prior to running the black-line Mylars which are to be signed by the owner,
notary, surveyor and city representatives. The city will then obtain signatures
of the appropriate city representatives.
   (E)   Special filings. In the event that the applicant requests a special
filing with the county, a check payable to the city shall be submitted to the
City Secretary in the amount of the appropriate fee and expenses. Fees for
special filings of plats shall be set by the City Council.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
PUBLIC WORKS IMPROVEMENTS
§ 153.105 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Documents. Design and construction of public works improvements must
conform to the standards, criteria and requirements of the following, as they
may from time to time be amended by those responsible for their promulgation:
      (1)   The Thoroughfare Plan;
      (2)   The Texas Uniform Traffic Control Device Manual;
      (3)   The Standard Specifications for Construction, City of Waco;
      (4)   The city design criteria and improvements (design standards), as
amended;
      (5)   The American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials
Design Manual;
      (6)   The State Health Code;
      (7)   The master drainage plan, as applicable;
      (8)   The flood damage prevention ordinance (Chapter 152);
      (9)   The integrated storm water standards; and
      (10)   All other codes and ordinances of the city.
   (B)   Design expiration. If the construction of public works improvements is
not completed within three years from the preliminary plat approval date, then
the infrastructure must be redesigned using the most current design standards.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.106 COMMON AREAS.
   An area retained in private ownership but intended for the benefit of the
owners of lots in the plat must be shown as a common area and a separate lot on
the plat. A homeowners’ or property owners’ association which meets the
requirements of §
153.189 must be approved for the area before the final plat is recorded.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.107 FIRE AND POLICE ACCESS.
   (A)   Generally. The layout design of a plat must take into consideration
the provisions of adequate fire and police access.
   (B)   Water supply. Provisions must be made for the extension of water lines
and the appropriate placement of fire hydrants as required by the Fire
Department before approval of the final plat.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.108 TIMING OF PUBLIC WORKS IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Deeds in escrow. As a condition of final plat approval, the City
Council may require the property owner to deposit deeds in escrow describing by
metes and bounds street rights-of-way, park land and easements required by
these regulations, conveying such rights-of-way, park land and easements to the
city, pending acceptance of improvements by the city and recordation of the
final plat. In the event the property owner fails to complete the public works
improvements, and the improvements are deemed necessary for the preservation of
the public health and safety, the city may compel the delivery and recording of
the deeds in order to complete the improvements as required.
   (B)   Installation after final plat approval. The City Council, on request
of the applicant, may defer the obligation to install one or more public
improvements to serve the development until after final plat approval. The
request shall be submitted with an application for preliminary approval. If the
developer elects not to file for preliminary approval, public works
improvements shall be installed after approval of the final plat. In either
case, deferral of the obligation to install public improvements shall be
conditioned on execution of a development agreement and sufficient surety to
secure the obligations defined in the agreement.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.109 SANITARY WASTE COLLECTION ACCESS.
   Each non-residential development that has a refuse facility or location for
solid waste collection containers shall provide for safe and convenient access.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.110 RETAINING WALLS.
   (A)   Material. All retaining walls shall be constructed of inorganic
material such as masonry, brick or stone. Timbers, railroad ties or wood
materials are prohibited.
   (B)   Plans required. Plans for a retaining wall must be reviewed and
approved by the City Engineer. The review shall verify the following:
      (1)   The retaining wall does not encroach on an adjoining property
without the consent of the adjoining owner;
      (2)   That the wall is constructed of a permitted material; and
      (3)   The wall in not constructed within a utility easement or without a
written waiver or consent from the utility company holding rights to the
easement.
   (C)   Inspection required. A certificate of occupancy will not be issued
until the retaining wall is constructed, been inspected by the city and the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.111 FISCAL ASSURANCE.
   (A)   Performance bonds; escrow agreement. If the developer requests that
building permits be issued for construction on lots within the development
prior to completion and acceptance of all public works improvements, and the
administrative official determines that permits should be issued, the following
requirements shall apply:
      (1)   A performance bond meeting the requirements of Tex. Gov’t Code,
Chapter 2253 will be submitted in an amount of not less than the value of the
public works improvements, as determined by the City Engineer, to ensure
completion of all improvements; or
      (2)   If the cost of completing the public works improvements at the time
the building permits are requested is $100,000 or less, as determined by the
City Engineer, cash money in the amount of the cost of completing the
improvements, as determined by the City Engineer, may be deposited with a bank
as escrow agent pursuant to an escrow agreement, the form and provisions
thereof to be approved by the City Attorney, to ensure completion of the
improvement.
   (B)   Model home. The administrative official may authorize construction of
a model home in a subdivision without completion of the public works
improvements.
   (C)   Payment bond; assurance of payment. Prior to acceptance by the city of
any improvements, the developer shall provide one of the following assurances:
      (1)   A payment bond meeting the requirements of Tex. Gov’t Code, Chapter
2253, in an amount of not less than 100% of the approximate total cost of the
contract, guaranteeing the full and proper protection of all claimants
supplying labor and material for the construction of the improvements, in the
form approved by the city and by a surety authorized to do business in the
state; or
      (2)   If the total contract amount of all public works improvements is
$50,000 or less, as determined by the City Engineer, or the improvements,
regardless of the contract amount, are for a one-lot development, the owner and
contractor may, in lieu of furnishing a payment bond, agree to pay and satisfy
all claims, liens, charges and encumbrances arising from construction of the
public works improvements and furnish a written affidavit signed by the
developer, in a form provided by the City Attorney, stating the following:
         (a)   All charges, accounts and claims for labor performed and
material furnished in connection with the improvements have been paid in full;
and
         (b)   There are no unreleased recorded liens filed against the
improvements or land to which they are affixed that are to be dedicated to the
public.
   (D)   Amount and acceptability. The security shall be issued in the amount
of 125% of the cost estimate approved by the City Engineer for all public
improvements associated with the subdivision. The bonds must be issued by a
Best-rated surety company that is duly authorized to transact business in the
state; however, the city retains the right to reject any surety company
regardless of such company’s qualifications or authorization to do business in
the state if the company does not have a resident agent and/or surety does not
meet the requirements of Tex. Insurance Code, Article 7.19-1. The security
shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.112 MAINTENANCE AND WARRANTY OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Maintenance during construction. The property owner shall maintain all
required public works improvements during construction of the development.
   (B)   Warranty after construction. The developer shall covenant to warranty
the required public works improvements for a period of two years following
issuance of a letter of acceptance by the city of all required public
improvements and shall provide a maintenance bond in the amount of the cost to
construct the improvements guaranteeing the maintenance and good condition of
the improvements insuring the repair and replacement of all defective work due
to faulty materials and workmanship that appear within a period of one year
from the date of acceptance of the improvements by the city. The bonds must be
issued by a Best-rated surety company that meets the requirements of §
153.111(D).
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.113 INSPECTION AND ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Inspections. Construction inspection shall be supervised by the City
Engineer. Construction shall be in accordance with the approved construction
plans. Any significant change in design required during construction shall be
made by the developer’s engineer, and shall be subject to approval by the City
Engineer. If the City Engineer finds upon inspection that any of the required
public works improvements have not been constructed properly and in accordance
with the approved construction plans, the property owner shall be responsible
for completing and/or correcting the public improvements.
   (B)   Fees. The developer shall submit a fee of 4% of the costs of the
public works improvements to reimburse the city its administrative costs,
inspection and review fees. Fees shall be based on an opinion of probable cost
prepared by the developer’s engineer and reviewed and accepted by the
administrative official.
   (C)   Submission of record drawings. The city shall not accept dedication of
required public improvements until the applicant’s engineer has certified to
the City Engineer, through submission of a detailed record drawing or survey
plat of the property and any off-site easements, the location, dimensions,
materials and other information establishing that the public improvements have
been built in accordance with the approved construction plans. Each record
drawing sheet shall show all changes made in the plans during construction and
on each sheet, there shall be an as-built stamp bearing the signature of the
engineer and date. Required formats include:
      (1)   One full-size Mylar set 22 inches by 34 inches sheet size; and
      (2)   Electronic drawing in AutoCAD and PDF format of the final plat and
water, wastewater and storm drainage layouts.
   (D)   Acceptance of improvements. When the developer has certified to the
city that the public works improvements have been completed in accordance with
the plans and applicable ordinances, the City Engineer shall determine whether
the public improvements have been installed in accordance with the approved
construction plans and design standards and applicable ordinances. If so, the
City Engineer shall accept such improvements on behalf of the city. Acceptance
of the improvements shall mean that the property owner has transferred all
rights to all the public works improvements to the city for use and
maintenance. The City Engineer may accept dedication of a portion of the
required public works improvements; provided adequate surety has been given for
the completion of all of other improvements. Upon acceptance of the required
public improvements, the City Engineer shall issue a certificate to the
property owner stating that all required public improvements have been
accepted.
   (E)   Disclaimer. Approval of a preliminary or final plat by the City
Council shall not constitute acceptance of any of the public improvements
required to serve the subdivision. No public improvements shall be accepted for
dedication by the city except in accordance with this section.
   (F)   Acceptance of improvements for land in extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Where the facilities to be constructed under the development agreement are
located within the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction and are to be dedicated
to the county in which the land is located, the City Engineer shall inform the
county that the public improvements have been constructed in accordance with
approved construction plans and are ready for acceptance by the county.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
STREET AND RIGHT-OF-WAY REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.125 GENERAL.
   (A)   Thoroughfare plan. The streets of a proposed development shall conform
to the general intent of the Thoroughfare Plan. The City’s Engineer shall
determine final alignment and related right-of-way dedications.
   (B)   Continuity of street systems. Proposed streets for a subdivision shall
be effectively related to the present and future street system and development
of the surrounding area. Any proposed streets shall provide for appropriate
continuation or completion of any existing streets, whether constructed or
dedicated, which project to the limits of a proposed subdivision or are
adjacent to the subdivision.
   (C)   Substandard street improvements. Where an existing thoroughfare that
does not meet the city’s right-of-way or design standards abuts a proposed
subdivision, the city may require that the entire right-of-way be dedicated
and/or improved to the city’s design standards, based upon factors including
the impact of the proposed development on the road, safety to the traveling
public, conditions and life expectancy of the road, the impact of the proposed
subdivision on other roads, the timing of this development in relation to need
for improving the road, the impact of the traffic on the road and city’s
roadway system as a whole. Any required improvements to substandard streets
shall be limited to the effective frontage of the proposed development for half
the width of the required roadway section.
   (D)   Layout. The street layout shall be in conformity with a plan for the
most advantageous development of the entire neighborhood areas. Whenever the
proposed development contains or is adjacent, or parallel to a railroad right-
of-way or a major thoroughfare or freeway, provision shall be made for a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way to provide
reasonable use of the intervening land.
   (E)   Participation in costs of improvements. The city may participate in
the costs of improvements required by this section in order to achieve
proportionality between the traffic impacts created by the proposed development
and the obligation to provide adequate roadways. The construction of
improvements and the provisions for participation in costs by the city shall be
included in a developer’s agreement.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.126 STREET AND DRIVEWAY ACCESS.
   (A)   Access.
      (1)   To ensure adequate access to each subdivision, there should be at
least two points of ingress and egress to the city’s improved thoroughfare
system for developments of more than 30 units. The city may require that more
than two access points be constructed if the configuration, number of lots or
other consideration that creates the need for the additional access points. TWO
POINTS OF VEHICULAR ACCESS shall be construed to mean that the subdivision has
at least two road entrances accessing the subdivision from the city’s improved
thoroughfare system.
      (2)   In cases where the shape of the land does not allow for two points
of ingress or egress, a single median divided entrance with a minimum length of
200 feet may be allowed, if petitioned for and approved by City Council.
   (B)   Limitations on driveway access.
      (1)   To minimize traffic hazards created by numerous intersections along
major thoroughfares, where a residential subdivision will abut on or contain an
existing or proposed arterial street, the street shall be designed so that
direct vehicular access from any residential lot to such arterial street is
prohibited. Where other means of access are not available or permitted, private
easements for access shall be provided when approved by the Council. The street
system should be designed to allow a minimum of individual access drives to
collector streets or constructed to a wider alternative section to allow for
individual access drives.
      (2)   Streets shall be designed to conform to existing or proposed
driveway openings (including those on the other side of an existing or planned
median-divided arterial, in which case new streets shall align with such
driveway openings such that median openings can be shared).
      (3)   To the greatest extent possible, the number of lots fronting along
residential collector streets shall be minimized in order to ensure adequate
traffic safety and efficiency. No more than 20% of the total centerline length
of a collector street may have residential lots fronting onto the collector on
each side of the street without constructing to a wider alternative section.
      (4)   If, in the opinion of the City Engineer, traffic safety concerns so
necessitate, the Engineer may require a residential subdivision to be designed
to provide rear entry access from a private access easement.
      (5)   For collector or arterial streets which have limited or no
individual access, the following note may be required on the face of any plat
intended to be filed in the county plat records: “No lot within this addition
shall be allowed driveway access onto _______________Street.”
   (C)   Reserved strips. The reservation of private ownerships of strips of
land at the end of or alongside proposed or existing streets intended solely or
primarily for the purpose of controlling access to property not included in the
development is prohibited.
   (D)   Half-streets. Half-streets are prohibited except where essential to
the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformance with other
requirements of this chapter and where the City Council finds it will be
practicable to obtain dedication when the adjoining land is platted.
   (E)   Emergency access. Each subdivision shall be designed to provide
adequate emergency access for public safety vehicles.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.127 RIGHT-OF-WAY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. The applicant shall be required to dedicate right-of-way as
shown in the Thoroughfare Plan, or as required in this section for all streets,
or parts thereof, within or at the perimeter of the subdivision. Such roadways
are shown on the city’s Comprehensive Plan and all affected areas being platted
are required to conform to this Plan. The design speeds, right-of-way and
pavement widths, street classifications, drive lanes, edge lanes, median
requirements and center turn lanes shall be as set forth in the design
standards, as amended and the Thoroughfare Plan. The street classifications are
as follows: freeway, arterial, collector and residential (local).
   (B)   Additional right-of-way. An additional right-of-way may be required
for the following purposes:
      (1)   At intersections where adjacent property is zoned for commercial,
industrial or other high intensity use to provide free right turns, center turn
lanes or other beneficial alignments intended to alleviate existing or
potential traffic congestion;
      (2)   To eliminate street intersection off-sets, as determined by the
City Engineer; or
      (3)   When necessitated by one or more of the factors set forth in §
153.125.
   (C)   Slope easements. The dedication of easements, in addition to dedicated
rights-of-way shall be required whenever, due to topography, additional width
is necessary to provide adequate earth slopes. Such slopes shall be no steeper
than three feet horizontal run to one foot vertical height, or a three-to-one
(3:1) slope.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.128 STREET DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Curvilinear design requirements. Curvilinear streets will be required
in at least 20% of the streets in residential subdivisions as measured by
street centerline length. Horizontal curve design must be such that safe travel
through the curve can be anticipated at the design speed for the roadway. In no
case shall the centerline horizontal curves be less than as shown in the design
standards.
   (B)   Design speed. Streets should be designed for a maximum speed based
upon their classification, as set forth in §
153.127(A).
   (C)   Intersections.
      (1)   All thoroughfares shall be continuous or in alignment with existing
streets, unless variations are deemed advisable by the Commission and City
Council upon consideration of the City Engineer’s recommendation.
      (2)   Off-center street intersections (in which intersections are closer
than 200 feet for thoroughfares or 125 feet for residential streets) shall not
be approved except in unusual cases.
      (3)   More than two streets intersecting at one point shall be avoided
except where it is impractical to secure a proper street system otherwise.
Where several streets converge at one point, setback lines, special rounding or
cutoff of corners and/or a traffic circle may be required to ensure safety and
facility of traffic movement.
      (4)   No street shall intersect any other street at an angle of less than
75 degrees.
      (5)   The number of minor or local street off-sets shall be minimized
but, when approved, shall be off-set a minimum distance of 125 feet on
centerlines. At the intersection of two collector and/or arterial streets, no
off-sets are permitted.
      (6)   Acute angle intersections approved by the City Engineer are to have
25 feet or greater radii at acute corners.
   (D)   Hierarchy of street pattern.
      (1)   Where a development will abut or contain an existing or proposed
arterial street, a plan shall be approved which would provide a minimum number
of intersections along each arterial street.
      (2)   Arterial streets should be intersected only by other arterial
streets or collector streets rather than minor streets.
      (3)   There shall be a minimum of 2,000 feet between intersections of
arterials and/or collector streets.
      (4)   There shall be no median break at intersections of arterial streets
and/or collector streets, and they must be at an interval of 600 feet or
greater.
      (5)   Street layout shall provide for continuation of collector streets
in areas between thoroughfares.
      (6)   Local streets shall extend to the tract boundary to provide future
connection with adjoining unplatted lands.
      (7)   Collector streets may intersect arterial streets upon specific
approval of the City Engineer and the administrative official.
      (8)   Residential or local streets should be planned to serve only local
traffic.
   (E)   Horizontal alignment and vertical alignment. Horizontal and vertical
alignment shall be in accordance with the design standards. Reverse circular
curves having a common tangent shall be separated by a tangent section in
accordance with the minimum tangents set forth in the design standards.
   (F)   Street cross-slopes. For drainage, all streets shall have a cross-
slope. Cross-slopes shall be as defined in the city’s design standards.
   (G)   Street drainage.
      (1)   Topographic maps with contour intervals of two feet (or less) and
details of existing drainage structures and watercourses shall be submitted
along with calculations for all watersheds affecting areas of the proposed
storm drain design. Drainage design shall be computed as noted in the drainage
section of this chapter. Maps showing the delineation and flow from each
drainage area must be included in the plans along with all hydraulic
calculations. Street and drainage profiles shall show the location of the
hydraulic grade line.
      (2)   No streets shall be designed or constructed to a grade less than
established in the design standards.
   (H)   Curb radii. Radii at street intersections shall not be less than 20
feet for residential streets and 30 feet for thoroughfare streets. If
necessary, property lines shall be adjusted accordingly.
   (I)   Variations. If existing topographic features prohibit the reasonable
use of the above-specified design requirements, the City Engineer may approve a
variation. A request for the variation must be made in writing to the city and
must include an accurate topographic map of the area in question showing the
proposed design.
   (J)   Cul-de-sacs.
      (1)   A maximum number of 29 dwelling units are permitted on a cul-de-sac
street permanently designed as such.
      (2)   The length of the cul-de-sac should not exceed 600 feet or be less
than 150 feet in length. However, density of development, topography, lot sizes
and other significant factors will be weighed in determining the length of a
cul-de-sac street.
   (K)   Block lengths. Residential blocks shall not be longer than 1,000 feet.
Five hundred feet is the desirable minimum. Conditions of topography,
surrounding platted subdivisions or circulation requirements may dictate
further study of the block length. Extremely short block lengths should be
avoided as well to eliminate the potential for increased traffic congestion
created by too many intersections.
   (L)   Dead-end streets.
      (1)   Dead-end streets shall be permitted only where a future extension
or connection is to be made. Street stubs shall be provided into adjacent
property at a minimum of 1,000 feet apart. If adjacent property is undeveloped
and a street must terminate temporarily, the right-of-way must extend to the
boundaries of the plat.
      (2)   Barricades and other traffic controls shall be installed by the
developer at dead-ends as required by the design standards.
      (3)   In the event that dead-end streets either dedicated or constructed
are not to be extended, permanent turn around facilities shall be constructed
by the developer not extending such street. Appropriate provisions shall be
made for access to adjoining undeveloped land.
      (4)   Temporary paved turn-arounds which meet the requirements of the
design standards are to be provided at ends of streets more than one lot deep
that will be extended in the future. The following note should be placed on the
plat: “Cross-hatched area is temporary easement for turn-around until street is
extended [insert direction] in recorded plat.”
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.129 DEFERRAL OF OBLIGATION.
   (A)   Generally. Upon request of the applicant, the obligation to dedicate
or improve thoroughfare rights-of-way or to make intersection improvements
imposed on a subdivision application may be deferred to a later stage of the
development process. As a condition of deferring the obligation to dedicate
rights-of-way for or to improve thoroughfares, which deferral shall be in the
sole discretion of the city, the city shall require the developer to execute a
developer’s agreement specifying the amount and timing of the rights-of-way
dedication or improvements to thoroughfares.
   (B)   Options. Whenever the proposed development’s share of the costs of a
thoroughfare or traffic-control improvement needed to mitigate traffic
generated by the subdivision is less than 100%, the city in its sole
discretion, may participate in the excess costs for one or more improvements,
or aggregate the costs of improving multiple thoroughfares or intersections
identified in the traffic impact analysis, and require improvements to only
some of the thoroughfares or intersections affected by the development.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.130 PAVING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Streets. All streets shall be constructed and paved to city standards
and within the right-of-way as required by the Thoroughfare Plan and in
accordance with the city’s design standards, as may be amended from time to
time. All streets, public and private, excluding residential areas where lot
size is three-quarters of an acre or larger, shall include curb and gutter
drainage with enclosed underground conduit and meeting the following
requirements:
      (1)   Soil samples for determining the plasticity of the natural soils
will be taken at locations specified by the project engineer and approved by
the City Engineer; and
      (2)   The pavement width and materials shall be as required in the design
standards as may be adopted and amended from time to time.
   (B)   Parking lots. Parking lots shall be constructed of concrete a minimum
of five inches in thickness and shall have curbs and adequate outfall for
drainage.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.131 PRIVATE STREETS.
   (A)   Generally. The city shall not approve a development with private
streets unless the requirements of this section are satisfied. If approved, a
homeowners’ or property owners’ association is responsible for the cost of
maintenance of private streets.
   (B)   City services. The city has no obligation to maintain private streets.
Depending on the characteristics of the subdivision, the city may not provide
certain other services, such as routine police patrols, enforcement of traffic
and parking ordinances, and preparation of accident reports.
   (C)   Maintenance standards. Maintenance, amenities and landscaping of
private streets shall conform to the same standards regulating the maintenance,
amenities and landscaping of public streets.
   (D)   Retention of easements. The developer shall dedicate a utility,
drainage and emergency access easement in private streets for the city and
other utility companies for the following purposes:
      (1)   To provide unrestricted use of the property for utilities and their
maintenance;
      (2)   To extend easement rights to all utility providers including cable
companies operating within the city;
      (3)   To provide the city with the right of access for any purpose
related to the exercise of a governmental service or function, including, but
not limited to, fire and police protection, inspection and code enforcement;
and
      (4)   To permit the city to remove any vehicle or obstacle within the
private street lot that impairs emergency access.
   (E)   City assumption of maintenance. The covenants of the deed restrictions
shall provide that if the homeowners’ association, its successors or assigns
fails or refuses to adequately maintain private streets and related
appurtenances, the city shall have the right, but not the obligation, to assume
temporarily the duty of performing the association’s maintenance obligations at
any time after the expiration of 60 days after receipt by the association, its
successors or assigns of written notice from the city specifying the nature and
the following:
      (1)   Upon assuming maintenance obligations, the city shall have the
right to collect, when they become due, the assessments levied by the
homeowners’ association for the purposes of repairing and maintaining the
private streets and related appurtenances, and if necessary, the city shall
have the right to enforce the payment of delinquent assessments in the manner
set forth in the association’s documents;
      (2)   The city shall also have the right to levy an assessment upon each
lot on a pro rata basis for the cost of such maintenance, which assessment
shall constitute an assessment lien upon the lot against which each assessment
is made; and
      (3)   Under no circumstances shall the city be liable to the association
or any lot owner or their respective heirs, successors or assigns for negligent
acts or omissions relating in any manner to maintaining, improving and
preserving the private streets and related appurtenances.
   (F)   Access restrictions.
      (1)   Each entrance to a private street shall be marked with a sign
stating that it is a private street.
      (2)   Either a guard house or an access control device such as a gate or
cross arm shall be constructed at each entrance.
      (3)   All restricted access entrances shall be manned 24 hours every day,
or an alternative means shall be provided of ensuring access to the subdivision
by the city and other utility service providers with appropriate
identification.
      (4)   If the association fails to maintain reliable access as required to
provide city services, the city shall have the right to enter the subdivision
and remove any gate or device which is a barrier to access at the sole expense
of the association.
   (G)   Restricted access entrance design standards. Private streets which
have access controlled by a gate, cross arm or other access control device
shall conform to the following requirements:
      (1)   The street must have a minimum uninterrupted pavement width of 24
feet at the location of the access control device;
      (2)   If an overhead barrier is used, it shall have a minimum height
above the road surface as required by the Fire Code for fire lanes;
      (3)   The design of all gates, cross arms and access control devices,
including automatic opening systems and manual backup systems, shall be
approved by the Fire Department before installation;
      (4)   The gates, cross arms and access control devices shall be tested
and accepted by the Fire Department before being put into operation;
      (5)   Gate designs may incorporate one or two gate sections to meet the
required minimum width of 24 feet; and
      (6)   If the entrance incorporates a median, guard shack or similar
structure that necessitates a divided gate arrangement, the gate and street
pavement widths may be reduced if approved by the Fire Department. This
approval shall be contingent upon the subdivision having a second approved
means of access, but in no case shall any single gate or street pavement have a
clear opening of less than 15 feet.
   (H)   Visitor entrance design standards. At least one entrance to a
subdivision with private streets shall be equipped for visitor access. In
addition to the above restricted access entrance design standards, the visitor
entrance shall be equipped with a call or code box located at least 50 feet
from the boundary of the subdivision to provide for visitors calling in an
automobile queuing. A turn-around space with a minimum outside radius of 30
feet shall be located between any call or code box and the access control
device to allow vehicles denied access to safely exit onto public streets in a
head out position. A sign shall be erected next to the edge of such turn-around
space to prohibit vehicle parking in such space. A residents’ entrance used in
combination with a visitor entrance shall comply with the requirements of this
division (H).
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.132 SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Requirements generally. Sidewalks will be required to be constructed
on both sides of the street for developments adjacent to all collectors and
arterials. This shall include the dedication of necessary right-of-way or
pedestrian access easement and the construction of sidewalks according to the
specifications provided herein.
   (B)   Requirements for non-residential subdivisions.
      (1)   The developer or builder of a non-residential subdivision shall
install sidewalks along the tract being developed adjacent to all arterial and
collector streets, including all development adjacent to Interstate 35, as per
the State Department of Transportation requirements. Sidewalks shall be
constructed either one foot from the property line within the street right-of-
way or within a dedicated sidewalk easement and shall extend along the street
frontage including the side of corner lots and block ends. When, in the opinion
of the administrative official, a non-residential development is located in an
area to which sidewalks would not provide a benefit to the public, the
requirement for sidewalks to be dedicated and constructed may be waived.
      (2)   Sidewalks shall be constructed in parking areas to assure safe
pedestrian access from parking spaces to structures and shall be constructed so
as to assure uninterrupted connections between existing pedestrian walkways.
      (3)   Each developer and/or builder of a non-residential subdivision
shall construct sidewalks at the time of construction of the development. In
those circumstances where a sidewalk would impact the construction of driveways
and access walks, the sidewalks shall be constructed before the city’s final
building inspection. A certificate of occupancy will not be issued until
required sidewalks are in place.
      (4)   Construction plans shall show the location of all proposed
sidewalks and shall state at what stage of the project they will be
constructed.
   (C)   Sidewalk specifications. All sidewalks shall be at least four feet
wide within a residential subdivision and at least five feet wide in a non-
residential subdivision and along thoroughfares and major collectors. Sidewalks
shall be constructed on both sides of the street. Sidewalks shall be
constructed in accordance with the requirements of the design standards.
   (D)   Americans with disability (ADA) access ramps.
      (1)   An ADA access ramp shall be constructed at any point a proposed
sidewalk intersects a street with the exception of walks leading from the
street to the door of a residence. If there is no sidewalk, provisions shall be
made for an ADA ramp at each corner of an intersection. Access ramps must be
constructed with a maximum one-inch wide expansion material between the street
and ramp flush with the finish grade.
      (2)   Care shall be taken to ensure a uniform grade meeting ADA
requirements on the ramp, free of sags and short grades.
   (E)   Maintenance.
      (1)   It shall be the duty and obligation of the owners and occupants of
real property abutting upon sidewalks, at their own cost and expense, to
maintain and keep the sidewalks bordering their property level and free of
depressions, excavations, elevations, inconsistencies, obstacles, obstructions
or encroachments, natural or artificial, above or below ground level, or which
overlap, impinge upon or appropriate any part of the sidewalk area or the space
eight feet above it.
      (2)   Any damage done to a sidewalk by the city or a city-hired
contractor shall be repaired by the city or contractor.
      (3)   Any damage done to a sidewalk by a utility shall be repaired by the
utility.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.133 STREET APPURTENANCES.
   (A)   Generally. The cost and installation of the following items are the
responsibility of the developer and are required at the time the infrastructure
improvements are constructed:
      (1)   Street lights, where required;
      (2)   Traffic signals;
      (3)   Traffic signs and street name blades;
      (4)   Pavement markings; and
      (5)   Temporary traffic-control devices for use during construction.
   (B)   Street lights. Any new development in the city shall provide street
lights. The developer is responsible for engineering, material, installation
and activation of street lights as required by the approved street lighting
plans. All plan approvals and construction scheduling must be coordinated
through the administrative official.
   (C)   Traffic signals. When the area being platted adds a driveway or street
approach to an existing signal, the signal hardware must be modified to serve
the development. The developer is responsible for engineering, material and
construction of the upgrade to the existing signal.
   (D)   Traffic signs and street name blades. The developer shall supply,
erect and install all of the required traffic signs and street name blades as
determined by the City Engineer. All signs must be specific to the neighborhood
development, in accordance with the adopted design standards. The developer is
responsible for supplying all necessary posts, hardware and concrete to
complete the sign assembly installation.
   (E)   Specialty signs and lighting. Specialty lighting and signs shall not
be approved unless provision is made for maintenance by a homeowners’ or
property owners’ association.
   (F)   Pavement markings. The developer shall install pavement markings
necessary to serve the property being platted in accordance with the approved
plans.
   (G)   Traffic-control during construction.
      (1)   The developer is responsible for installing and maintaining all
necessary barricades, temporary signs, pavement transitions and pavement
markings to safely convey traffic through the construction area in accordance
with the Texas Uniform Traffic Control Device Manual, State Department of
Highways and Public Transportation and the Barricades Manual of the city.
      (2)   The owner is also responsible for the removal of all barricades,
temporary signs, pavement transitions and pavement markings.
   (H)   Speed humps. Speed humps shall not be permitted on city streets
without approval of the City Council.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.134 TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS REQUIRED.
   (A)   When required. Every application for a proposed development that
generates traffic in excess of 2,000 average daily trips based upon the latest
edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation
Manual, or with respect to an application which the City Engineer determines
that the characteristics of the proposed subdivision necessitate analysis,
shall be accompanied by a traffic impact analysis based on the ITE Manual,
prepared by the developer at the developer’s expense in accordance with
standard transportation engineering practices. The analysis shall be prepared
for purposes of determining the adequacy of the road network to serve the
proposed subdivision, and whether off-site road dedication and improvements
should be made to mitigate the effects of the proposed subdivision.
   (B)   Requirement for update. An updated traffic impact analysis shall be
submitted by the applicant with each final plat submitted for approval if, in
the opinion of the City Engineer, the final plat changes significantly (such
as, add lots, modifies or adds street connections and the like) from the
approved overall development plan.
   (C)   Analysis. The traffic impact analysis shall determine: trips to be
generated by the proposed subdivision; assignment of such trips to the road
network analyzed; the capacity of affected thoroughfares before and after the
proposed subdivision; specific recommendations for thoroughfare improvements
and traffic-control modifications needed to mitigate the traffic from the
proposed subdivision; and the subdivision’s proportionate share of the costs of
such improvements and modifications.
   (D)   City evaluation and action. The city shall evaluate the adequacy of
the applicant’s traffic impact analysis. Based upon such evaluation, the city
shall determine whether the application may be approved in the absence of
dedication of rights-of-way or construction of improvements to each affected
thoroughfare and the extent of the applicant’s obligations to make such
dedications or improvements.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.135 ALLEYS.
   Alleys or loading courts are prohibited.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022) Penalty, see §
153.999
WATER, SEWER AND DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS
§ 153.150 WATER AND SEWER IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Policy. It is the policy of the city that all water and sewer
improvements within, adjacent to, servicing or being impacted by any proposed
subdivision or development be regulated by the city. City sewer and water
services are only provided to properties within the area of the city’s
certificate of convenience and necessity and within the city.
   (B)   Controlling ordinance. All requirements related to water and sewer
improvements which are within, adjacent to, servicing or otherwise being
impacted by any proposed development are described in the design standards, as
amended.
   (C)   Minimum size. The minimum pipe size of all water and sewer mains shall
be six inches in diameter and shall conform to the design standards, as
amended. Water mains eight inches or larger in diameter shall be looped.
   (D)   Adequate water for domestic use and fire protection.
      (1)   It shall be the policy of the city to ensure that all future
developments within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be
provided with the water in sufficient volume and pressure for domestic use and
fire protection. Where the land to be platted lies within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city and the city is not the water supplier, the Council
may grant a waiver to the requirement for adequate fire protection if it finds
that: the proposed development will meet the land development rules and
regulations of the county in which the property is located; the development is
to be served solely by on-site sewage disposal systems; and water lines and
other water facilities serving the site are designed and sized to carry future
fire flows under the city’s criteria and meets all city design standards.
      (2)   Fire hydrants with valves shall be installed at each street
intersection and at a minimum of 500 feet spacing in any residential zoning and
300 feet spacing in all other zones. Additional fire hydrants shall be placed
as necessary such that all ground portions of all buildings in the subdivision
can be reached with a normal 300-foot lay of fire hose. In most instances,
commercial buildings will be required to have fire suppression systems and fire
spigots in addition to the normal fire hydrants.
      (3)   The approval of a plat by the city does not constitute any
representation, assurance or guarantee by the city of the adequacy and
availability of water for domestic use and fire protection to the property
within the boundaries of the subdivision.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.151 EXTENSION OF WATER AND SANITARY SEWER MAINS.
   (A)   Required extensions. All new subdivisions and developments shall be
required to extend across the full width of the subdivision or lot in such an
alignment that it can be extended to the next property. The developer shall
furnish, install, construct or extend at his or her own expense, water and
sanitary sewer distribution facilities necessary for the proper development of
the subdivision.
   (B)   Impact. Properties which are served by water and sanitary sewer at the
time of application for plat approval shall not be required to install
additional facilities unless the current lines are not of adequate capacity to
serve the proposed development; in which case the developer will be required to
install adequate facilities.
   (C)   Adequate water system.
      (1)   No application shall be approved unless the developer demonstrates
that there will be a sufficient volume and pressure for domestic use and fire
protection to serve the subdivision concurrent with development. The water
system serving the subdivision must be deemed adequate under the rules and
regulations and the fire flow regulations contained in the design standards.
      (2)   The developer shall demonstrate that the water system serving the
development, other than approach mains to connect the development to the water
distribution system will be adequate to serve the development at the time of
preliminary plat approval. The approach main shall be extended to serve the
entire subdivision subject to a subdivision prior to the time of final plat
approval for the second phase of the plat unless the extension is part of a
funded capital improvement project that the city has initiated consistent with
its adopted capital improvements plan for water facilities.
      (3)   The owner of each lot shown on a plat within the city or its
extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be required to connect to the city’s water
system if there is a connection to a main less than 200 feet from the property
line.
   (D)   Adequate wastewater system.
      (1)   No application shall be approved unless the developer demonstrates
that there will be an adequate wastewater system to serve the subdivision
concurrent with development. The wastewater system serving the subdivision
shall be deemed adequate under the rules and regulations of the State
Commission on Environmental Quality, the State Department of Health and city
ordinances, as the same may be amended from time to time or the city, as may be
applicable.
      (2)   The owner of each lot shown on a plat within the city or its
extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be required to connect to the city’s
wastewater system if there is a connection to a main less than 200 feet from
the property line.
      (3)   Where the city is not collecting the sewage, the developer shall
provide assurances that wastewater mains shall be extended to serve the
subdivision prior to the time of final plat approval for the second phase of a
subdivision.
      (4)   The developer shall demonstrate that the wastewater system serving
the development, other than approach mains to connect the development to the
sanitary sewer collection system, will be adequate at the time of preliminary
plat approval. On-site sewage systems shall conform to the rules of the State
Commission on Environmental Quality, State Department of Health, the county and
applicable city ordinances, as the same may be amended from time to time.
   (E)   Water and sanitary sewer line locations.
      (1)   Along state highways, water and sanitary sewer lines are required
to be constructed on both sides of the roadway. New lines crossing existing
streets shall be placed by boring. A casing shall be required under arterial
and collector roadways. Open cut excavation will not be allowed to cross
existing streets, unless approved in advance and in writing by the City
Engineer.
      (2)   All public water and sanitary sewer lines located on private
property shall be centered in an easement. Lines shall not be located under
paved surfaces where possible.
   (F)   Adequacy where utility connection not required. Where the installation
of sanitary sewer facilities is not proposed or required, the size of the
subdivided lots shall meet the minimum lot size standards of the zoning
district in which the land is located, and the city’s minimum lot size
requirements for individual disposal facilities for land inside city limits,
and the minimum lot size requirements for individual disposal facilities for
the county. The lot shall be of sufficient size for individual disposal
facilities, including the necessary lateral lines, and the developer shall
install individual disposal devices for each lot at the same time improvements
are erected thereon. Any such individual sewage disposal system shall be
constructed in accordance with the State Health Department specifications and
subject to the approval of the city.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.152 OVERSIZED WATER AND SANITARY SEWER MAINS.
   In order to provide appropriate capacity for reasonably anticipated
development in a drainage basin or service area, the City Engineer, with the
approval of the City Council, may require a developer to install a utility line
or system improvement larger than necessary to support the development. The
size of the facilities required to serve the development shall be determined by
the City Engineer. The City may compensate the developer for the difference in
cost mandated by oversizing by pro rata agreement or city participation. Upon
written request of the developer, credit for development fees may be
transferred from the current development project to subsequent development
projects, subdivisions or phases undertaken by the developer.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.153 DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. An adequate storm sewer system consisting of inlets, pipes,
channel improvements or grading, driveway adjustments or other underground
structures with approved outlets shall be constructed where runoff of storm
water and the prevention of erosion cannot be accomplished satisfactorily by
surface drainage facilities. Areas subject to flood conditions or inadvertent
storm water retention, such as standing or pooling water, as established by the
City Engineer, will not be considered for development until adequate drainage
has been provided. Drainage systems, including all conveyances, inlets,
conduits, structures, basins or outlets used to drain storm water, must be
designed and constructed to promote the health, safety and welfare of the
property owner and the public. Adequate provision must be made for the
acceptance, collection, conveyance, detention and discharge of storm water
runoff drainage onto, through and originating within the subdivision. Storm
water must be discharged in an acceptable form and at a controlled rate so as
not to endanger human life or public or private property. No final plat
approval may be issued until proper provision has been made for drainage.
   (B)   Design criteria. The criteria for use in designing storm sewers,
culverts, bridges, drainage channels and drainage facilities shall conform to
the design standards. In no case shall drainage areas be diverted artificially
to adjacent properties or across roadways. All storm drainage facilities must
be designed and constructed to safely drain a 100-year return frequency flood
as outlined in the design standards, as amended. Paved streets and alleys,
ditches, and swales may be used for emergency overflow capacity in parallel
with enclosed systems provided the requirements of the design standards.
   (C)   Lot to lot drainage. Storm water drainage from one lot onto another
shall not be allowed unless such does not pose any harm or inconvenience to the
downstream property owner(s), unless specifically approved by the City
Engineer, and unless the necessary off-site drainage easement is procured on
the affected properties, or if applicable, letters of permission from the
property owner have been obtained and approved by the city.
   (D)   Developer responsibilities. The developer shall ensure that all
drainage improvements within public easements or rights-of-way are functioning
properly prior to the expiration of the maintenance bond. The developer shall
be responsible for removing any significant build-up of sediment or debris from
drainage improvements, with the exception of backlot and side lot drainage
swales, at the eleventh month of the second year for the required two-year
maintenance bond for the applicable facilities. The city shall inspect the
improvements to determine any maintenance or correction of deficiencies at the
conclusion of this period.
   (E)   Layout requirements. To reduce storm water runoff, and resulting
erosion, sedimentation and conveyance of non-point source pollutants, the
layout of the street network, lots and building sites shall, to the greatest
extent possible, be sited and aligned to minimize the amount of cut and fill on
slopes, and shall minimize the amount of cut and fill on slopes in order to
minimize the amount of land area that is disturbed during construction. All
erosion and sedimentation controls shall conform to the design standards.
   (F)   Runoff. No proposed development shall be constructed which impedes or
constricts runoff from an upstream watershed.
   (G)   Floodplain. Unless in compliance with the flood damage prevention
ordinance (Chapter 152), land subject to flooding, as designated in a FEMA 100-
year floodplain, shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor shall it
be platted for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or
property or aggravate the flood hazard. Lots may be platted which include
designated floodplain; however, the lot must contain sufficient buildable area
outside of the designated floodplain, based on current zoning requirements. 
   (H)   Detention and retention ponds. Detention or retention ponds shall be
required to limit the peak rate of discharge for the design storm events stated
below to pre-development rates or rates which will not cause an increase in
flooding or channel instability downstream when considered in conjunction with
ultimate watershed development and downstream drainage capacities. The pond
shall meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Outlet structures shall be staged to prevent any increase at the
five-, ten-, 25-, 50- and 100-year flow levels. Outflow structures should be
well maintained and unobstructed. Provisions for maintenance shall be included
with plat or deed covenants;
      (2)   Unless approved by the Council, the pond shall remain the property
of the developer or homeowners’ association, and shall not be the direct
responsibility of the city; and
      (3)   The pond shall be landscaped, designed and constructed to meet the
requirements of the design standards. The pond shall be sealed and aerated.
   (I)   Channels. Open ditches may be used to carry surface runoff in areas in
which enough width is available to accommodate the required section. Capacity
of ditches shall be calculated by Manning’s formula or other method approved by
the City Engineer. Ditches shall be constructed of sufficient size to carry the
intended runoff. The side slopes of all ditches shall be no steeper than four
feet horizontal run to one foot vertical height, or a four to one (4:1) slope.
   (J)   Finished floors (pad sites). The site grading plan and all
construction shall be such that building pads for structures shall drain away
at a minimum of 5% grade in all directions from the structure for at least ten
feet from the edge of structure, then a minimum 2% grade in all directions for
the next 40 feet, unless proper walls, ditches or underground drainage systems
are used to capture and convey 100-year runoff away from the building. In any
area in which localized building flooding appears to be a concern, the
applicant shall set a minimum finish floor elevation and show such on the
grading plans.
   (K)   Design methods.
      (1)   The determination of design discharge of storm drainage water shall
be accomplished in accordance with the following criteria:
         (a)   The rational method (Q = CIA) shall be used on small watersheds
of 200 acres or less; and
         (b)   Unit hydrographic techniques shall be used for areas greater
than 200 acres.
      (2)   The City Engineer prior to the completion of calculations shall
approve the technique and data to be used for the determination of the design
discharge. A complete set of all detailed calculations must be submitted to the
City Engineer for approval prior to the completion of the plans for the
drainage system.
   (L)   Funding. The owner or developer shall fund and construct all storm
drainage outfalls necessary to safely and adequately drain the development.
   (M)   City participation. The city may provide new public drainage outfalls
and public drainage system upgrades to serve existing and future developments
through specific items in the capital improvement bond programs.
 
   (N)   Creeks and drainage areas. All creeks and drainage areas shall be
preserved and protected in their natural condition wherever possible, unless
significant storm drainage improvements are required by the city in these
areas. All development adjacent to creeks and drainage areas shall be in
accordance with the city’s design standards, and with any other city policies
or ordinances related to public access or recreational use of waterways. Sheet
flow into drainage channels or creeks shall be limited to non-erosive
velocities as determined in the design standards.
   (O)   Bridges. Bridges or culverts shall be constructed at all street
locations where flow patterns cross the street and are not intercepted by an
underground storm sewer system or appropriate concrete valley gutter. (Note:
valley gutters on public streets shall not be used to convey more than ten cfs
based on a 100-year event.) Bridges and culverts must accommodate the 100-year
design flows based on fully developed upstream conditions and be designed to
accommodate the needed driving lanes for cross traffic along with any safety
end treatment, protective off-sets, guardrail, signs and/or lighting.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.154 WATER AND SEWER PRO RATA.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish responsibilities
for the extension of water and sewer mains and other public utility
improvements into the various utility basins located within the limits of the
city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, to provide a procedure for
acquiring necessary easements and rights-of-way, and to establish
responsibilities for paying for the cost of constructing the water and sewer
improvements, preparing the engineering and survey work necessary to design and
install the water and sewer improvements, and the cost of inspecting any and
all construction undertaken pursuant to this section.
   (B)   Developer’s responsibilities.
      (1)   In the event that a development proposal is submitted which will
require the use of a public water and/or sewer system, and no such public
system has yet been extended into the area where the proposed development is
located, it will be the responsibility of the developer to comply with the
terms and conditions of this section in order to ensure the immediate
availability of service.
      (2)   It is, and shall remain, the responsibility of each developer to
tie his or her development project into the water or sewer main serving that
specific utility basin or service area. Should a lift station and/or force main
be required in order to utilize a proposed off-site service location, such lift
station and/or force main shall be installed at the developer’s cost. In order
to promote economic development, the city may participate in construction of
water and sewer mains and infrastructure; provided that the city may share in
pro rata reimbursement.
   (C)   Determination of system availability.
      (1)   When a developer plans to undertake a specific development project
within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction and the development will
require service through a public water and/or sewer system, it will be the
responsibility of the developer to contact the City Engineer to determine
system availability. The developer will advise the City Engineer in writing of
the specific location of his or her development, the total size of the
development in acreage, living units and/or square feet of commercial or
industrial space, the type of development and land use to occur within the
subdivision, estimated amount of flows, if available, and the approximate time
when public utilities will be required. The information may be incorporated
into a preliminary plat or development plan application submitted to the
administrative official.
      (2)   The City Engineer shall review the city’s current water and
sanitary sewer system and determine whether service is currently available to
the development. If service is available through an existing main, the City
Engineer shall identify the point on that main where the development will be
permitted to tie into the system and will advise the developer in writing of
the location where a tie-in will be permitted. The City Engineer shall support
such written notice with such map exhibits as are necessary to clearly
delineate the point of tie-in.
      (3)   In the event that a connection to an existing utility main is
possible, the City Engineer will determine if the utility main has been
installed by the city or whether it was installed by a prior developer under
the approach main extension policies of this section. In the event that the
utility main was installed by the city and the city is not entitled to pro rata
reimbursement under the terms of this section, the developer will be advised
that there will be no pro rata reimbursement charge to tie into the utility
main. The developer will be responsible for the entire cost of the service line
connecting his or her development to the utility main. In the event that the
city is due pro rata, the developer shall pay the pro rata charge into the pro
rata escrow account of the city, prior to making a tie-in to the system.
      (4)   If the utility main or a portion of the utility system serving the
development was installed by a prior developer under the approach main
extension policy outlined in this section, the City Engineer will advise the
developer of his or her pro rata share of costs for connection to this line.
The developer shall pay the pro rata charge into the pro rata escrow account of
the city prior to making a tie-in to the system.
   (D)   Construction of approach mains. If the City Engineer should determine
that utility service to a proposed development is not available, he or she
shall notify the developer in writing. In this situation, the developer must
select among the following alternatives:
      (1)   Discontinue his or her proposed development until such time as a
utility system has been installed within the drainage basin or service area;
      (2)   Petition the City Council to expedite the construction of a utility
system capable of serving the proposed development; or
      (3)   Install the necessary utilities to the point necessary to serve the
development. The developer will be responsible for all costs associated with
the installation of necessary utilities, including, but not limited to,
engineering, attorney’s fees, surveying, testing, easement preparation,
easement acquisition, construction and inspection. The public utilities must be
designed and constructed to city standards and specifications as the City
Engineer determines to be applicable. The developer may install the public
utilities or may contract with the city to secure construction of the utilities
by the city. All financial arrangements, including any necessary bonding, shall
be completed prior to the execution of a developer agreement. In the event that
a developer elects to pursue this alternative, he or she will be eligible to
receive a pro rata reimbursement, for a period of ten years from the execution
of the pro rata agreement, from developers who tie into these specific
utilities.
   (E)   Pro rata cost allocation where public utilities are financed by
initial developer.
      (1)   If a public utility system is installed within a service area by a
developer, each subsequent development within the utility basin or service area
which ties into the public utility system shall pay a pro rata share of the
cost of the utility system installed by the initial developer. If the city
installs a public utility system, the City Council may require each subsequent
development within the utility basin or service area which ties into the public
utility system to pay a pro rata share of the cost of the utility system. The
pro rata fee shall be paid prior to connection to the utility system, or before
approval of the final plat, whichever occurs first. The pro rata fee for each
subsequent development seeking service shall be determined on a cost per acre
basis by calculating the proportional area of the new development to the total
area within the utility basin or service area served by the public utility
system, multiplied by the total cost of the public utility system installed by
the initial developer. The total cost of the utilities shall include
construction, engineering, attorney’s fees, surveying, testing, easement
preparation, easement acquisition and inspection costs.
      (2)   Provided the city collects the funds, the initial developer shall
be entitled to a rebate of the pro rata charge against subsequent developers
for a period of ten years following completion and acceptance of the utilities.
At the expiration of the tenth year, the developer will no longer be entitled
to receive any reimbursement.
   (F)   Management of escrow account.
      (1)   The city shall establish an escrow account in the Water and Sewer
Fund for the deposit of all pro rata payments. A separate escrow account shall
be established for each public utility system constructed by an initial
developer. All pro rata fees received from subsequent developments or
subdivisions in that drainage basin or service area shall be deposited in that
specific escrow account.
      (2)   At least once each year, on or about January 30, the administrative
official shall inventory each escrow account to determine what percentage of
those monies is allocable to reimbursable oversizing costs owed by the city as
determined under this section. This allocation shall be determined in the same
proportion that the cost of the oversized line bears to the cost of the line
size that is necessary to serve the development. For other utility system
improvements, the allocation shall be determined in the same proportion that
the cost of the oversized improvements bear to the cost of the minimum
improvements required by city ordinances to serve the development, as
determined by the City Engineer. Upon completion of such inventory, the
administrative official shall transmit all escrow funds due and owing to the
initial developer. Upon payment of these funds, the city will receive a credit
for the amount of money allocable toward its reimbursable oversizing
requirements.
      (3)   The developer shall be responsible for providing to the city, and
maintaining with the city, an accurate current address. When escrowed funds are
available for disbursement, the city shall notify the developer at the address
on file with the city. If the developer fails to withdraw the funds within six
months, the funds shall be forfeited to the city’s Water and Sewer Fund.
      (4)   At no time shall the developer be entitled to receive reimbursement
for a sum greater than the initial cost of the public utilities less the pro
rata share of capacity of that utility system that would have been attributable
to the initial development for its proportionate share of capacity in the
system.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.155 FIRE HYDRANTS AND FIRE LANES.
   (A)   Generally. Fire hydrants with valves shall be installed at each street
intersection and at a minimum of 500 feet spacing in any residential
subdivision and 300 feet spacing in all other zones. Additional fire hydrants
shall be placed as necessary such that all ground portions of all buildings in
the subdivision can be reached with a normal 300-foot lay of fire hose. In most
instances, commercial buildings will be required to have fire suppression
systems and fire spigots in addition to the normal fire hydrants.
   (B)   Specifications.
      (1)   Fire hydrants shall be Mueller, Waterous or other equal model
approved by the City Engineer. All fire hydrants shall include a line valve
between the fire hydrant and the water main.
      (2)   Where possible, fire hydrants shall be located not further than 15
feet from a street or fire lane.
      (3)   Fire lanes shall not be narrower than 24 feet.
      (4)   Blue pavement reflectors, meeting the criteria of the Fire
Department, shall be installed at the center of the street(s) adjacent to each
fire hydrant location.
   (C)   Blocking. Fire hydrants, valves and pipe ends shall be blocked with
unreinforced concrete (at least 2,500 psi) as shown in the city’s standard
water details. If blocking for a particular situation is not given in the city
details, then the Heart of Texas Council of Governments details shall be met.
In no instance shall rocks be in contact with the pipe or fittings.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022) Penalty, see §
153.999
ELECTRIC UTILITY REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.170 UNDERGROUNDING REQUIRED.
   (A)   Generally. All electric lateral and service lines throughout the
interior of residential subdivisions shall be placed underground and in
dedicated easements. This provision does not require the underground
installation of transmission lines or of feeder lines placed along the
perimeter of a subdivision.
   (B)   Appurtenances. Wherever electric lateral and service lines are
required to be placed underground, lines carrying telephone service, data
transmission, cable television and street lighting shall also be placed
underground.
   (C)   Supporting structures. Within the interior of residential
subdivisions, all electrical, telephone, data transmission or cable television
support equipment necessary for underground installation, including
transformers, amplifiers, switching devices and the like shall be pedestal- or
pad-mounted, or shall be placed underground.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.171 OWNER TO BEAR COSTS.
   (A)   Responsibility. The developer shall arrange to reimburse the utility
company for the difference in cost between the installation of such service and
the installation of equivalent overhead service in accordance with the
provisions of the utility’s tariff, if any.
   (B)   Arrangement for payment. No utility shall be required to begin
construction of underground facilities unless and until the owner has made
arrangements satisfactory to the utility company for the payment of the
difference between the cost of overhead facilities and underground facilities.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.172 EXCEPTIONS TO UNDERGROUNDING REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Temporary service. Temporary service during construction may be
provided by overhead utility lines and facilities prior to activation of the
underground service. Following activation of the underground permanent service,
the temporary overhead service shall be removed within 45 days.
   (B)   Existing facilities. Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to
require any existing overhead facilities to be placed underground or to
prohibit the upgrading, reconstruction or reconductoring of any existing
overhead facilities with overhead construction.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.185 LOTTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Fronting street. Each lot shall abut on a public street or a private
street. Private streets will be allowed only if approved by the Commission and
the City Council and if the standards set forth in this chapter are met.
   (B)   Minimum size. All lots that are not served by a public or quasi-public
community sewer system, shall contain a minimum lot area as required by the
county to support a private septic tank and leach field.
   (C)   Double fronted lots. Double fronted residential lots shall not be
allowed. However, lots which are backed up to an arterial street shall be
allowed when there is no access allowed from these lots to the arterial street.
Access may also be limited to collector streets for lots which have double
frontage. Where lots have double frontage, building setback lines shall be
established for each street frontage. Setbacks shall be defined as per the
zoning regulations with the front of the lot established on the street with the
lesser classification. If both streets are of the same classification, the
administrative official shall determine which street is designated as the front
of the lot.
   (D)   Side lot lines. All side lot lines shall be perpendicular to the
right-of-way lines or radial in the case of a cul-de-sac or curvilinear design.
   (E)   Corner lots. All corner lots within the city shall have setback lines
on both streets as required by the zoning regulations.
   (F)   Setback. All lots within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city
shall have a minimum 20-foot building setback line from all streets adjacent to
the lot.
   (G)   Conformance with zoning regulations. All lots within the city shall
meet the requirements of the zoning regulations or where applicable, the
requirements in an approved development agreement for a subdivision within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city.
   (H)   Irregular-shaped lots. Irregular-shaped lots shall have sufficient
width at the building line to meet lot width and frontage requirements, and
shall provide a building pad without encroachment into front, side or rear yard
setbacks or into any type of easement. The rear lot width shall be sufficient
to provide access for all necessary utilities, including access for driveways
and solid waste collection.
   (I)   Prohibited lots. Triangular, greatly elongated or tapered, flag or
panhandle lots are prohibited.
   (J)   Lots backed onto street. A residential lot shall not back onto any
residential street or collector street within a residential area or
neighborhood, and shall not have more than one-half of its perimeter along
streets.
   (K)   Access limitation. Residential lots shall not have direct access onto
thoroughfare streets, except as provided in §
153.126(B)(1), and direct access from residential lots shall be permitted on
collector streets only where design conditions do not permit any other
possibility.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.186 SIGHT TRIANGLE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Restriction. There shall be no tree, shrub, plant, sign, soil, fence,
retainer wall or other view obstruction having a height greater than two feet
within the sight triangle. This height shall be measured above a line drawn
between the top of curb or edge of pavement of both streets at the point where
the referenced line intersects the top of curb or edge of pavement. The sight
triangle shall be the triangle made by extending 25 feet along each property
line from the property corner at an intersection.
   (B)   Exception. This restriction shall not apply to trees within the
triangle having a diameter of less than 12 inches when such trees are trimmed
at all times so that no branch or growth is less than nine feet above the above
referenced measurement line.
   (C)   Plat notation. All final plats which depict intersections of public
right-of-way shall have the following statement on the face of the plat prior
to filing in the county plat records: “The owners of all corner lots shall
maintain sight triangles in accordance with the City’s Subdivision Ordinance.”
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.187 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.
   (A)   Permanent survey reference monuments. Concrete monuments, eight inches
in diameter and 12 inches long, shall be placed on all boundary corners which
are along existing dedicated right-of-way at the perimeter of the subdivision.
A five-eighth-inch diameter iron rod having a minimum length of 18 inches shall
be placed flush with the top and at the center of the concrete monument. The
monuments shall be set at such an elevation that they will not be disturbed
during construction and the top of the monument shall be flush with or just
below the finished ground elevation.
   (B)   Installation of monuments. Monuments shall be installed before the
recording of the final plat. The developer may install monuments after the
recording of the final plat and after completion of improvements; provided the
developer furnishes the city a letter of assurance certifying the monuments
will be installed as required. All monuments shall be installed prior to
acceptance of the subdivision.
   (C)   Monuments in streets. When placing of monuments in streets is
postponed, adequate ties to the boundary line shall be shown on the plat in
order that monuments may be correctly located and installed following the
paving of streets.
   (D)   Benchmark monuments on headwalls. A brass cap approximately two inches
in diameter shall be placed on top and at one end of all culvert headwalls
within or at the perimeter of the development. Prior to acceptance of the
subdivision, the subdivider’s surveyor shall provide a letter certifying the
elevation of the brass cap (NGVD 1929).
   (E)   Monument verification. Prior to acceptance of public works
improvements by the city, the developer’s surveyor or engineer shall certify
that all monument and markers are in place and correctly positioned.
   (F)   Markers. Lot markers shall be iron pins not less than one-half-inch in
diameter and not less than 18 inches long and shall be set flush with the
ground at each corner lot.
   (G)   Corners. All lot corners shall be set prior to the acceptance of the
public improvements and shall be marked in a way that is traceable to the
responsible registrant or associated employer.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.188 DIGITAL DATA REQUIREMENTS.
   Prior to acceptance of the subdivision, the developer shall provide a
digital computer file or files of the subdivision containing the coordinate
geometry for the subdivision boundaries, lot lines, right-of-way, street
centerlines and easements in a format and on media compatible with the city
system (autocad, DWG and PDF).
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.189 HOMEOWNERS’ OR PROPERTY OWNERS’ ASSOCIATIONS.
   (A)   Applicability. When a development contains common areas, entry
features, screening walls, open space or other improvements not intended to be
dedicated to the city for public use, a homeowners’ or property owners’
association shall be created, and the duties and responsibilities shall be
established in a declaration consistent with state laws.
   (B)   Dedication.
      (1)   The common areas shall be shown on the final plat as separate lots,
along with an adequate form for dedication. This dedication form shall include
language which saves the title to common area properties for the benefit of the
homeowners’ or property owner’s association and expresses a definite
undertaking by the developer to convey the common properties to the homeowners’
association.
      (2)   All facilities, structures, improvements, systems, areas or grounds
to be operated, maintained and/or supervised by an association, other than
those located in public easements or rights-of-way or public parks dedicated to
the city, shall be dedicated by easement or deeded in a fee simple ownership
interest to such association.
   (C)   Responsibilities. The mandatory property owner’s or homeowners’
association shall be responsible for the continuous and perpetual operation,
maintenance and/or supervision of landscape systems, features or elements
located in parkways, common areas, between screening walls or living screens
and adjacent curbs or street pavement edges, adjacent to drainage ways or
drainage structures, or at subdivision entryways.
   (D)   Legal requirements. To assure the establishment of a permanent
homeowners’ or property owners’ association, including its financing and the
rights and responsibilities of the owners in relation to the use, management
and ownership of common areas or common property, the plat, dedication
documents, covenants and other recorded legal agreements must provide for the
following:
      (1)   Creation of an automatic membership, nonprofit homeowners’ or
property owners’ association;
      (2)   Placement of title to the common property in the homeowners’ or
property owners’ association or definite assurance that it automatically will
be so placed within a reasonable, definite time;
      (3)   Appropriate limitation of the uses of the common property;
      (4)   Imposition of an association charge or assessment on each lot in a
manner which will assure sufficient association funds to maintain the common
property or improvements;
      (5)   The grant to each owner voting rights in the association;
      (6)   Identification of the land area within the association’s
jurisdiction including, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   The property to be transferred to public agencies;
         (b)   The individual lots;
         (c)   The common properties to be transferred by the developer to the
association; and
         (d)   Other parcels.
      (7)   Protective covenants which, shall make the association responsible
for the maintenance and operation of all common property, and include
provisions for assessments, to be enforced by lien;
      (8)   Definitions of terms;
      (9)   An initial term of the agreements, covenants and restrictions
establishing the association for a 25-year period and automatic renewal for
successive ten-year periods, and provide that the association may not be
dissolved without the prior written consent of the city;
      (10)   The amendment of any portion of the association’s agreements,
covenants or restrictions pertaining to the use, operation, maintenance and/or
supervision of any facilities, structures, improvements, systems, areas or
grounds that are the responsibility of the association only with the prior
written consent of the city; and
      (11)   An indemnification holding the city harmless from any and all
costs, expenses, suits, demands, liabilities or damages, including attorney’s
fees and costs of suit, incurred or resulting from the city’s removal of any
landscape systems, features or elements.
   (E)   Procedure. The developer shall submit the articles of incorporation of
the homeowners’ or property owners’ association, its bylaws and the restrictive
covenants to the administrative official for approval along with the final
plat. Prior to filing the plat, the developer shall create an incorporated non-
profit homeowners’ association, and record covenants which meet the
requirements of division (D) above.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.190 DEVELOPER’S AGREEMENT.
   (A)   When required. A developer’s agreement is required to be executed in
the event public works improvements are required, when the developer requests a
waiver or credit of fees, credits for prior or proposed improvements or
dedications, requests a pro rata arrangement, or dedicates park land to the
city.
   (B)   Generally.
      (1)   No earthwork, grading, utility, street or drainage improvement
construction or any public or private improvements shall be allowed until the
developer receives approval of the appropriate plat and the city executes a
developer’s agreement with the developer.
      (2)   (a)   The City Administrator is authorized to execute a developer’s
agreement in the form approved by the City Council unless the agreement
provides for one or more of the following:
            1.   Financial participation by the city;
            2.   Waiver of fees; or
            3.   Credits for prior or proposed improvements or dedications.
         (b)   If the developer’s agreement includes any of the foregoing
provisions, the agreement must be approved by City Council.
   (C)   Terms of agreement. The developer’s agreement shall be on a form
prepared by the city and shall contain, at a minimum, the following provisions:
      (1)   Covenants to complete the public improvements in accordance with
city ordinances within two years from final plat approval;
      (2)   Covenants to warranty the improvements for a period of two years
following acceptance by the city;
      (3)   Covenants to provide performance, payment and maintenance bonds;
      (4)   Provisions for participation in the costs of the improvements by
the city, if authorization has been obtained from the City Council, and a
performance bond for such improvements from the contractor, with the city as an
obligee;
      (5)   Provisions for securing the obligations of the agreement;
      (6)   Insurance and indemnification requirements; and
      (7)   Such other terms and conditions as are agreed to by the developer
and city.
   (D)   Cost estimates. The costs in the developer’s agreement shall be based
on cost estimates thereof, prepared by the developer’s engineer and reviewed by
the City Engineer.
   (E)   Covenants to run with the land. The developer’s agreement shall
provide that the covenants contained in the agreement run with the land and
bind all successors, heirs and assignees of the property owner. All existing
lienholders shall be required to execute the agreement or provide written
consent to the covenants contained in the agreement.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.191 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Generally. The Commission may recommend and the City Council may
authorize a variance from these regulations when, in its opinion, extraordinary
hardship will result from requiring strict compliance.
   (B)   Request. The applicant seeking a variance shall submit to the
administrative official a written request stating the justification for such
variance, accompanied by engineering data or other evidence supporting the
applicant’s request for relief. The Commission may recommend and the City
Council may grant a variance in conjunction with the application for approval
of the plat. The applicant bears the burden of proof to demonstrate that a
variance to the standards applicable to a development application should be
granted.
   (C)   Evidence. The Commission and City Council may require engineering
studies and displays from the applicant to support the request for a variance.
The decision of the Council shall be final.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.192 FACTORS TO CONSIDER.
   (A)   The City Council shall take into account the nature of the proposed
use of the land involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of
persons who will reside or work in the proposed development, and the probable
effect of the requested variance upon traffic conditions, city services and
upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare, and whether:
      (1)   The requirement places an unreasonable burden on the development
and does not bear a rough proportionality to the requirements necessary to
serve the development;
      (2)   Hardships or practical difficulties will result from strict
compliance with these regulations, and/or the purpose of these regulations may
be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal; and
      (3)   The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are
unique to the property and are not applicable to other properties, or the tract
has severe topographical conditions or unique environmental qualities worthy of
protection.
   (B)   Financial hardship, alone, to the applicant shall not be deemed to
constitute unreasonable burden or hardship.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.193 AUTHORITY TO IMPOSE CONDITIONS.
   The City Council may impose conditions relating to the variance as will, in
its judgment, substantially secure the objectives of the standards or
requirements to which the variance was granted.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.194 WAIVERS FOR PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS.
   The Commission may recommend and the City Council may modify the standards
and requirements of this chapter in the case of an application including an
approved planned development district. Such departures from the standards
specified may be made only when the Council finds that the plan provides for
convenience and safe access, adequate space for recreation, provision for light
and air, and offers all essential utility services and necessary public and
other facilities, and is in conformance with all provisions of any ordinances
which specifically apply to a planned development district.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.195 PARK LAND DEDICATION.
   (A)   Purpose. This section is to provide dedication of park land and/or
fees in lieu for neighborhood or community park facilities in accordance with
the city’s Comprehensive Plan and Park Master Plan as amended.
   (B)   Neighborhood and community parks. Neighborhood and community parks
provide for a variety of outdoor recreational opportunities that are within
convenient distances from the majority of residences to be served thereby.
   (C)   Application. These requirements shall apply to subdivision plats on
residentially zoned land which is to be used for residential purposes.
Developers shall dedicate park land or pay fees in lieu as required by this
chapter.
   (D)   Dedication of land. At the city’s discretion, developers shall
dedicate park land for each residential subdivision plat, at a minimum of one
acre of land per 100 of projected subdivision population. Population shall be
calculated based upon 2.8 persons per dwelling unit.
   (E)   Fees in lieu of dedication. At the city’s discretion, payment of fees
in lieu of park land dedication may be required. The amount of such payment
shall be equal to the fair market value of the land that would be required to
be dedicated for park land according to this chapter.
   (F)   Fair market value determined. The fair market value of the base land
to be dedicated shall be calculated as determined on the most recent appraisal
made by the County Central Appraisal District of all or part of the property
being subdivided at the time of preliminary plat approval. If there is no
preliminary plat required, then at the time of final plat approval, if the
developer/owner objects to the fair market value determination, the developer/
owner at his or her own expense, may obtain an appraisal by a state certified
real estate appraiser, mutually agreed upon by the city and the developer/
owner.
   (G)   Use of fees. Park land dedication fees paid in lieu of land dedication
will be deposited in a fund referenced to specific future neighborhood or
community parks or existing neighborhood or community parks as identified on
the city’s Comprehensive Plan or Parks Master Plan as amended. Funds deposited
into a particular park fund may only be expended for land or improvements
within that particular future or existing neighborhood or community park.
   (H)   Accounting of fees. The city shall account for all fees in lieu of
land and all development fees paid under this section with reference to the
individual plat(s) involved. Any fees paid for such purposes must be expended
by the city within ten years from the date received by the city for acquisition
and/or development of a neighborhood or community park as required herein. Such
funds shall be considered to be spent on a first-in, first-out basis. If not
expended, the landowners of the property on the expiration of such period shall
be entitled to a prorated refund of each sum, computed on a square footage of
area basis. The owners of such property must request such refund within one
year of entitlement, in writing, or such right shall be barred.
   (I)   Minimum acreage. Unless otherwise determined by the city, the minimum
park land dedication that will be accepted by the city shall be three acres.
   (J)   Usable park land. Any land dedicated to the city for park purposes in
accordance with this chapter shall be appropriate for neighborhood or community
park purposes as determined by the administrative official.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable for a fine up to $500 per
offense. Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense upon conviction.
(Ord. passed 2-17-2022)
CHAPTER 154: ZONING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Definitions
   
154.002   Purpose
   
154.003   General
   
154.004   Zoning district map
AO Agriculture-Open District
   
154.015   Generally
SF Single-Family Residential District
   
154.030   Uses
   
154.031   Area and height regulations
D Two-Family Duplex District
   
154.045   Uses
   
154.046   Area and height regulations
MF Multi-Family Residential District
   
154.060   Uses
   
154.061   Area and height regulations
MH Mobile Home Park District
   
154.075   Definitions
   
154.076   License
   
154.077   Physical requirements of manufactured home parks
   
154.078   Operation of manufactured home parks
   
154.079   Facilities and services
   
154.080   Miscellaneous requirements
C Commercial District
   
154.095   Uses
   
154.096   Area and height regulations
GI General Industrial District
   
154.110   Uses
   
154.111   Area and height regulations
O Office District
   
154.125   General purpose and description
   
154.126   Uses permitted
   
154.127   Height regulations
   
154.128   Area regulations
   
154.129   Special district requirements
PD Planned Development District
   
154.140   General description and purpose
   
154.141   Permitted uses
   
154.142   Planned development requirements
Regulations
   
154.155   Accessory buildings
   
154.156   Non-conforming uses
   
154.157   Special area regulation and exceptions
   
154.158   Special use regulations
   
154.159   Floodplain prefix to district designation
   
154.160   Temporary zoning; annexed territory
   
154.161   Board of Adjustment
   
154.162   Specific use permits
   
154.163   Usual and reasonable criteria for control of signs
   
154.164   Completion of existing buildings
   
154.165   Telephone service buildings
   
154.166   Compliance required
   
154.167   Classification of new and unlisted uses
   
154.168   Creation of building site
Administration and Enforcement
   
154.180   Changes and amendments
   
154.181   Validity of chapter
   
154.182   Enforcement
   
154.183   Permits and certificates of occupancy and compliance
   
154.184   Chart of uses
 
   
154.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The word
“building” includes the word “structure” and the word “lot” includes the word
“plot.”
   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE. One which: is subordinate to and serves a
principal building or principal use; is subordinate in area, extent or purpose
to the principal building or principal use served; contributes to the comfort,
convenience and necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal
use served; and is located on the same building lot as the principal use
served.
   ALLEY. A public space or thoroughfare which affords only secondary means of
access to property abutting thereon.
   AMUSEMENT, COMMERCIAL (INDOOR). An amusement enterprise wholly enclosed in a
building which is treated acoustically so that noise generated by the
enterprise is not perceptable at the bounding property line and including, but
not limited to, a bowling alley or billiard parlor.
   AMUSEMENT, COMMERCIAL (OUTDOOR). Any amusement enterprise offering
entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee or charge
wherein any portion of the activity takes place in the open including, but not
limited, to a golf driving range, archery range and miniature golf course.
   ANTIQUE SHOP. An establishment offering for sale, within a building articles
such as glass, china, furniture or similar furnishings or decorations which
have value and significance as a result of age, design and sentiment.
   APARTMENT. A dwelling unit in an APARTMENT building.
   APARTMENT BUILDING. A building or any portion thereof, which contains three
or more dwelling units, located in the same building lot. An APARTMENT BUILDING
is a multi-family dwelling.
   AREA OF THE LOT. The net area of the lot and shall not include portions of
streets and alleys.
   ATMOSPHERE. The air that envelops or surrounds the earth. Where air
contaminants are emitted into a building not designed specifically as air
pollution control equipment, such emission into the building shall be
considered emission into the atmosphere.
   ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION. The discharging from stacks, open storage, chimneys,
exhausts, vents, ducts, openings or open fires of such air contaminants as
visible emissions, sulphur dioxide, particulate matter, hydrocarbons, fumes or
similar material or gases.
   AUTO LAUNDRY. A building, or portion thereof containing facilities for
washing automobiles using automated methods including chain conveyor, blower,
steam cleaning device or other mechanical devices. A self-service type of car
wash is an AUTO LAUNDRY.
   AWNING. A roof-like cover of a temporary nature that projects from the wall
of a building.
   BACKGROUND NOISE. Noise from all sources other than that under specific
consideration including traffic operating on public thoroughfares.
   BASEMENT. A building story which is partly under ground, but having at least
one-half of its height above the average level of the adjoining ground. A
BASEMENT shall be counted as a story in computing building height.
   BLOCK. An area enclosed be streets and occupied by or intended for
buildings; or if said word is used as a term of measurement, it shall mean the
distance along a side of a street between the nearest two streets which
intersect said street.
   BOARD. If and as provided for in an ordinance.
   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. A board created, pursuant to Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat.
Article 1011g to grant variances from zoning restrictions and to hear appeals
from decisions by the administrative official.
   BOARDING HOUSE or ROOMING HOUSE. A building, other than a hotel, where
lodging and/or meals for three or more persons are provided for compensation.
   BUILD. To erect, convert, enlarge, reconstruct or alter a building or
structure.
   BUILDABLE AREA. The area of the building site left to be built upon after
any floodplain, easements, yards and other unbuildable areas are considered.
   BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter and enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind. When subdivided in
a manner sufficient to prevent the spread of fire, each portion so subdivided
may be deemed a separate BUILDING.
   BUILDING ENDS. Those sides of building having the least dimensions as
compared to the front or rear of a building. As used herein for the building
spacing regulations for multiple-family dwelling, a BUILDING END shall be
interpreted as being the most narrow side of a building regardless of whether
it fronts upon a street, faces the rear of the lot or is adjacent to the side
lot line or another building.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building Inspector or administrative official charged
with the responsibility of issuing permits and enforcing the zoning and
building ordinances.
   BUILDING SITE. A single tract of land located within a single block which,
(at time of filing for a building permit) is designed by its owner or developer
as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, under single
ownership or control. It shall front upon a street or approved place.
Therefore, a BUILDING SITE may be subsequently subdivided into two or more
BUILDING SITES, and a number of BUILDING SITES may be cumulated into one
BUILDING SITE, subject to the provisions of this chapter and the subdivision
regulations.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. An official certificate issued by the city through
the enforcing official which indicates conformance with or approved conditional
waiver from this chapter and authorizes legal use of the premises for which it
is issued.
   CHURCH or RECTORY. A place of worship and religious training of recognized
religions including the on-site housing of ministers, rabbis, priests, nuns and
similar staff personnel.
   CLEANING SHOP AND PRESSING (SMALL SHOP AND PICK-UP). A custom cleaning shop
not exceeding 3,000 square feet in floor area, or a pick-up station for laundry
or cleaning where the work is performed other than on the premises.
   CLINIC. A group of offices for one or more physicians, surgeons or dentists
to treat sick or injured out-patients who do not remain overnight.
   COMBUSTION. The rapid exothermic reaction of any material with oxygen.
   COMMISSION. May be used to refer to a commission created by a zoning
ordinance.
   COMMUNITY CENTER (PUBLIC). A building and grounds owned and operated by a
governmental body for the social, recreational, health or welfare of the
community served.
   COUNTRY CLUB. An area of a minimum number of acres containing a golf course
and clubhouse which is available to a specific recorded membership. Such a club
may include as adjunct facilities, a dining room, private club, swimming pool,
cabanas, tennis courts and similar serve and recreational facilities for the
members.
   COURT. An open, unoccupied space, bounded on more than two sides by the
walls of a building. An inner COURT is a COURT entirely surrounded by the
exterior walls of a building. An outer COURT is a COURT having one side open to
a street, alley, yard or other permanent space.
   COVERAGE. The percent of a lot or tract covered by the roof or first floor
of a building. Roof eaves to the extent of three feet from the walls of a
building shall be excluded from COVERAGE computations.
   DAY CARE FOR CHILDREN. A facility arranged and conducted for the organized
recreation and instruction of children including outdoor activities on a
daytime basis; a kindergarten or nursery school.
   DECIBEL. A unit of measurement of sound pressure.
   DEVELOPMENT or TO DEVELOP. The construction of a new building or any
structure on a building lot, the relocation of an existing building on another
building lot or the use of open land for a new use. TO DEVELOP is to create a
DEVELOPMENT.
   DISTRICT. A zoning district which is a part of the city wherein regulation
of an ordinance is uniform.
   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof designed and used exclusively for
residential occupancy, including one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and
multiple-family dwellings, but not including hotels, motels or lodging houses.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms, which are arranged, assigned, used or
intended to be used for occupancy by a single family or a group of persons
living together as a family or by a single person. Individual bathrooms and
complete single kitchen facilities permanently installed are not necessarily
provided, but each installation of kitchen facilities consisting of at least a
stove or cooking device and a sink shall constitute a separate DWELLING UNIT
unless such facilities are provided in bona fide servants’ quarters. Apartment
units in apartment hotels are DWELLING UNITS.
   EMISSION. The act of passing into the atmosphere an air contaminant or gas
stream which contains or may contain an air contaminant or the material so
passed into the atmosphere.
   EMISSION POINT. The location (place in horizontal place and vertical
elevation) at which an emission enters the atmosphere.
   EXHAUST GAS VOLUME. The total volume of gas emitted from an emission point.
   FAMILY. Any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping
unit, in which not more than four individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage
or adoption.
   FARM, ORCHARD or TRUCK GARDEN. An area of three acres or more which is used
for growing of usual farm products, vegetables, fruits, trees and grain, and
for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals, such as
horses, cattle and sheep and including the necessary accessory uses for
raising, treating and storing products raised on the premises, but not
including the commercial feeding of offal and garbage to swine and other
animals and not including any type of agriculture or husbandry specifically
prohibited by ordinance or law.
   FIELD OFFICE (TEMPORARY). A structure or shelter used in connection with a
development or building project for housing on the site of temporary
administrative and supervisory functions and for sheltering employees and
equipment and subject to a temporary permit issued by the Building Official
and, generally, permitted in this chapter as a limited exception, but, also
generally, subject to discontinuance at the order of the Building Official.
   FLOOR AREA. The total square feet of floor space within the outside
dimensions of a building including each floor level, but excluding cellars,
carports or garages.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR). The ratio between the total square feet of floor
area to a structure and the total square feet of land in the lot or tract on
which the structure is located.
   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION, LODGE or CIVIC CLUB. A society or association
organized for the pursuit of some common objective by working together in a
brotherly union. These organizations are not automatically a private club, but
may also be a private club.
   FREQUENCY. The number of times per second a vibration or sound wave
oscillates.
   GARAGE, AUTO REPAIR. A building or portion thereof whose principal use is
for the repair, servicing, equipping or maintenance of motor vehicles or motor
vehicle components, including engines, radiators, starters, transmissions,
brakes, tires and wheels, seats and similar components.
   HEIGHT. The vertical distance of a building measured from the average
established grade at the street line or from the average natural front yard
ground level, whichever is higher, to the highest point of the roof’s surface
is a flat surface, to the deck line of mansard roofs or to the mean HEIGHT
level between eaves and ridge for hip and gable roofs and, in any event,
excluding chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, penthouses, tanks,
water towers, radio towers, ornamental cupolas, domes and spires, and parapet
walls not exceeding ten feet in HEIGHT. If the street grade has not been
officially established, the average front yard grade shall be used for a base
level.
   HOME OCCUPATION.
      (1)   A business, occupation or profession conducted within a residential
dwelling unit by the resident thereof, and which shall be the following
characteristics:
         (a)   The activity shall employ only members of the immediate family
of the resident of the dwelling unit;
         (b)   There shall be no external evidence of the occupation detectable
at any lot line, said evidence to include advertising signs or displays, smoke,
dust, noise, fumes, glare, vibration, electrical disturbance, storage of
materials or equipment, or traffic or parking of vehicles in a manner
evidencing the conduct of a business; and
         (c)   Said HOME OCCUPATION shall not have a separate entrance for the
business and shall not include continual visits by the general public.
      (2)   Any business, occupation or profession conducted within a dwelling
unit and which does not meet the aforesaid characteristics, is construed to be
commercial activity and therefore cause for an order to cease to all such
activity within said dwelling unit.
   HOSPITAL. A legally authorized institution in which there are complete
facilities for diagnosis, treatment, surgery, laboratory, X-ray and the
prolonged care of bed patients. Clinics may have some but not all of these
facilities.
   HOTEL or MOTEL. A building or group of buildings designed and occupied as a
temporary abiding place of individuals. To be classified as a HOTEL or MOTEL,
an establishment shall contain a minimum of _______ individual guest rooms or
units and shall furnish customary HOTEL services such as linens, maid service,
telephone use and upkeep of furniture.
   HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCE SALES. To include the sale and service of the following,
but not necessarily limited to, radio, television, refrigerators and the like.
   JUNK OR SALVAGE YARD. A lot upon which waste or scrap materials are bought,
sold, exchanged, stored, packed, disassembled or handled, including, but not
limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags rubber, tires and bottles.
A JUNK YARD includes an automobile wrecking yard and automobile parts yard. A
JUNK YARD does not include such uses conducted entirely within an enclosed
building.
   LEGAL HEIGHT. The maximum height of a building permitted by any airport
zoning ordinance or other ordinance restricting the height of structures.
   LIVESTOCK AUCTION. Barns, pens and sheds for the temporary holding of sale
of livestock.
   LOADING SPACE. A space within the main building or on the same lot
therewith, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks, and
having minimum dimensions of 12 by 60 feet for industrial and warehouse uses
and 12 by 35 feet for commercial and institutional uses with a vertical
clearance of a least 14 feet, together with access and maneuvering areas
provided on the same building lot as the principal use for which the LOADING
SPACE is intended.
   LOCAL UTILITY LINE. The facilities provided by a municipality or a
franchised utility company for the distribution or collection of gas, water,
surface drainage water, sewage, electric power or telephone service including
pad- and pole-mounted transformers.
   LOT. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory
buildings, and including such open spaces as are required under an ordinance
and having its principal frontage upon a public street or officially approved
place.
   LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane intercepted by the vertical
projections of the front, side and rear lot lines of a building lot.
   LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT. The lot area required for each dwelling unit
located on a building lot.
   LOT, CORNER. A building lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the
interior angle of which intersection does not exceed 135 degrees.
   LOT COVERAGE. The percentage of the total area of a lot occupied by the base
(first story or floor) of buildings located on the lot or the area determined
as the maximum horizontal cross-sectional area of a building.
   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the
rear lot line of a building lot measured at the respective mid-points of the
front lot line and rear lot line within the lot boundary.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A building lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary of a building lot which is the line of an
existing or dedicated street. Upon corner lots, either street line may be
selected as the FRONT LOT LINE providing a front and rear yard are provided
adjacent and opposite, respectively, to the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The boundary of a building lot which is most distant from
and is, or is most nearly parallel to the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. The boundary of a building lot which is not a front lot line
or a rear lot line.
   LOT OF RECORD. Area of land designated as a lot on a plat of a subdivision
recorded, pursuant to state statutes, with the County Clerk, or an area of land
held in single ownership described be metes and bounds upon a deed recorded or
registered with the County Clerk.
   LOT WIDTH. The width of a lot at the front building line.
   MAIN BUILDING. The building or buildings on a lot which are occupied by the
primary use.
   MOBILE HOME AS A FIXED DWELLING. A dwelling designed to be transported
intact on the highway which is placed on a standard building lot, connected to
utilities, placed on permanent supports and occupied as a fixed dwelling.
   MOBILE HOME DWELLING. A dwelling unit designed as a house trailer or mobile
home which is made immobile and used as a temporary or permanent dwelling or as
part of permanent dwelling, including any structure transported on a metal
frame with wheels, regardless of the number of parts in which is transported,
but not including pickup campers or travel trailers used temporarily for
camping or outings.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A tract of land designed or being used to accommodate one
or more transient portable dwelling units designed to be moved on wheels from
location to location by automobile, truck or similar prime mover.
   MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION. A tract of land subdivided into lots which are
designed as permanent sites for mobile or relocatable homes and which are
served by separate utilities, dedicated street access on a legally filed plat
and are capable of being conveyed as separate lots.
   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING (APARTMENT). Any building or portion thereof, which
is designed, built, rented, leased or let to be occupied as three or more
dwelling units or apartments or which is occupied as a home or place of
residence by three or more families living in independent dwelling units.
   MUSEUM LIBRARY OR ART GALLERY (PUBLIC). An institution for the collection,
display and distribution of books, objects of art or science and which is
sponsored by a public or quasi-public agency and which facilities are open to
the general public.
   NON-CONFORMING USE. A building, structure or use of land lawfully occupied
at the time of the effective date of this chapter or amendments thereto, or
which was subsequently annexed to the city and which does not conform to the
use regulations of the district in which it is situated.
   OCCUPANCY. The use or intended use of the land or buildings by proprietors
or tenants.
   OCTAVE BAND. All frequencies between any given frequency and double that
frequency.
   OCTAVE BAND FILTER. An electrical frequency analyzer designed according to
the standards formulated by the American Standards Association and used in
conjuction with a sound level meter to take measurements in specific octave
intervals.
   ODOR THRESHOLD. The concentration of odorous matter in the atmosphere
necessary to be perceptible to the olfactory nerve of a normal person.
Determination of the ODOR THRESHOLD is prescribed by A.S.T.M.D. 1391-57,
Standard Method for Measuring Odor in Atmosphere.
   OFF-STREET PARKING. Parking spaces provided in accordance with the
requirements specified by this chapter and located on the lot or tract occupied
by the main use.
   OPEN AREA. The part of a building lot, including courts or yards, which:
      (1)   Is open and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky;
      (2)   Is accessible to all residents upon a building lot; and
      (3)   Is not part of the roof of that portion of the building containing
dwelling units.
   OPEN SPACE. An area or tract of undeveloped land which is intended to remain
generally in its natural state, except for those uses allowed under the
provisions of this chapter.
   OPEN STORAGE. The storage of any equipment, machinery, commodities, raw,
semi-finished materials and building materials, not accessory to a residential
use, which is visible from any point on the building lot line when viewed from
ground level to six feet above ground level.
   OPERATION. Any physical action resulting in a change in the location, form
or physical properties of a material, or any chemical action resulting in a
change in the chemical composition or chemical or physical properties of a
material. The following are given as examples, without limitation of the
generality of the foregoing: heat transfer, calcination, double decomposition
fermentation, pyrolysis, electrolysis, combustion material handling,
evaporation mixing, absorption, filtration, fluidization, screening, crushing,
grinding, demolishing, shoveling, bagging and the like.
   PARK OR PLAYGROUND (PUBLIC). An open recreation facility or park owned and
operated by a public agency such as the Park Department or school board and
available to the general public.
   PARKING LOT, TRUCK. Any area, used for the parking or storage of trucks or
trailers larger than three-fourths tons in size.
   PARKING SPACE. An enclosed or unenclosed all-weather surfaced area of not
less than 180 square feet (measured approximately nine feet by 20 feet) not on
a public street or alley, together with an all-weather surfaced driveway
connecting the area with a street or alley permitting free ingress and egress
with out encroachment on the street or alley. Any parking adjacent to a public
street wherein the maneuvering is done on the public street shall not be
classified as off-street parking in computing the public area requirements for
any use.
   PARTICULATE MATTER. Any material, except uncombined water, which exists in a
finely divided form as liquid or solid at standard conditions when released
into the atmosphere.
   PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. Those standards or criteria by which qualitative and
quantitative measures are derived for the regulation of industrial uses and
activities. Terms generally used in connection with PERFORMANCE STANDARDS are
listed here but are defined in the appropriate alphabetical sequence, being:
      (1)   Atmosphere;
      (2)   Atmospheric pollution;
      (3)   Background noise;
      (4)   Combustion;
      (5)   Decibel;
      (6)   Emission;
      (7)   Emission point;
      (8)   Exhaust gas volume;
      (9)   Frequency;
      (10)   Octave band;
      (11)   Octave band filter;
      (12)   Odor threshold;
      (13)   Operation;
      (14)   Particulate matter;
      (15)   Person or operation;
      (16)   PPM (volume);
      (17)   Smoke;
      (18)   Toxic and noxious matter; and
      (19)   Vibration.
   PERSON or OPERATION. Any person, firm, association, organization,
partnership, business, trust, corporation, company, contractor, supplier,
installer, user or owner or any state or local governmental agency or public
district or any officer or employee thereof. It includes the owner, lessor,
lessee, tenant, licensee, manager and operator, or any of such, of any emission
point or any source operation which may constitute a source of atmospheric
pollution related thereto, or any interest in such emission point or operation
source.
   PERSONAL SERVICE. Barber shop, beauty shop, tailor, dressmaker, shoe shop or
similar shop offering custom service.
   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The agency designated in an ordinance as the
Planning Commission and appointed by the City Council as an advisory body to it
and which is authorized to recommend changes in the zoning ordinance.
   PLAYFIELD or STADIUM (PUBLIC). An athletic field or stadium owned and
operated by a public agency for the general public including a baseball field,
golf course, football field or stadium.
   PPM (VOLUME). Parts per million by volume.
   PUBLIC BUILDING, SHOP OR YARD OF LOCAL, STATE, FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
Facilities, such as office, building, maintenance yards or shops required by
branches of local, state or federal government for service to an area such as a
highway department yard or city service center.
   RADIO, TELEVISION OR MICROWAVE TOWERS. Structures supporting antennae for
transmitting or receiving any portion of the radio spectrum but excluding non-
commercial antennae installations for home use of radio or television. In any
event, the use as a MICROWAVE, RADIO OR TELEVISION TOWER in a given zone is
still subject to the height, setback and other requirements and the like, as
per the zoning district requirement in which the TOWER is located.
   RECREATION AREA. A privately-owned park, playground or open space maintained
by a community club, property owners’ association or similar organization.
   RECREATION CENTER (PUBLIC). A building or complex of building housing
community recreation facilities owned, operated or leased for operation by a
public entity and may include swimming pools, tennis and other indoor or
outdoor athletic facilities.
   RESIDENCE. Same as DWELLING; also when used with district and area or
residential regulations.
   REST HOME or NURSING HOME. A private facility for the care of children or
the aged or infirm or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders.
Such HOMES do not contain facilities for surgical care or the treatment of
disease or injury.
   RESTAURANT (DRIVE-IN SERVICE). An establishment designed and constructed to
serve food for consumption on the premises in an automobile or for carry-out
for off-premises consumption and which establishment may or may not have an on-
premises dining room or counter.
   RESTAURANT (NOT DRIVE-IN TYPE). An establishment serving food to the general
public in specific, designated dining areas, and where food is not served to or
eaten in automobiles on the premises.
   SCREENING DEVICE. A barrier of stone, brick, pierced brick or block,
uniformly colored wood, or other permanent material or equal character, density
and acceptable design, at least six feet in height, where the solid area equals
at least 65% of the wall surface, including an entrance gate or gates; or
foliage of an acceptable type and of a density that will not permit through
passage; or an acceptable combination of these materials. Such SCREENING DEVICE
shall be continuously maintained.
   SCHOOL, BUSINESS OR TRADE. A business organized to operate for a profit and
offering instruction and training in a service or art such as a secretarial
school, barber college, beauty school or commercial art school.
   SCHOOL, PUBLIC OR DENOMINATIONAL. A school under the sponsorship of a public
or religious agency having a curriculum generally equivalent to public
elementary or secondary schools, but not including trade or business schools.
   SERVANT’S QUARTERS. An accessory building or portion of a main residential
building located on the same lot as the principal residential building,
occupied only by such persons and their families as are employed full-time by
occupants of the principal residence.
   SERVICE STATION. Any building or premises used for the dispensing, sale or
offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuels or oils. If the dispensing,
sale or offering for sale is incidental to a public garage, the premises shall
be classified as a public garage.
   SIGN. A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is
affixed to, or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or
piece of land and which directs attention to an object, product, place,
activity, institution or business. A SIGN is not a display of official court or
public office notices nor is it a flag, emblem or insignia of a nation,
political unit, school or religious group. A SIGN shall not include a SIGN
located completely within an enclosed building.
   SIGN, ADVERTISING. A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than upon the
premises where such sign is located, or to which it is affixed.
   SIGN, AGRICULTURAL. Accessory sign identifying the farm or ranch on which it
is placed and advertising the produce, crops, animals or poultry raised or
quartered thereon.
   SIGN, APARTMENT NAME. An accessory sign for the identification of an
apartment building or complex of apartment buildings. An APARTMENT NAME SIGN
shall not exceed 50 square feet in area and shall not be of the flashing
intermittently lighted type.
   SIGN, BUSINESS. A sign which directs attention to a business or profession
conducted, or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered upon the
premises.
   SIGN, CONSTRUCTION. A temporary accessory sign identifying the property
owner, architect, decorator or mortgagee engaged in the design, construction or
improvement of the premises on which the sign is located.
   SIGN, DEVELOPMENT. A temporary accessory sign related to the promotion of
new developments and located on the premises involved in the development.
   SIGN, FLASHING. An illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not
maintained stationary, or in constant intensity or color at all times when such
sign is in use.
   SIGN, ILLUMINATED. Any sign designed to give forth any artificial light or
designed to reflect light from one or more sources, natural or artificial.
   SIGN, INSTITUTIONAL. An accessory sign located on the premises for the
identity of a school, church, hospital or similar public or quasi-public
institution.
   SIGN, MOBILE HOME PARK. An accessory sign for the identification of a mobile
home park or mobile home subdivision.
   SIGN, NAME PLATE. An accessory sign showing only the name and address of the
owner or occupancy of the premises on which it is erected or placed.
   SIGN, OFFICE IDENTIFICATION. An accessory sign identifying an office
building or the occupants thereof.
   SIGN, REAL ESTATE. A temporary accessory sign pertaining to the sale or
rental of property and advertising property only for use for which it is
legally zoned.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING (ATTACHED). A dwelling unit which is joined to
another dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or abutting separate wall
and which is designed for occupancy by one family and is located on a platted
separate lot, delineated by front, side and rear lot lines and is served by
separate utility connections and meters as a SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT (DETACHED). A dwelling unit designed and
constructed for occupancy and occupied by not more than one family and located
on a lot or separate building tract and having no physical connection to a
building located on any other lot or tract and occupied only by one family.
   SMOKE. The visible discharge of particulate matter from a chimney, vent,
exhaust or combustion process.
   SPECIAL EXCEPTION. A privileged use or development of property which would
not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout a specified
zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, size, location or
relation to the neighborhood, would promote the public health, safety, order,
comfort, convenience or general welfare of the community.
   STABLE, COMMERCIAL. A stable and related open pasture where horses are
quartered for owners on a fee basis.
   STORY. The height between the successive floors of a building or from the
top floor to the roof. The standard height of a STORY is 11 feet, six inches.
   STREET. Any thoroughfare or public driveway, other than an alley, and more
than 30 feet in width, which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for
public use.
   STREET LINE. A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a
contiguous street, the right-of-way line.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting member of a building,
such as a bearing wall, column, beam or girder.
   STRUCTURE. See BUILDING. 
   SWIM OR TENNIS CLUB. A private recreational club with restricted membership,
usually of less area than a country club, but including a clubhouse and a
swimming pool or tennis courts, and similar recreational facilities none of
which are available to the general public.
   SWIMMING POOL (PRIVATE). A swimming pool constructed for the exclusive use
of the residents of a one-family, two-family or multi-family dwellings.
   TELEPHONE EXCHANGE, SWITCHING OR RELAY OR TRANSMITTING STATION. Not
including public business facilities, storage or repair facilities.
   THOROUGHFARE. A street on which through traffic enjoys preference over
traffic from streets not classed as thoroughfares.
   TIRES, BATTERIES AND ACCESSORIES. Any retail operation wherein the sale and/
or installation of TIRES, BATTERIES, brakes and other related minor parts or
ACCESSORIES is carried on; specifically not to include heavy automotive repair,
upholstery and muffler installation, automotive tune-up, automotive salvage or
painting, used part sales or storage, tire retreading or recapping.
   TOXIC AND NOXIOUS MATTER. Any solid, liquid or gaseous matter which is
present in sufficient quantities to endanger health, safety and comfort of
persons in the vicinity or which may cause injury or damage to property.
   TWO-FAMILY DWELLING. A single structure designed and constructed with two
dwelling units under a single roof for occupancy by two families.
   USE. The USE of property is the purpose or activity for which the land, or
building thereon is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied
or maintained, and shall include any manner of such activity with respect to
the standards of a zoning ordinance.
   VARIANCE. An adjustment in the application of the specific regulations of a
zoning ordinance to a particular parcel or property which, because of special
conditions or circumstances peculiar to the particular parcel, is necessary to
prevent the property from being deprived of rights and privileges enjoyed by
other parcels in the same vicinity and zoning district.
   VIBRATION. A periodic displacement of the earth measured in inches.
   VISUAL SCREEN. A wall, not of living plant material, permanently affixed to
the ground in which the area of all openings and cracks in each square foot of
wall and entrance gates shall not exceed 14 square inches, and the wall is of
sufficient height so that the objects being screened are not visible from any
point on the lot line when viewed from any height between ground and seven feet
above ground level.
   YARD. An open space on the same building lot with a building, unoccupied and
unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as
otherwise provided. In measuring a YARD for the purpose of determining the
width of a side yard, the depth of a rear yard and the depth of a front yard,
the minimum horizontal distance between the building site and lot line shall be
used. A YARD extends along a lot line and at right angles to such lot line to a
depth or width specified in the YARD regulations of the zoning district in
which such building is located.
      (1)   YARD, FRONT. An open, unoccupied space on a lot facing a street
extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and from the
main building to the front lot or street line with the minimum horizontal
distances between the street line and the main building line as specified for
the district in which it is located.
      (2)   YARD, REAR. An open, unoccupied space, except for accessory
building as herein permitted, extending across the rear of a lot from one side
lot line to the other side lot line and having a depth between the building and
the rear lot line as specified in the district in which the lot is situated.
      (3)   YARD, SIDE. An open, unoccupied space or spaces on one side or two
sides of a main building and on the same lot with the building, situated
between the building and a side line of the lot and extending through from the
front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line, not the rear line or a front line,
is deemed to be a side line.
   ZONING COMMISSION. As created and authorized in a zoning ordinance.
   ZONING DISTRICT MAP. The official certified map upon which the boundaries of
the various zoning districts are drawn and which is an integral part of this
chapter.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982)
§ 154.002 PURPOSE.
   The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made in
accordance with the Comprehensive Plan for the purpose of promoting health,
safety, morals and the general welfare of the city. They have been designed to
lessen the congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and
other danger; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the over-crowding
of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate
provisions of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public
requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other
things, for the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for
particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings an
encouraging the most appropriate use of the land throughout the city.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982)
§ 154.003 GENERAL.
   (A)   Zoning regulations and districts as herein set forth are approved and
established. The city is hereby divided into nine classes of use and area
districts, termed respectively:
      (1)   AO Agriculture-Open;
      (2)   SF Single-Family Residential;
      (3)   D Two-Family Duplex;
      (4)   MF Multi-Family Residential;
      (5)   MH Mobile Home Park;
      (6)   C Commercial;
      (7)   GI General Industrial;
      (8)   O Office; and
      (9)   PD Planned Development.
   (B)   All districts are fully shown upon the zoning map which accompanies
and is attached to this chapter. The said zoning map is hereby made a part
hereof for all intents and purposes. Except as hereinafter provided, no
building shall be erected or structurally altered and no premises shall be used
except in conformity with the regulations herein prescribed for the use and
area district in which such building or premises is located and shown by the
said map.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.004 ZONING DISTRICT MAP.
   (A)   The boundaries of the zoning districts set out herein are delineated
upon the zoning district map of the city, said map being a part of this chapter
as fully as if the same were set forth herein in detail.
   (B)   Two original, official and identical copies of the zoning district map
are hereby adopted bearing the signature of the Mayor and the attestation of
the City Secretary and shall be filed and maintained as follows.
      (1)   One copy shall be filed with the City Secretary and retained as the
original record and shall not be changed in any manner.
      (2)   One copy shall be filed with the City Council and its designee and
shall be maintained up-to-date by posting thereon all changes and subsequent
amendments for observation in issuing building permits, certificates of
occupancy and compliance and enforcing the zoning ordinance.
      (3)   Reproductions for information purposes may, from time to time, be
made of the official zoning district map.
   (C)   The district boundary lines shown on the zoning district map are
usually along streets, alleys, property lines or extensions thereof. Where
uncertainty exists as the boundaries of districts as shown on the official
zoning district map, the following rules shall apply.
      (1)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines or
rights-of-way of alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines or
rights-of-way lines.
      (2)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the platted lot
lines shall be construed as following such lot lines so as to eliminate a
zoning division on any platted lot.
      (3)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the city limits
shall be construed as following the city limits.
      (4)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically
indicated on the original zoning maps shall be determined by the scale of the
map.
   (D)   Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official
action of the City Council, or whenever such area is franchised for building
purposes, the zoning district line adjoining each side of such street, alley or
other public way shall be automatically extended to the centerline of such
vacated street, alley or way and all area so involved shall then henceforth be
subject to all regulations of the extended districts.
   (E)   Where physical features on the ground are at variance with information
shown on the official zoning district map or when there arises a question as to
how or whether a parcel of property is zoned and such question cannot be
resolved by the application of this section, the property shall be considered
as classified AO Agriculture-Open District, temporarily in the same manner as
provided for newly annexed territory and the issuance of a building permit and
the determination of permanent zoning shall be in accordance with the
provisions for temporarily zoned areas.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982)
AO AGRICULTURE-OPEN DISTRICT
§ 154.015 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Generally. Short-term, this land is reserved for farm and ranch
operations, including dwellings and buildings accessory to such agricultural
uses. Long-range, the zoning objective is to reserve the land for higher value
community uses, such as residential developments; consequently, the permitted
uses should not involve high unrecoverable investment so as to preserve maximum
flexibility and to avoid irreversible commitment to uses not in the community’s
best long-term interest.
   (B)   Numerical criteria.
      (1)   Lot area: no tract to be less than three acres;
      (2)   Maximum coverage: 10%; and
      (3)   Maximum setbacks: 100 feet at front, rear, side and next to street.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982)
SF SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 154.030 USES.
   In a SF Single-Family Residential District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or structurally altered which is arranged
or designed to be used for other than one or more of the following uses:
   (A)   Agriculture of one-family dwelling;
   (B)   Church;
   (C)    Public or private nursery school or kindergarten, grade school, high
school or college, including dormitories and library;
   (D)   Municipal recreational buildings, playgrounds or parks owned or
operated by the city;
   (E)   Public water supply reservoir, public regulating or pumping station,
or fire station;
   (F)   Farming, truck gardening, nursery or greenhouse; provided no sales
office is maintained;
   (G)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above
uses when located upon the same lot and not involving the conduct of a
business, including customary home occupation engaged in by the occupants of
the buildings on the premises, and including the office of a physician,
surgeon, dentist or a studio of a teacher of the fine arts when situated in the
same dwelling used by such physician, surgeon, dentist or teacher as his or her
private dwelling and incidental to the enjoyment of such premises as his or her
bonafide home; or
   (H)   Sign as accessory use:
      (1)   A professional person or persons engaged in a customary home
occupation may display a name plate not exceeding one square foot in area, such
plate containing the name and occupation of the resident, and provided such
plate is placed flat against, along and on the front of the building and no
portion of it projects more than six inches from the wall of the building.
      (2)   A sign not exceeding four square feet in area may by placed upon a
lot or building to advertise the lease, hire or sale of such lot or building.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.031 AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   In a SF Single-Family Residential District, the following regulations shall
apply.
   (A)   Front yard. There shall be a front yard along the front line of the
lot. The minimum depth of such front yard shall be 25 feet; provided that if
25% of a block frontage on the same side of the street is improved with
buildings, the front yard shall extend to the average alignment of such
existing buildings, unless such alignment is more than 40 feet back from the
street line, in which case the front yard shall be not less than 40 feet, but
in no case shall the depth of such front yard be less than 15 feet.
   (B)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard along the rear line of the lot.
The minimum depth of such rear yard shall be 25 feet.
   (C)   Side yard. There shall be side yard along each line of the lot other
than a front line or a rear line. The minimum width of such side yard shall be
ten feet; provided that, if the street side line of the corner lot is in the
same block frontage with a lot or lots whose street line is a front line of
such lot or lots, the side yard shall extend to the average alignment of the
buildings along the same side of the street, unless such buildings are more
than 25 feet back from the street line or unless the lot is in a platted
subdivision and the building is planned to said subdivision, but no case less
than ten feet.
   (D)   Lot width. The average minimum width of the lot shall be 90 feet for
any use.
   (E)   Lot area. The minimum area of the lot shall be 9,000 square feet for
any use.
   (F)   Height. The height limit shall be two and one-half stories for a
dwelling and 35 feet for any other building, except that any such other
building or portion thereof may be erected higher than 35 feet; provided that
above such 35-foot limit, such building or portion thereof if set back from all
required ground level building lines one foot for each two feet of its height
above such limit.
   (G)   Accessory building. No accessory building shall be more than one story
in height and shall be located on the lot as follows:
      (1)   Not closer than 60 feet to the front lot line;
      (2)   Not closer than four feet to the rear lot line unless there is an
existing alley, in which case the accessory building may be built along the
rear lot line;
      (3)   Not closer than four feet to a side lot line not on a side street;
and
      (4)   Not closer than 20 feet to any side street lot line if the
accessory building is located on the rear third of the lot, and not closer than
ten feet to any side street lot line if the building is on any portion of the
lot other than the rear third.
   (H)   Maximum density. Four dwellings per acre.
   (I)   Maximum coverage. Thirty percent of total lot area.
   (J)   Minimum depth. One hundred feet.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
D TWO-FAMILY DUPLEX DISTRICT
§ 154.045 USES.
   In a D Two-Family Duplex District, no building or premises shall be used and
no building shall be erected or structurally altered which is arranged or
designed to be used for other than one or more of the following uses: a use
permitted in an Agricultural-Open and Single-Family Residential District; and
two-family dwelling.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.046 AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   In a D Two-Family Duplex District, the following regulations shall apply.
   (A)   Front yard. There shall be a front yard along the front line of the
lot. The minimum depth of such front yard shall be 25 feet; provided that if
25% of a block frontage on the same side of the street is improved with
buildings, the front yard shall extend to the average alignment of such
existing buildings, unless such alignment is more than 40 feet back from the
street line in which case the front yard shall be not less than 40 feet, but in
no case shall the depth of such front be less than 15 feet.
   (B)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard along the rear line of the lot.
The minimum depth of such rear yard shall be 25 feet.
   (C)   Side yard. There shall be a side yard along each line of the lot other
than a front line or a rear line. The minimum width of such side yard shall be
ten feet provided that, if the street side line of the corner lot is in the
same block frontage with a lot or lots whose street line is a front line of
such lot or lots, the side yard shall extend to the average alignment of the
buildings that are more than 25 feet back from the street line, in which case,
the side yard shall not be less than 25 feet, or unless the lot is in a platted
subdivision and the building is planned in conformity with the building setback
lines pertaining to said subdivision, but in no case less than ten feet.
   (D)   Lot width. The average minimum width of the lot shall be 90 feet for a
two-family dwelling.
   (E)   Lot area. The minimum area of the lot shall be 9,000 square feet for a
two-family dwelling.
   (F)   Height. The height limit shall be two and one-half stories for a
dwelling and 35 feet for any other building; except that such other building or
portion thereof may be erected higher than 35 feet; provided that above such
35-foot limit, such building or portion thereof is set back from all required
ground level building lines one foot for each two feet of its height above such
limit.
   (G)   Accessory buildings. No accessory building shall be more than one
story in height and shall be located on the lot as follows:
      (1)   Not closer than 60 feet to the front lot line;
      (2)   Not closer than four feet to the rear lot line, unless there is an
existing alley, in which case the accessory building may be built along the
rear lot line;
      (3)   Not closer than four feet to a side lot line not on a side street;
and
      (4)   Not closer than 20 feet to any side street lot line if the
accessory building is located on the rear third of the lot and not closer than
ten feet to any side street lot line if the building is on any portion of the
lot other than the rear third.
   (H)   Off-street parking. A minimum of four off-street parking spaces per
duplex unit shall be provided.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
MF MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 154.060 USES.
   In a MF Multi-Family Residential District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or structurally altered which is arranged
or designed to be used for other than one or more of the following uses:
   (A)   A use permitted in any Agricultural-Open, Single-Family Residential or
Two-Family Duplex District; or
   (B)   Triplexes, townhouses and apartment houses with minimum dwelling area
of 750 square feet per dwelling unit.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.061 AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   In a Multi-Family Residential District for buildings hereinafter erected,
the following regulations shall apply.
   (A)   Front yard. There shall be a front yard along the front line of the
lot. The minimum depth of such front yard shall be 25 feet; provided that, if
25% of a block frontage on one side of the street is improved with buildings,
the front yard shall extend to the average alignment of such existing
buildings, unless such alignment is more than 40 feet back from the street
line, in which case the front yard shall be not less than 40 feet, but in no
case shall the depth of such front yard be less than 15 feet.
   (B)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard along the rear line of the lot.
The minimum depth of such rear yard shall be 25 feet.
   (C)   Side yard. There shall be a side yard along each line of the lot other
than a front line or a rear line. The minimum width of any such side yard shall
be ten feet; provided that, if the street side line of the corner lot is in the
same block frontage with a lot or lots whose street line is the front line of
such lot or lots, then the side yard shall extend to the average alignment of
the buildings along the same side of the street, unless such buildings are more
than 25 feet back from the street line, in which case the yard shall be not
less than 25 feet, or unless the lot is in a platted subdivision and the
building is planned in conformity with the building setback lines pertaining to
said subdivision, but in no case less than ten feet.
   (D)   Minimum lot width. The minimum average width of the lot shall be 90
feet.
   (E)   Minimum lot depth. The minimum lot depth shall be 100 feet.
   (F)   Maximum lot depth. Three times the average of the front line and rear
line lengths.
   (G)   Height. The height limit shall be 35 feet for any building, except
that any such building or portion thereof may be erected higher than 35 feet;
provided that above such 35-foot limit, such building or portion thereof is set
back from all required ground level building lines one foot for each two feet
of its height above such limit.
   (H)   Accessory buildings.
      (1)   Location. No accessory building shall be located:
         (a)   Closer than four feet to the rear lot line, unless there is an
existing alley, in which case the accessory building may be built along the
rear lot line; or
         (b)   Closer than 20 feet to any street lot line if the accessory
building is located on the rear third of the lot, nor closer than ten feet to
any side street lot line if the accessory building is on any portion of the lot
other than the rear third.
      (2)   Height. No accessory building shall be more than one story in
height, except that a garage used exclusively for the storage of vehicles for
the accommodation of tenants of an apartment house or hotel may be not more
than three stories in height.
   (I)   Off-street parking. A minimum of one and one-half off-street parking
spaces per family dwelling unit shall be provided.
   (J)   Minimum lot area. A minimum of 9,000 square feet for the first two
units and 2,500 square feet for each additional unit.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982) Penalty, see
154.999
MH MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT
§ 154.075 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME/HUD-CODE MANUFACTURED HOME. A manufactured home
which has a kitchen, flush toilet and a bath or shower facility and is commonly
referred to as self-contained.
   MANUFACTURED HOME LOT. A plot of ground within the park designed for the
accommodation of one manufactured home.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. Any plot of ground upon which two or more
manufactured homes occupy space for dwelling or sleeping purposes and where a
compensation is made for such accommodations. This subchapter does not apply to
parks established for a recreational vehicle park.
   MOBILE HOME/MANUFACTURED HOUSING/HUD-CODE MANUFACTURED HOME. As set forth in
the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act (Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Article
5221f) are binding on all persons and agencies in this state as a matter of law
including local political subdivisions and home-rule cities.
      (1)   HUD-CODE MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure constructed on or after
June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in
the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more
in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is
built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems.
      (2)   MANUFACTURED HOUSING or MANUFACTURED HOME. A HUD-code manufactured
home or a mobile home and collectively means and refers to both.
      (3)   MOBILE HOME. A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976,
transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight
body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected
on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning and electrical systems.
   PARK. A mobile home and/or HUD-code manufactured home park.
(Ord. 1-97, passed 7-10-1997)
§ 154.076 LICENSE.
   (A)   License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or
operate within the limits of the city, any park unless such person shall first
obtain a license therefor.
   (B)   License fees. The fee for the park shall be as prescribed by the
annual fee schedule published with the city’s operating budget.
   (C)   Application for license.
      (1)   Application for a park license shall be filed with the City
Secretary. Applications shall be in writing, signed by the applicant and shall
contain the following:
         (a)   The name and address of the applicant;
         (b)   The common street address location and legal description of the
park;
         (c)   A complete plan of the park showing compliance with §
154.077;
         (d)   Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements
constructed, or to be constructed within the park; and
         (e)   Such further information as may be requested by the City Council
to enable it to determine if the park will comply with the legal requirements.
      (2)   The application and all accompanying plans and specifications shall
be filed in triplicate. The City Engineer shall review the application and
inspect the proposed plans and specifications. He or she shall then make a
report to the City Council concerning such application and include therein the
recommendations relative to the issuance of the a license. If the park is in
compliance with all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable
ordinances or statutes, the City Council may approve the application, and in
the case of proposed parks, may make such approval contingent upon the
completion of the park according to the plans and specifications submitted with
the application. The City Secretary, at the direction of the City Council,
shall issue the license.
   (D)   Revocation of license. The City Council may revoke any license or
permit issued under this chapter in case any of the provisions hereof are
violated. However, before said license or permit may be revoked, the City
Council must give ten days’ notice to the holder of said license and hold a
hearing thereon. After said license or permit has been revoked, the owner may
reapply for a new license following the provisions outlined in this section, if
the reasons for said revocation have been duly corrected.
   (E)   Posting of licenses. The license certifications shall be conspicuously
posted in the office of the park at all times.
(Ord. 1-97, passed 7-10-1997) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.077 PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS OF MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS.
   (A)   Park plan. The following requirements are generally applicable to all
parks.
      (1)   The minimum size of the park will not be less than five acres.
      (2)   The park shall be located on a well drained site, free from
stagnant pools of water.
      (3)   Entrances to the park must be clearly defined and identified by
address. Each manufactured home must be clearly identified by three-inch lot
numbers. This number must be visible from the internal roadway at all times.
      (4)   Lots shall be clearly defined. Manufactured housing shall be so
harbored on each lot that there shall be at least a 35-foot clearance between
manufactured homes. In addition, no manufactured home shall be located closer
than ten feet from any building, roadway, lot line or from any property line
bounding the park. Lot size for site built residences in a park shall comply
with lot area requirements of residential lots in the city. Two parking spaces
constructed of asphalt or concrete will be provided for off-street parking for
each manufactured home.
      (5)   (a)   All park lots shall abut upon an internal roadway of not less
than 36 feet where parking is permitted on both sides of the street, 31 feet
where parking is permitted on one side or a minimum of 25 feet where no parking
is allowed on either side of the street. All internal roadways shall have
unobstructed access to a public street or highway and shall be so designed as
to minimize congestion and hazards at the entrance or exit and allow free
movement of traffic on adjacent streets. All internal roadways shall be well
marked in the daytime and lighted at night.
         (b)   All streets shall be provided with a smooth, hard and dense
surface which shall be durable and well-drained under normal use and weather
conditions. Surface edges shall be protected to prevent raveling of the wearing
surface and shifting of the base. Street surfaces shall be maintained free of
cracks, holes and other hazards.
         (c)   Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to ensure adequate
surface drainage, but shall be not more than 8%.
      (6)   (a)   Within 100 feet of an intersection, streets shall be at
approximate right angles. A distance of at least 150 feet shall be maintained
between centerlines of off-set intersecting streets.
         (b)   Intersections of more than two streets at one point are
prohibited.
      (7)   Walkways, not less than five feet wide, shall be provided from the
park lots to the service buildings open to residents of the parks, such as, but
not limited to, laundry room, pool, game room, sanitation facilities and the
like. The walkways shall be hard surfaced, well marked in the daytime and
lighted at night.
      (8)   All streets and internal roadways within the parks will be a
minimum of one-inch hot asphalt on an eight-inch base of crushed stone. Any
interior roadway not connected to a public street on both ends must have a turn
around with a minimum radius of 80 feet.
   (B)   Location. Parks may be located only in conformity with the zoning
ordinance of the city and, in addition to the requirements contained therein,
each boundary of the park must be at least 200 feet from any permanent
residential building located outside the park, unless separated therefrom by a
natural or artificial screening which must be approved by the City Council
prior to construction of the park.
   (C)   Maintenance. Every person owning or operating a park shall maintain
such park and any facilities, fixtures and permanent equipment in connection
therewith, in a clean and sanitary condition and shall maintain said equipment
in a state of good repair.
   (D)   Additional construction. Except as permitted by this section or by a
license or permit issued by the city, it shall be unlawful for any person
operating a park or occupying a manufactured home to construct or authorize
construction in such park, or in connection with such manufactured home any
additional structure, building or shelter as an accessory with or attached to a
manufactured home without a building permit. Awnings of canvas or metal,
suitably constructed, may be attached to said manufactured homes. Permits for
portable prefabricated temporary rooms, for the express purpose of increasing
the manufactured home, commonly called cabana, may be approved by the City
Council if they meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Strength of materials and structure to meet minimum standards of
the Building Code;
      (2)   Capable of being dismantled when moved;
      (3)   Such rooms shall be completely dismantled and removed from the site
at the time the manufactured home itself is moved;
      (4)   Finish and appearance to be as near the same as possible to the
manufactured home to which it is an accessory and will not exceed the elevation
of the main use structure;
      (5)   The length must not exceed the length of the manufactured home to
which it is accessory and will not exceed one-half of the area of the main use
structure; and
      (6)   Only one such structure per manufactured home shall be permitted.
   (E)   Office building. Each park shall be provided with an on-site office in
which shall be kept copies of all records pertaining to the management and
supervision of the park, as well as all rules and regulations of the park. Such
records, rules and regulations will be available for inspection by law
enforcement officers, public health officials and other officials whose duties
necessitate acquisition of the information contained therein.
(Ord. 1-97, passed 7-10-1997) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.078 OPERATION OF MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS.
   It shall be the duty of the owner, his or her agent, representative or
manager to prescribe rules and regulations for the management of the park; to
make adequate provisions for the enforcement of such rules; and to adhere to
all rules and regulations adopted for the management of such park. Copies of
all rules and regulations shall be furnished to the City Council. In addition
thereto, it shall be the duty of the owner, his or her agent, representative or
manager to comply strictly with the following:
   (A)   Request the city perform an inspection of the water and sanitary
conveniences at least annually;
   (B)   (1)   Provide for the collection and removal of garbage and other
waste material. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the park
shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect
breeding areas, accident or fire hazards, air or water pollution. Disposal of
refuse will comply with the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission
(TNRCC) and local regulations pertaining to disposal of municipal solid waste;
and
      (2)   All refuse shall be stored in fly-tight, water-tight or rodent-
proof containers which shall be located not more than 150 feet from any lot.
Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to properly
store all refuse. Refuse collection stands shall be provided for all refuse
containers. Such container stands shall be so designed as to prevent containers
from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration and to
facilitate cleaning around them. All refuse containing garbage shall be
collected at least twice weekly. Where suitable collection service is not
available from municipal or private agencies, the park operator shall provide
the service. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles
or covered containers. Where municipal or private disposal service is not
available, the park operator shall dispose of the refuse by transporting to a
disposal site approved by the TNRCC. Such site must comply with state and local
solid water disposal regulations.
   (C)   Prohibit the placing or storage of unsightly material or vehicles of
any kind;
   (D)   Provide for regulation of barbecue pits, fireplaces, stoves and
incinerators. Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces, woodburning stoves
and incinerators shall be so located, constructed, maintained and used as to
minimize fire hazards and smoke nuisance both on the property on which used and
on neighborhood property. No open fire shall be permitted except in facilities
provided. No open fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall be used and no
material burned which emits dense smoke or objectionable odors; and
   (E)   (1)   Provide regulations for the control of insects and rodents.
Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent
harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control
insects and rodents shall conform with the requirements of the health
authority;
      (2)   Parks shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris which may
provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other
pests;
      (3)   Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent
harborage. Lumber, pipe and other building material shall be stored at least
one foot above the ground;
      (4)   Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation exists, all
exterior openings in or beneath any structure shall be appropriately screened
with wire mesh or other suitable materials; and
      (5)   The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent
harborage of ticks, chiggers and other noxious insects. All parks shall be so
maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, poison
sumac and other noxious weeds considered detrimental to health. Open areas
shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description.
(Ord. 1-97, passed 7-10-1997) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.079 FACILITIES AND SERVICES.
   (A)   Water supply and distribution. The following requirements shall apply
within the park.
      (1)   An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be
provided in each park. Provisions shall be made for a public supply of water of
satisfactory quantity, quality and pressure, and connections shall be made
thereto and its supply used exclusively.
      (2)   The water supply system of the park shall be connected by pipes to
all manufactured homes, buildings and other facilities requiring water. All
water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be constructed and maintained
in accordance with state and local regulations and requirements and shall be of
a type and in locations approved by the health authority.
      (3)   The water piping system shall not be connected with non-potable or
questionable water supplies and shall be protected against the hazards of
backflow or back siphonage.
      (4)   The system shall be so designed and maintained as to provide a
pressure of not less than 20 pounds per square inch under normal operating
conditions at service buildings and other locations requiring potable water
supply.
      (5)   Individual water riser pipes shall be located within the confined
area of the mobile home stand at a point where the water connection will
approximate a vertical position.
      (6)   Water riser pipes shall extend at least four inches above ground
elevation and be at least three-quarter-inch. Each pipe shall be thoroughly
cleaned prior to the connection of a new manufactured home.
      (7)   Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service
lines, valves and riser pipes and to protect risers from heaving and thawing
actions of ground during freezing weather. Surface drainage shall be diverted
from the location of the riser pipe.
      (8)   Underground stop and waste valves shall be installed on any water
service.
   (B)   Sewage disposal system. All parks shall have a sewage disposal system
which meets the following requirements.
      (1)   An adequate and safe sewerage system shall be provided in all parks
for conveying and disposing of all sewage to an approved public system.
      (2)   All sewer lines shall be located in trenches of sufficient depth to
be free of breakage from traffic or other movement and shall be separated from
the park water supply system at a safe distance. Sewers shall be at a grade
which will ensure a velocity of two feet per second when flowing full. All
sewer lines shall be constructed of materials approved by the local water
control and treatment district, shall be adequately vented, and shall have
watertight joints.
      (3)   The sewer riser pipe shall have at least a four-inch diameter,
shall be trapped below the ground surface and shall be located on the lot so
that the sewer connection to the manufactured home drain outlet will be
approximate a vertical position.
      (4)   The sewer connection shall have a nominal inside diameter of at
least three inches and the slope of any portion thereof shall be at least one-
fourth-inch per foot. The sewer connection shall consist of one pipe line only
without any branch fittings. All joints shall be watertight.
      (5)   All materials used for sewer connections shall be semi-rigid,
corrosive resistant, non-absorbent and durable. The inner surface shall be
smooth.
      (6)   When a manufactured home is not occupied, the sewer pipe must be
capped. The rim of the pipe must be at least four inches above ground elevation
and/or drainage shall be diverted away from it.
      (7)   Installation of all risers and underground traps shall be
accomplished under the supervision of a plumber licensed by the state.
   (C)   Electrical distribution system. All parks shall be connected to an
electrical distribution system which meets the following requirements.
      (1)   Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of
wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances which shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such
systems. All installation work of electrical fixtures will be accomplished in
accordance with the rules of the National Electrical Code, current edition.
      (2)   All exposed non-current carrying metal parts of manufactured homes
and all other equipment shall be grounded by means of an approved grounding
conductor with branch circuit conductors or other approved method of grounded
metallic wiring. The neutral conductor shall not be used as an equipment ground
for manufactured homes or other equipment.
   (D)   Fuel. Bottled gas and propane equipment shall be installed and
maintained as prescribed by the Texas Railroad Commission Liquefied Petroleum
Gas Division Rules.
   (E)   Fire protection. The following rules regarding fire protection shall
apply within any park.
      (1)   The park shall be subject to rules and regulations of the county
fire prevention authority.
      (2)   All parks shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable
materials.
      (3)   Portable fire extinguishers of an approved type shall be keep in
service buildings and at all other location designated by such fire prevention
authority and shall be maintained in good operating condition.
      (4)   Fire shall be made only in stoves and other equipment intended for
such purpose.
      (5)   Fire hydrants shall be installed if the park or area water supply
system is capable to serve them in accordance with the following requirements:
fire hydrants shall be located within 300 feet of any manufactured home,
service building or other structures in the park or area.
      (6)   The name of each park shall be displayed on a sign having
dimensions of not less than 18 square feet and shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place when viewed from a public thoroughfare. Lettering shall not
be less than eight inches in height.
(Ord. 1-97, passed 7-10-1997)
§ 154.080 MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Responsibilities of the park management.
      (1)   The person to whom a license for a park is issued shall operate the
park in compliance with this and other regulations issued hereunder and shall
provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment
in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
      (2)   The park management shall notify all occupants of the applicable
provisions of this regulation and inform them of their duties and
responsibilities under the regulations issued hereunder.
      (3)   The park management shall supervise the placement of each
manufactured home stand which includes securing its stability and installing
all utility connections.
      (4)   The park management shall maintain a register containing the names
of all park occupants.
      (5)   The park operator will designate an office within the park or in
the absence of a resident manager, will leave posted a sign indicating the
phone number of a management representative.
   (B)   Responsibilities of park occupants.
      (1)   Each park occupant shall comply with all applicable requirements of
this regulation and shall maintain his or her lot, its facilities and equipment
in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
      (2)   Each park occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of his
or her mobile home on its stand and proper installation of all utility
connections in accordance with the instructions of the park management.
      (3)   No owner or person in charge of a dog, cat or other pet animal
shall permit it to run at large or to commit any nuisance within the limits of
the park.
      (4)   A manufactured home shall not be occupied for dwelling purposes
unless it be properly placed on a stand and connected to water, sewerage and
electrical utilities.
      (5)   All manufactured homes shall be maintained in accordance with the
standards set forth by the Department of Housing and Urban Development for the
construction of manufactured homes.
      (6)   To ensure against natural hazards such as tornados, high winds and
electrical storms, anchorage at each manufactured home shall be provided
according to the Bureau of Labor Standards and other applicable state laws.
      (7)   All manufactured home units not attached to a permanent foundation
shall provide weather resistant skirting from the top of the unit’s frame to
grade. Skirting shall totally enclose and secure from view the unit’s axles and
all required anchors, footings and piers. All required skirting shall be of a
texture and color similar to the materials used in the construction of the
manufactured home unit.
(Ord. 1-97, passed 7-10-1997)
C COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
§ 154.095 USES.
   In a Commercial District, no building or premises shall be used and no
building shall be erected or structurally altered which is arranged or designed
to be used for other than one or more of the following uses:
   (A)   A use permitted in an Agriculture-Open, Single-Family Residential,
Two-Family Duplex, Multi-Family or Mobile Home Park District;
   (B)   Automobile salesroom and accompanying mechanical garage; used car lot;
provided no junk is bought or sold;
   (C)   Bakery;
   (D)   Commercial billboard or advertising sign;
   (E)   Bottling works;
   (F)   Bus terminal or bus garage;
   (G)   Billiard room, bowling alley, skating rink, dance hall, driving range
or miniature golf course;
   (H)   Dry cleaning, pressing; laundry or dyeing establishment, carpet
cleaning or home laundry;
   (I)   Electro-plating, electric-galvanizing and electric works, including
armature winding;
   (J)   Frozen food locker room, where the refrigerating units shall not
exceed in capacity ten tons of refrigeration;
   (K)   Ice cream manufacture;
   (L)   Job printing;
   (M)   Mechanical garage;
   (N)   Mortuary;
   (O)   Newspaper publishing and printing;
   (P)   Penal or correctional institution, institutions for the care of
tubercular, liquor, narcotic, insane or feeble-minded patients;
   (Q)   Sports arena for the exhibition of boxing and wrestling matches and
similar activities;
   (R)   Tourist court;
   (S)   Transfer company;
   (T)   Veterinary hospital;
   (U)   Warehouse for such material as automobiles, clothing, dry goods,
drugs, films, furniture, glass, groceries, hardware, machinery, millinery,
paint, roofing, rope, rubber, shop supplies, tobacco, turpentine and varnish;
   (V)   Wholesale house or sales office, or sample room;
   (W)   Bank;
   (X)   Barber shop, bath or massage parlors and beauty parlor;
   (Y)   Business college;
   (Z)   Cleaning and pressing;
   (AA)   Commercial billboard or advertising sign;
   (BB)   Commercial tennis courts;
   (CC)   Electric sub-station;
   (DD)   Gasoline filling station;
   (EE)   Lodge hall;
   (FF)   Miniature golf courses;
   (GG)   Ice delivery station;
   (HH)   Nursery or greenhouse operated as a retail business;
   (II)   Office, office building;
   (JJ)   Public parking lot;
   (KK)   Photographer’s studio;
   (LL)   Restaurant;
   (MM)   Retail store or shop for custom work or the making of articles to be
sold at retail on the premises;
   (NN)   Storage garage;
   (OO)   Studio where operated as a main use;
   (PP)   Telephone exchange; providing no business office and no repair or
storage facilities are maintained;
   (QQ)   Theatre;
   (RR)   Trade school;
   (SS)   Any use not included in any other class; provided such use is not
noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas,
fumes, noise or vibration; or
   (TT)   Accessory buildings and uses. Accessory building and uses customarily
incident to any of the above uses when located upon the same lot.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.096 AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   In a Commercial District for buildings hereafter erected, the following
regulations shall apply:
   (A)   Maximum height: 45 feet when across the street from any family-
dwelling districts; otherwise no limit; and
   (B)   Setback: none if entire block is a Commercial District; otherwise,
front setbacks must harmonize with adjacent property.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982)
GI GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 154.110 USES.
   In a General Industrial District, no building or premises shall be used, and
no building shall be erected or structurally altered which is arranged or
designed to be used for other than one or more of the following uses:
   (A)   A use permitted in a Commercial District, however, no dwellings,
unless accessory to industrial use, are not allowed in this District;
   (B)   Automobile wrecking yard;
   (C)   Blacksmith shop, horse shoeing or wagon shop and public stables;
   (D)   Boiler making, structural iron or pipe works;
   (E)   Brewery;
   (F)   Canning or preserving factory;
   (G)   Cotton ginning, baling or compressing, or cotton seed products
manufacture;
   (H)   Central Station Lighting or Power Plant;
   (I)   Chicken hatchery;
   (J)   Coal hoist, coal pocket or coal car trestle;
   (K)   Disinfectant or insecticide manufacture;
   (L)   Dyes manufacture;
   (M)   Flour milling;
   (N)   Grain elevator;
   (O)   Ice manufacture, cold storage plant or creamery;
   (P)   Oil compounding and barrelling;
   (Q)   Printing ink manufacture;
   (R)   Poultry dressing or poultry killing, storage or packing of fish or
poultry;
   (S)   Public utility plant;
   (T)   Railroad roundhouse or shop;
   (U)   Sewage disposal or treatment plant;
   (V)   Stone cutting, rock crushing;
   (W)   Scrap iron or junk storage, scrap paper or rag storage or baling;
   (X)   Tar roofing or tar waterproofing manufacture;
   (Y)   Textile manufacture;
   (Z)   Wood distillation including manufacture of charcoal, tar, turpentine
and other by products; or
   (AA)   Any manufacturing or industrial process not heretofore listed
excluding however, such processed as may emit obnoxious dust, fumes, odor or
gas.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.111 AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   In a General Industrial District for buildings hereafter erected, the
following regulations shall apply:
   (A)   Maximum height: one story if within 150 feet of any residential
district, otherwise, maximum is one foot for each foot of setback from the lot
line; and
   (B)   Minimum setback: 50-foot setback from street is required when opposite
a district zoned SF, D, MF, MH or C.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982)
O OFFICE DISTRICT
§ 154.125 GENERAL PURPOSE AND DESCRIPTION.
   The O Office District is established to create a flexible district for low
intensity office and professional uses (less than 10,000 square feet of floor
area). Permitted uses should be compatible with adjacent residential areas by
limiting heights to one story and utilizing buffers and landscape requirements
established by the District. Adaptive reuse of existing structures is
encouraged. Sites zoned O may be built to two stories or in excess of 10,000
square feet if located away from any properties zoned for a single-family.
Buildings in this District should be compatible and in similar scale with
residential uses and adjacent property.
(Ord. 02-2000, passed 2-10-2000)
§ 154.126 USES PERMITTED.
   The following uses are permitted:
   (A)   Accessory uses to the main use;
   (B)   Automatic teller machines;
   (C)   Artist’s studio;
   (D)   Clinic, medical office or other licensed health care services (no
overnight patients);
   (E)   Church;
   (F)   Drug store or pharmacy;
   (G)   Florist (no outside storage);
   (H)   Laboratory: scientific, research, testing, medical or optical so long
as all operations are conducted indoor and no residual waste products are
generated;
   (I)   Municipally-owned structures and facilities (no open storage or
repairs);
   (J)   Nursing home;
   (K)   Postal facilities (public or private) excluding truck terminals;
   (L)   Professional, administrative and general office uses including:
      (1)   Architect or planner;
      (2)   Bookkeeping or accountant;
      (3)   Engineering;
      (4)   General business;
      (5)   Interior decorator;
      (6)   Insurance agency;
      (7)   Lawyer;
      (8)   Optician or optometrist;
      (9)   Psychologist;
      (10)   Real estate sales and offices; and
      (11)   Reprographic or printing shop.
   (M)   Photography studio;
   (N)   Public schools or private schools;
   (O)   Radio broadcasting without tower;
   (P)   Telephone exchange; provided no public business and no repair or
outside storage facilities are maintained; or
   (Q)   Uses permitted by specific use permit according to §
154.162.
(Ord. 02-2000, passed 2-10-2000)
§ 154.127 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The maximum height is one story; two and one-half stories if located more
than 60 feet from any property zoned or used for single-family residential.
(Ord. 02-2000, passed 2-10-2000)
§ 154.128 AREA REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Size of yards.
      (1)   Minimum front yard: 25 feet;
      (2)   Minimum side yard: exterior 20 feet; interior is none; and
      (3)   Minimum rear yard: no rear yard shall be required except when it
adjoins a residential zoning district, then a rear yard of ten feet is
required.
   (B)   Size of lots.
      (1)   Minimum lot size: 9,000 square feet;
      (2)   Minimum lot width: 60 feet; and
      (3)   Lot depth: N/A.
(Ord. 02-2000, passed 2-10-2000)
§ 154.129 SPECIAL DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Floor area. The floor area shall be 10,000 square feet; the maximum
floor area may exceed 10,000 square feet if the entire structure is in excess
of 200 feet from a residential use or zone.
   (B)   Parking requirements. 
      (1)   One off-street parking space shall be provided for each 200 square
feet of gross floor area of each structure in the O Office District. Before
approval of the zoning for this classification, the property owner shall submit
a site plan including planned parking and loading, which must be approved by
the City Engineer before the rezoning application is approved by the City
Council.
      (2)   Off-street parking provided in the O Office District shall be
provided from side streets rather than major arterials. Where such access is
not possible due to lot location or configuration, access shall be permitted
from major arterials reflected on the site plan submitted at the time of
approval of the zoning for this classification.
      (3)   Off-street parking provided in the O Office District shall be
screened from abutting residential property.
      (4)   Entrances and/or exits shall be located so as to minimize traffic
congestion. Driveways shall be located so that the opening, including the
turning radius, is no closer than 25 feet to the end of a street intersection
curb return. Driveway opening shall not be less than 25 feet turning radius of
the driveway apron. The distance between any two adjacent entrances or exits
serving the same parking facility shall be not more than 25 feet as measured at
the property line.
      (5)   The off-street parking required shall be on the same lot or parcel
of land as the structure they are intended to serve or on a lot or parcel of
land abutting the lot they are intended to serve. On-street parking shall not
be included in meeting the required number of parking spaces.
   (C)   Open storage is prohibited.
(Ord. 02-2000, passed 2-10-2000) Penalty, see § 153.999
PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
§ 154.140 GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The Planned Development District is a district which accommodates
planned associations of uses developed as integral land use units such as
industrial districts, offices, commercial or service centers, shopping centers,
residential developments of multiple or mixed housing including attached
single-family dwellings or any appropriate combination of use which may be
planned, developed or operated as integral land use units either by a single
owner or a combination of owners.
   (B)   A PD District may be used to permit new or innovative concepts in land
utilization not permitted by other zoning districts in this subchapter. While
greater flexibility is given to allow special conditions or restrictions that
would not otherwise allow the development to occur, procedures are established
herein to ensure against misuse of increased flexibility.
(Ord. 1211-02, passed 12-11-2008)
§ 154.141 PERMITTED USES.
   Any use permitted in this subchapter shall be permitted if such use is
specified in the amending ordinance granting a Planned Development District.
The size, location, appearance and method of operation may be specified to the
extent necessary to ensure compliance with the purpose of this chapter.
(Ord. 1211-02, passed 12-11-2008)
§ 154.142 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Development requirements for each separate PD District shall be set
forth in the amending ordinance granting the PD District and shall include, but
may not be limited to: uses, density, lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard
depths and widths, building height, building elevations, coverage, floor area
ratio, parking, access, screening, accessory buildings, signs, lighting,
project phasing or scheduling,
management associations, and other requirements as the City Council and
Planning and Zoning Commission may deem appropriate.
   (B)   In the PD District, uses shall conform to the standards and
regulations of the base zoning district to which it is most similar. The
particular zoning district may be stated in the granting ordinance. All
applications to the city shall list all requested variances from the standard
requirements set forth throughout this chapter (applications with this list
will be considered incomplete).
   (C)   The ordinance granting a PD District shall include a statement as to
the purpose and intent of the PD granted therein. A specific list is required
of variances in each district or districts and general statement citing the
reason for the PD request.
   (D)   The Planned Development District shall conform to all other sections
of the ordinance unless specifically excluded in the granting ordinance.
   (E)   In establishing a Planned Development District in accordance with this
section, the City Council shall approve and file as part of the amending
ordinance appropriate plans and standards for each Planned Development
District. To facilitate understanding of the request during the review and
public hearing process, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council
shall require a conceptual plan and/or a development plan (or detail site
plan). A detail site plan may be submitted in lieu of the conceptual plan, in
which case no further approval is required by the City Council.
      (1)   Conceptual plan. This shall be submitted by the applicant at the
time of the PD request. The plan shall show the applicant’s intent for the use
of the land within the proposed Planned Development District in a graphic
manner and as may be required, supported by written documentation of proposals
and standards for development. The city may prepare application form(s) which
further describe and explain the following requirements.
         (a)   Residential concept plan. A conceptual plan for residential land
use shall show general use, thoroughfares and preliminary plotting
arrangements. The residential development which does not propose platted lots,
the conceptual plan shall set forth the size, type and locations of buildings
and building sites, access, density, building height, fire lanes, screening,
parking areas, landscaped areas, project scheduling and other pertinent
development data.
         (b)   Non-residential conceptual plan. A conceptual plan for uses
other than residential uses shall set forth the land use proposals in a manner
to adequately illustrate the type and nature of the proposed development. Date
which may be submitted by the applicant, or required by the Planning and Zoning
Commission or City Council, may include, but is not limited to, the types of
use(s), topography and boundary of PD area, physical features of the site,
existing streets, alleys and easements, location of future public facilities,
building height and location, parking ratios, project scheduling and other
information to adequately describe the proposed development and provide data
for approval which is to be used in drafting the final development plan.
      (2)   Development plan or detail site plan.
         (a)   This plan shall set forth the final plans for development of the
Planned Development District and shall conform to the data presented and
approved on the conceptual plan. Changes of detail on the development plan,
which differ from the original concept plan, but do not alter the basic
relationship of the proposed development to adjacent property, and which do not
alter the uses permitted or increase the density, building height coverage of
the site, or which do not decrease the off-street parking ratio or reduce the
yards provided at the boundary of the site, or does not significantly alter the
landscape plans as indicated on the approved conceptual plan may be authorized
by the Mayor. If an agreement cannot be reached regarding whether a detail site
plan conforms to the original concept plan, the City Council shall review the
request and render judgment as to the conformity. The development plan may be
submitted for the total area of the PD or for any section or part as approved
on the conceptual plan. The development plan must be approved by the City
Council, but a public hearing is not required. A public hearing for the
development plan shall be required only if specifically stated at the time of
conceptual plan approval in the original amending ordinance.
         (b)   The development plan shall include:
            1.   A site inventory analysis including a scale drawing showing
existing vegetation, natural water courses, creeks or bodies of water and an
analysis of planned changes in such natural features as a as a result of the
development. This should include as a delineation of any flood-prone areas;
            2.   As a scale drawing showing any proposed public or private
streets and alleys; building sites or lots; and areas reserved as parks,
parkways, playgrounds, utility easements, school sites, street widening and
street changes; the points of ingress and egress from existing streets; general
location and description of existing and proposed utility services, including
size of water and sewer mains; the location and width for all curb cuts; the
land area of all abutting sites; and the zoning classification thereof on an
accurate survey of the tract with as a topographical contour interval of not
more than five feet;
            3.   As a site plan for proposed building complexes showing the
location of separate buildings and the minimum distance between buildings and
between buildings and property lines, street lines and alley lines. Also to be
included on the site plan is as a plan showing the arrangement and provision of
off-street parking;
            4.   As a landscape plan showing turf areas, screening walls,
ornamental planting, wooded areas and trees to be planted;
            5.   An architectural plan showing elevations and signage style to
be used throughout the development in all districts except single-family and
two-family may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission or City
Council if deemed appropriate; and
            6.   All development plans may have supplemental data describing
standards, regulations or other data pertinent to the development of the
Planned Development District which is to be included in the text of the
amending ordinance.
   (F)   The procedure for establishing a Planned Development District shall
follow the procedure for zoning amendments as set forth in this chapter. This
procedure is further expanded as follows for approval of conceptual and
development plans.
      (1)   The City Council may approve the conceptual plan and the
development plan or any section of the development plan, separately or jointly,
in public hearings, as a single pubic hearing for the PD request is adequate
when:
         (a)   The applicant submits adequate data with the request for the
Planned Development District to fulfill the requirement for as a detail site
plan; or
         (b)   Information on the concept plan and attached application is
sufficient to determine the appropriate use of the land and the development
plan will not deviate substantially from it.
      (2)   If the above conditions are not met, then another public hearing
must be held by the Planning and zoning Commission and City Council prior to
approval of the development plan (or detail site plan).
      (3)   The ordinance establishing the Planned Development District shall
not be approved until the conceptual and/or development plan is approved.
         (a)   The development plan may be approved in sections. When the plan
is approved in sections, then separate approvals by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and City Council for the initial and subsequent sections will be
required.
         (b)   The development plan shall be submitted for approval within six
months from the approval of the conceptual plan for some portion of the concept
plan. If as a partial development plan is not submitted within six months, the
concept plan is subject to review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and
City Council. If the entire project is not started within two years, the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council may review the original concept
plan to ensure its continued validity. If the city determines the concept is
not valid, as a new concept plan must be approved prior to issuing a building
permit for any portion of the PD District.
         (c)   Although a public hearing may not be required for the
development plan, approval by the City Council is still required.
      (4)   A planned development may be submitted and approved without a
conceptual or detail site plan if in the amending ordinance it is stipulated
that conceptual and detail site plans are still required; a public hearing is
required at the time the plans are submitted to the city; and no development
may occur until a detail site plan is approved.
   (G)   When a PD District is being considered, a written report from the City
Manager or his or her designated representative, discussing the impact on
planning, engineering, water utilities, electric, sanitation, building
inspection, tax, police, fire and traffic, and written comments from the
applicable public school district and from private utilities may be submitted
to the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to the Commission making any
recommendations to the City Council. In the event written comments are not
forthcoming in a reasonable amount of time, the Commission may, at its
discretion, make a recommendation to the City Council.
   (H)   If three or more buildings are situated on one lot, regardless of the
zoning classification, a conceptual plan and/or a development plan (detailed
site plan) shall be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City
Council. No public hearing is required unless so stated in the original
zoning amendment.
   (I)   All Planned Development Districts approved in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter in its original form, or by subsequent amendments
thereto, shall be referenced on the zoning district map, and a list of such
Planned Development Districts, together with the category of uses permitted
therein, shall be maintained as part of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1211-02, passed 12-11-2008)
REGULATIONS
§ 154.155 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the following regulations
regarding accessory buildings shall apply.
   (A)   Front yard. An attached accessory building or structure shall have a
front yard not less than the main building. A detached accessory building or
structure shall be located in the area defined as the rear yard.
   (B)   Side yard. There shall be a side yard for any accessory building or
structure located in a residential area of not less than three feet from any
side lot line, alley line or easement line, except that adjacent to a side
street the side yard shall never be less than ten feet.
   (C)   Rear yard.
      (1)   There shall be a rear yard for accessory building or structure of
not less than three feet measured from any lot line, alley line or easement
line. In residential districts, the main building and all accessory buildings
shall not cover more than 50% of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a
line erected joining the mid-point of one side lot line. Detached carports,
garages or other detached accessory buildings located within the rear portion
of the lot as heretofore described shall not be located closer than ten feet to
the main building nor nearer than three feet to any side lot line.
      (2)   Where a garage or carport is designed and constructed to be entered
from an alley or side street, such garage or carport shall be set back from the
side street or alley a minimum distance of 15 feet to facilitate access without
interference with the use of the street or alley by other vehicles or persons.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982)
§ 154.156 NON-CONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Any use of property existing at the time of the passage of this
chapter which does not conform with the regulations prescribed in this chapter
shall be deemed a non-conforming use.
   (B)   A non-conforming use may be continued subject to such regulations as
to the maintenance of premises and the conditions of operation as may in the
judgment of the Board of Adjustment be reasonably required for the protection
of adjacent property.
   (C)   A non-conforming use shall not be extended, but the extension of a use
to any portion of a building, which portion was arranged or designed for such
non-conforming use at the time of the passage of this chapter, shall not be
deemed the extension of a non-conforming use.
   (D)   A non-conforming use shall not be changed unless changed to a
conforming use. A non-conforming use, if changed to a conforming use, may not
thereafter be changed back to any non-conforming use.
   (E)   A cemetery, sewage, disposal or treatment plant, public utility plant,
hospital, sanitarium, correctional institution or municipal or state building
or institution existing in any use district at the time of the passage of this
chapter, shall be deemed a conforming use upon the plat devoted to such use at
the time of the passage of this chapter.
   (F)   A non-conforming use damaged more than 75% of its fair market value
above the foundations at the time of damage by fire or other calamity shall not
be reconstructed and used as before such calamity, but if less than 75%
damaged, it may be reconstructed or used provided that it be done within six
months of such calamity.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982)
§ 154.157 SPECIAL AREA REGULATION AND EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Vision clearance. On any corner lot on which a front yard is required
by this chapter, no wall, fence or other structure shall be erected and no
hedge, tree, shrub or other growth shall be maintained in such location within
such required yard space as to cause danger to traffic into the front yard.
   (B)   Front yard. In a Two-Family Duplex or Multi-Family District, a cornice
or eaves of the main building may project or extend not more than two feet into
the front yard.
   (C)   Side yard. The space in a side yard shall be open and unobstructed
except for the ordinary projections of window sills, cornices, eaves and other
ornamental features which may project or extend not more than two feet into the
side yard.
   (D)   Rear yard. The space in a rear yard shall be open and unobstructed
except for the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices,
eaves and other ornamental features. In any dwelling or apartment district,
accessory buildings may be located in the rear yard; provided they do not cover
more than 40% of the rear yard area.
   (E)   Lot extended from street to street. Wherever a lot extends from one
street line to another street line, both street lines shall be considered front
lot lines, unless houses do not front on one of the streets, in which case the
street line of the street upon which houses do not front may be considered a
rear lot line.
   (F)   Lot area. On any lot separately owned at the time of the passage of
this chapter, a single-family dwelling may be erected even though of less width
or area than required by the regulations of the area district in which it is
located; provided the required yard regulations are observed. A lot shall be
considered as separately owned even though it adjoins another lot or lots
belonging to the same owner in case it fronts on a different street from such
other adjoining lot or lots.
   (G)   Areas not to be diminished. The lot, yard area, parking or garage
space as required by this chapter, for a particular building shall not be
diminished and shall not be included as a part of the required lot, open space,
yard area, parking or garage space of any other building. If the lot, open
space, yard area, parking or garage space as required by this chapter for a
particular building are diminished, the continued existence of such building
shall be deemed to be violation of this chapter. The lot, open space, yard
area, parking or garage space of the building existing at the time of the
passage of this chapter shall not be diminished below the requirements herein
provided for building hereafter erected and such required areas shall not be
included as a part of the required areas of any building hereafter erected.
   (H)   Frontage. If 25% of the frontage on one side of any street, in any
subdivision is improved with buildings, the front yard shall extend to the
average alignment of such buildings. This provision shall apply to all dwelling
districts and multi-family districts and to all blocks in said streets in any
such subdivisions even in case any particular block or blocks may not be 25%
improved.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.158 SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS.
   No place of business for the dispensing or sale of beer, wine, malt liquor
or intoxicating liquor shall be located within a distance of 300 feet in a
direct line from the nearest exit from or entrance to a public school, hospital
or church. This protection shall also apply to duly organized schools for
children under 16 years of age, giving regular instructions at least five days
a week for eight months or more each year, owned or operated by any established
religious body or educational corporation.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.159 FLOODPLAIN PREFIX TO DISTRICT DESIGNATION.
   (A)   To provide for the appropriate use of land which has a history of
inundation or is determined to be subject to flood hazard, and to promote the
general welfare and provide protection from flooding, portions of certain
districts are designated with a floodplain prefix FP. Areas designated on the
zoning district map by an FP prefix shall be subject to the following
provisions.
   (B)   The permitted uses in that portion of any district having a floodplain
FP prefix shall be limited to the following:
      (1)   Agricultural activities including the ordinary cultivation or
grazing of land and legal types of animal husbandry;
      (2)   Off-street parking incidental to any adjacent main use permitted in
the district;
      (3)   Electrical substation;
      (4)   All types of local utilities including those requiring specific use
permits;
      (5)   Parks, community centers, playgrounds and public golf courses;
      (6)   Private commercial open area amusements such as golf courses,
driving ranges, archery ranges and similar uses when approved by specific use
permits; and
      (7)   Heliport when approved by a specific use permit.
   (C)   No building or structure shall be erected in that portion of any
district which is designated as a floodplain FP prefix until, and unless, such
building or structure has been approved by the Mayor or his or her designee,
who will ascertain that such building or structure is not subject to damage by
flooding and would not constitute an encroachment hazard or obstacle to the
movement of flood waters and that such construction would not endanger the
value and safety of other property or the public health and welfare.
   (D)   Any dump, excavation, storage, filling or mining operation within the
portion of a district have a floodplain FP prefix shall be approved in writing
by the Mayor or his or her designee before such operation is begun.
   (E)   An area may be removed from the floodplain FP prefix designation when
by the provision of drainage works, grading, flood protection or specific
drainage study, it is determined by the Mayor or his or her designee that the
flood hazard has been alleviated. Removal of the floodplain FP prefix shall be
accomplished by resolution of the City Council after written notification from
the Mayor or his or her designee advising of the removal of the flood hazard.
   (F)   The fact that land is, or is not, within a district having a
floodplain FP prefix shall not be interpreted as assurance that such land is,
or is not, subject to periodic local flooding.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.160 TEMPORARY ZONING; ANNEXED TERRITORY.
   (A)   All territory hereinafter annexed to the city shall be temporarily
classified as AO Agriculture-Open District, until permanent zoning is
established by the City Council. The procedure for establishing permanent
zoning on annexed territory shall conform to the procedure established by law
for the adoption of the original zoning regulations.
   (B)   In an area temporarily classified as AO Agriculture-Open District:
      (1)   No person shall erect, construct or proceed or continue with the
erection or construction of any building or structure or add to any building or
structure or cause the same to be done in any newly annexed territory to the
city without first applying for and obtaining a building permit or certificate
of occupancy therefore from the City Council as may be required herein.
      (2)   No permit for the construction of a building or use of land shall
be issued by the City Council or its designee other than a permit which will
allow the construction of a building permitted in the AO Agriculture-Open
District, unless and until such territory has been classified in a zoning
district other than AO Agriculture-Open District, by the City Council in the
manner prescribed by law.
      (3)   An application for a permit for any other use than that specified
in division (B)(2) above shall be made to the City Council or its designee and
by them referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration and
recommendations to the City Council and their action concerning any such permit
shall take into consideration the appropriate land use for the area. The City
Council, after receiving and reviewing the recommendations of the Planning and
Zoning Commission, may be majority vote authorize the issuance of a building
permit or certificate of occupancy or may disapprove the application.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.161 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Organization. There shall be a Board of Adjustment consisting of five
members appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. The Board of
Adjustment shall have the powers granted by and be controlled by the provisions
of Laws of Texas for 1927, Chapter 283, § 7.
   (B)   Special exceptions. When in its judgment, the public convenience and
welfare will not be substantially or permanently injured, the Board of
Adjustment may in a specific case after public notice and hearing and subject
to appropriate conditions and safeguards, authorize special exception to the
regulations herein established as follows:
      (1)   Permit the location in any use district of a state or municipal
building, publicly-owned aviation field, sewage disposal or treatment plant,
municipal waste dump, sand or gravel pit, municipally-owned athletic field,
commercial radio, transmitting station, philanthropic institution, hospital or
sanitarium;
      (2)   Permit the reconstruction of a building occupied by a non-
conforming use, or permit the extension of a non-conforming use of a building
upon the lot occupied by such use or building at the time of the passage of
this chapter;
      (3)   Permit the extension of a building or use into a more restricted
district, immediately adjacent thereto, but not more than 50 feet beyond the
boundary line of the district in which such building or use is authorized;
      (4)   Grant in undeveloped sections of the city temporary and conditional
permits for not more than two-year period for any structure or use;
      (5)   Permit in any district, such modification of the requirements of
these regulations as said Board may deem necessary to secure any appropriate
development of a lot where adjacent to such lot on two or more sides there are
buildings that do not conform to these regulations;
      (6)   Permit, in a dwelling district, a commercial use of a lot adjoining
a manufacturing district, or a multi-family use of a lot adjoining a commercial
or retail district so that there will be a stepping down from the more
restricted to the less restricted use;
      (7)   Permit such modification of the yard, open space, lot area or lot
width regulation as may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement of a
parcel of land where such parcel was separately owned at the time of the
passage of this chapter, and is of such restricted area that it cannot be
appropriately improved without such modifications; and
      (8)   Permit as an accessory use a parking lot in a Two-Family Duplex or
Multi-Family District where the lot is adjacent to a commercial or industrial
district or to non-conforming business uses, or is separated from such
districts or use by a street or alley not over 50 feet in width. Where
permission for such parking lot is granted, such parking lot shall not be used
for repair work or for servicing of any kind and no charge may be made for
parking and no signs, except an identification sign not larger than four square
feet in area may be erected or maintained thereon.
   (C)   Variances. To authorize in special cases such variances from the terms
of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to
special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this chapter
shall be observed and substantial justice done.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982)
§ 154.162 SPECIFIC USE PERMITS.
   (A)   The City Council, after public hearing and proper notice to all
parties affected and after recommendations by the Planning and Zoning
Commission may authorize the issuance of specific use permits for the uses
indicated by “S” in the chart of uses.
   (B)   The Planning and Zoning Commission in considering and determining its
recommendations to the City Council on any request for a specific use permit
may require from the applicant, plans, information, operating data and expert
evaluation concerning the location and function and characteristics of any
building or use proposed. The City Council may, in the interest of the public
welfare and to assure compliance with this chapter, establish conditions or
operation, time limit, locations, arrangement and construction of any use for
which a permit is authorized. In authorizing the location of any of the uses
listed as specific use permits, the City Council may impose such development
standards and safeguards as the conditions and locations indicate important to
the welfare and protection of adjacent property from excessive noise,
vibration, dust, dirt, smoke, fumes, gas, odor, explosion glare, offensive view
or other undesirable or hazardous conditions. A specific use permit issued for
the purpose of a mobile home dwelling shall be non-transferable. If the area
for which a specific mobile home use permit has been issued is vacant for a
period of six months, the specific use permit shall be deemed to have expired
and will thereafter no longer be valid.
   (C)   The specific use permit may be granted for definite periods of time
after which the Planning and Zoning Commission may, in the public interest,
inquire into the continuation of the permit and based upon its finding,
recommend its discontinuance or the extension of the time period as set forth
in the ordinance establishing the specific use permit.
   (D)   All specific use permits approved in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter in its original form or as hereafter amended shall be referenced
on the zoning district map and a list of such permits shall be maintained in
the appendix of this chapter.
   (E)   Specific use permits may be issued by the City Council, under the
terms of this section, for placement of mobile homes on property within the
city, regardless of the zoning classification of such property.
   (F)   The granting of a specific use permit shall be considered as an
amendment to the zoning ordinance, and the provisions of §
154.180, as amended, shall apply thereto.
   (G)   The provisions of the zoning ordinances shall not be taken as an
authorization by the city of a use, which is prohibited by restrictive
covenants or by any other rule of law.
   (H)   The following conditions shall be absolute with respect to the
issuance of a specific use permit for a mobile home.
      (1)   In deciding whether to grant a specific use permit, the City
Council shall take into consideration the size of the lot upon which the mobile
home is to be placed. In no event shall a specific use permit be granted to
place a mobile home on a lot which is smaller than the size required for
single-family dwellings (90 feet by 100 feet).
      (2)   All mobile homes must be placed on blocks or a concrete foundation
and skirted. If a mobile home is not skirted within 30 days after being placed
on a lot, the specific use permit may be terminated by the City Council upon
ten days’ written notice to the lot owner.
      (3)   The mobile home shall be placed no closer than 50 feet from any
existing residence on an adjoining lot.
      (4)   A fee of $200 shall be paid by the applicant along with the
application for the specific use permit. The fee shall not be refunded whether
the specific use permit is issued or not.
      (5)   Upon satisfactory proof of emergency conditions constituting a
documented hardship, a temporary special permit may be issued to the owner of a
mobile home for location on a lot or tract owned by him or her or a member of
his or her immediate family.
      (6)   The mobile home shall be occupied only by said landowner and his or
her family or another member or members of his or her immediate family and
shall never be rented out or used for any commercial purpose whatsoever.
      (7)   A detailed site plan shall be provided which assures compatible
placement of a mobile home in relation to the principal residence, surrounding
property lines and development, streets and other relevant site factors.
      (8)   The maximum term of permit approval shall not exceed three years;
however, extensions may be considered and approved if such extension is not
adverse to the surrounding area. The fee for each extension of the permit shall
be $25.
      (9)   If rezoning of a single-family lot to duplex zoning accompanies the
issuance of a specific use permit for a mobile home, and if the specific use
permit for mobile home placement later terminates, the zoning of the lot shall
immediately revert to single-family.
   (I)   The specific use permit is a personal right issued to the then owner
of the property. It is not transferable, and if it is in effect when the land
is sold, it shall terminate contemporaneously with the sale thereof.
   (J)   (1)   Placement of or use of a mobile home on property in the city
upon which a specific use permit is not in effect shall be a violation of §
154.999.
      (2)   Likewise, failure to remove a mobile home after a specific use
permit has expired or is terminated shall be a violation of such ordinance.
   (K)   The City Council may impose conditions on such permit as it deems
necessary to be in the public interest after full hearing on an application and
reserves, at all times, the right and power to revoke any such permit for
violation of any of its terms after a hearing at which the holder has been give
at least ten days’ prior notice.
   (L)   The provisions of this section shall not affect the placement of
mobile homes in mobile home subdivisions, a use which continues to be
authorized under this chapter without issuance of a specific use permit.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982; Ord. 02-92, passed 11-12-1992) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.163 USUAL AND REASONABLE CRITERIA FOR CONTROL OF SIGNS.
Permanent Type Signs
Type Maximum Area (Square Feet) Zone Permitted Spacing
Permanent Type Signs
Type               Maximum Area (Square Zone Permitted       Spacing
                   Feet)
                                                             400 feet apart set
Advertising sign   400                  C District           back 50 feet at
                                                             intersection
Agricultural sign  100                  All districts        200 feet between
                                                             signs
Apartment sign     50                   All districts except 1 per street
                                        residential          frontage
Business sign      100                  C District           Not controlled
                  200                  C and GI Districts   Not controlled
Institutional sign 32                   All residential      1 per street
                  100                  districts            frontage

Name plate         2                    All residential      1 per street
                                        districts            frontage
 
 
 
Temporary Type Signs
Type              Maximum Area  Zone Permitted       Spacing
                  (Square Feet)
                                                     1 per street
Construction sign 64            All districts        frontage of project
                                                     or for each 50 acres
                                                     of project
                                                     1 per project
Development sign  150           All districts        1 per each 50 acres
                                                     in project
Real estate sign  8             All residential
                                districts            1 for each platted
                 32            All districts except lot or tract and for
                                residential and C    acreage, 1 for each
                                                     200 feet of street
                 200           GI District          frontage
 
   (A)   Any non-conforming sign which is damaged or is deteriorated to a point
where its restoration cast exceeds 50% of its original value shall be removed.
   (B)   No sign, name plate or similar device located in a residential
district or within 100 feet of a residential district boundary shall be
directly illuminated or of a flashing, intermittent or pulsating type.
   (C)   No sign shall be erected so as to project into the public right-of-way
of any street or alley.
   (D)   All ground supported signs shall be separated by a 50-foot separation.
   (E)   No advertising sign structure shall contain more than two sign panels
facing in the same direction.
   (F)   No sign shall be constructed to exceed the maximum building height
permitted in the specific district where the sign is located except that in
shopping centers or similar commercial or office centers containing six acres
or more, it is permissible to erect a pylon or major identification sign not to
exceed 75 feet in height when set back from the side and rear property line a
distance equal to the height of the sign.
   (G)   No sign shall be located or constructed so as to interfere with or
confuse the control of traffic on the public streets and no sign shall use a
rotating beacon, beam or flashing illumination resembling an emergency signal.
   (H)   No provision of this chapter shall supersede or replace any other
ordinance of the city having to do with the sign standards, materials or
construction except the provisions of this chapter pertaining to the use of the
various types of signs in the various districts, and their size and location
shall take precedence over all other ordinances, regulations and standards.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.164 COMPLETION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction or designated use of a building actually under construction at the
time of the passage of this chapter, and which entire building shall be
completed within two years from the date of the passage of this chapter.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans,
construction or designated use of a building for which a building permit has
heretofore been issued and which entire building shall be completed within two
years from date of the passage of this chapter.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982)
§ 154.165 TELEPHONE SERVICE BUILDINGS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the location,
construction, maintenance or use of central office buildings of corporations,
firms or individuals engaged in the furnishing of telephone service to the
public, or to the location, construction, maintenance or use of any equipment
in connection with such buildings as a part of such telephone system, necessary
in the furnishing of telephone service to the public.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982)
§ 154.166 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   All land buildings, structures or appurtenances thereon located within the
city, which are hereafter occupied, used, erected, altered or converted shall
be used, placed and erected in conformance with the zoning regulations
prescribed for the zoning district in which such land or building is located.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982)
§ 154.167 CLASSIFICATION OF NEW AND UNLISTED USES.
   (A)   It is recognized that new types of land use will develop and forms of
land use not anticipated may seek to located in the city.
   (B)   In order to provide for such changes and contingencies, a
determination as to the appropriate classification of any new or unlisted form
of land use shall be made as follows.
      (1)   The City Council or its designee shall refer the question
concerning any new or unlisted use to the Planning and Zoning Commission
requesting an interpretation as to the zoning classification into which such
use should be placed. The referral of the use interpretation question shall be
accompanied by a statement of facts listing the nature of the use and whether
it involves dwelling activity, sales, processing, type of product, storage and
amount and nature thereof, enclosed or open storage, anticipated employment,
transportation requirements, the amount of noise, odor, fumes, dust, toxic
material and vibration likely to be generated and the general requirements for
public utilities such as water and sanitary sewer.
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the nature and
described performance of the proposed use and its compatibility with the uses
permitted in the various districts and determine the zoning district or
districts within which such use should be permitted.
      (3)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit its findings and
recommendations to the City Council as to the classification proposed for any
new or unlisted use. The City Council may, by ordinance, approve the
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission or make such determination
concerning the classification of such use as is determined appropriate.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982)
§ 154.168 CREATION OF BUILDING SITE.
   No permit for the construction of a building or buildings upon any tract or
plot be issued until a building site, building tract or building lot has been
created by compliance with one of the following conditions:
   (A)   The lot or tract appears on a plat properly approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission and filed in the plat records of the county;
   (B)   The site, plot or tract is all or part of a site plan officially
approved by the City Council after recommendations by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, which site plan provides all utility and drainage easements,
alleys, street and other public improvements necessary to meet the normal
requirements for platting including designation of building areas and such
easements, alleys and streets have been required and properly dedicated and the
necessary public improvements provided; or
   (C)   The plot, tract or lot faces upon a dedicated street and was
separately owned prior to the effective date of this chapter or prior to
annexation to the city whichever is applicable, in which event a building
permit for only one main building may be issued on each such original
separately owned parcel without first complying with the necessary requirements
of creation of building sites.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.180 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The City Council may from time to time amend, supplement or change by
ordinance the boundaries of the districts or the regulations herein
established.
   (B)   Before taking any action on any proposed amendment, supplement or
change, the City Council shall submit the same to the City Planning Commission
for its recommendation and report.
   (C)   A public hearing shall be held by the City Council before adopting any
proposed supplement, amendment or change. Notice of such hearing shall be given
by publication three times in the official publication of the city stating the
time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than 15 days
from the first day of such publication.
   (D)   Unless such proposed amendment, supplement or change has been approved
by the City Planning Commission or if a protest against such amendment,
supplement or change has been filed with the City Secretary, duly signed and
acknowledged by the owners of 20% or more, either of the area of the lots
included in such proposed change, or those immediately adjacent in the rear
hereof extending 200 feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto
extending 200 feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such
amendment, supplement or change shall not become effective except by a three-
fourths vote of the City Council.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982)
§ 154.181 VALIDITY OF CHAPTER.
   If any section, division, clause, phrase or provisions of this chapter shall
be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the
validity of this chapter as a whole or any part or provision thereof other than
the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982)
§ 154.182 ENFORCEMENT.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Building
Official. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plan
in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be
built upon, the size of the building to be erected, its position on the lot and
such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of
these regulations. A careful record of such applications and plans shall be
kept in the office of the Building Official.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982)
§ 154.183 PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY AND COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No person shall use any premises nor erect or construct any building
or structure, nor add to, enlarge, move, alter, convert, extend or demolish any
building structure, or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a
building permit from the Building Official.
   (B)   No premises shall be used and no building hereafter erected or
structurally altered shall be used, occupied or changed in use, until a
certificate of occupancy and compliance shall have been issued by the Building
Official, stating that the building or proposed use of a building or premises
complies with the building laws and the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Certificates of occupancy and compliance shall be applied for
coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued
within ten days after the erection or structural alterations of such buildings
shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. A
record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the Building
Official.
   (D)   No permit for excavation for any building shall be issued before
application has been made for certificate of occupancy and compliance.
   (E)   All owners of non-conforming uses shall obtain a certificate of
occupancy within 60 days after the passage of this chapter to serve as an
official certificate of the uses to which their property was put at the time of
the passage of this chapter.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.184 CHART OF USES.
   Land and buildings in each of the following classified districts may be used
for any of the following listed uses but no land shall be hereafter used, and
no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, altered or converted which
is arranged or designed or used for other than those uses specified for the
district in which it is located as set forth by the following schedule:
Chart of Recommended Permissible Uses
Represented in cumulative form
X   =   Designates use permitted or acceptable in district indicated
   =   Designates use prohibited or non-acceptable in district indicated
S   =   Designates specific use which is not considered to be cumulative
Structure/Use A-O SF D MF MH C GI
Chart of Recommended Permissible Uses
Represented in cumulative form
X   =   Designates use permitted or acceptable in district indicated
   =   Designates use prohibited or non-acceptable in district indicated
S   =   Designates specific use which is not considered to be cumulative
Structure/Use                        A-O SF D MF MH C GI
Accessory to dominate use            X   X  X X  X  X X
Agriculture and ranching             X   X  X X  X  X X
Apartment house                            X  X  X X
Antique store                                  X X
Auditorium                                     X X
Automobile body display room                   X X
Automobile body laundry                        X X
Automobile body rentals                        X X
Automobile body repairs                        X X
Automobile body sales                          X X
Automobile body salvage lot                     X
Automobile body shop                           X X
Bakery                                         X X
Bank                                           X X
Barber/beauty shop                             X X
Bicycle/motorcycle shop                    X  X  X X
Boarding house                                 X X
Boat sales, repair, storage                    X X
Book store                                     X X
Building material sales (new)        S          X X
Bus depot                                      X X
Cafeteria                                      X X
Camera store                                   X X
Carpentry shop                                 X X
Cemetery                             X   X  X X  X  X X
Church                               X   X  X X  X  X X
Cleaning and dyeing                            X X
Clinic                                     X  X  X X
Club - golf                          X   X  X X  X  X X
Club - social                        X   X  X X  X  X X
Confectionary                                  X X
Convalescent home                          X  X  X X
Creamery                                       X X
Day nursery                                X  X  X X
Drug store                                     X X
Dry cleaning                                   X X
Dwelling - 2-family                       X X  X  X X
Dwelling - mobile home                       X  X X
Dwelling - multi-family                    X  X  X X
Dwelling - single-family attached         X X  X  X X
Dwelling - single-family detached    X   X  X X  X  X X
Exhibition grounds                             X X
Fabric shop                                    X X
Farm equipment store                           X X
Farm equipment yard                            X X
Farming                              X   X  X X  X  X X
Feed lot (non-commercial)            S            
Florist                                        X X
Food processing                                 X
Food store - convenience                       X X
Food store - supermarket                       X X
Furniture store                                X X
Freight terminal                               X X
Garden shop                                    X X
Golf course                          X   X  X X  X  X X
Golf course - driving range                    X X
Golf course - miniature                        X X
Greenhouse                           X   X  X X  X  X X
Hardware store                                 X X
Hatchery                                        X
Hobby shop                                     X X
Home industry                        X   X  X X  X  X X
Hospital                                       X X
Hotel                                          X X
Institution - mental                             
Institution - penal                              
Junk yard                                       X
Kennel - no outside run                        X X
Kennel - outside run                            X
Laboratory                                      X
Laundry                                        X X
Library                              X   X  X X  X  X X
Livestock auction                               X
Locker plant                                   X X
Lodge room                                 X  X  X X
Manufacturing - acid                            X
Manufacturing - apparel                        X X
Manufacturing - cement                          X
Manufacturing - electronics                    X X
Manufacturing - fertilizer                      X
Manufacturing - jewelry                        X X
Manufacturing - mechanical                     X X
Manufacturing - pharmaceuticals                 X
Manufacturing - plastic products                X
Medical clinics                                X X
Mini-warehouses                                X X
Mobile home dwelling                         X  X X
Mobile home sales                              X X
Mortuary                                       X X
Motel                                          X X
Museum                                         X X
Newspaper plant                                X X
Office building                                X X
Office - loan                                  X X
Office - professional                          X X
Open storage                                    X
Paint store                                    X X
Park, public                         X   X  X X  X  X X
Parking lot                                    X X
Pawn shop                                      X X
Personal service shop                          X X
Pet store - no outside run                     X X
Pet store - outside run                        X X
Photo studio                                   X X
Plumbing shop                                  X X
Printing shop                                  X X
Radio/television - studio                      X X
Radio/television - tower             X   X  X X  X  X X
Realty office                                  X X
Recreation - private                 X   X  X X  X  X X
Recreation - public                  X   X  X X  X  X X
Rendering plant                                  
Restaurant - drive-in                          X X
Restaurant - indoor                            X X
Retail store - general                         X X
School - commercial or trade                   X X
School - public or church            X   X  X X  X  X X
Service station                                X X
Shop - auto repair                             X X
Shop - carpentry                               X X
Shop - forge                                   X X
Shop - machine                                 X X
Slaughtering                                    X
Smelting                                         
Stable - commercial                            X X
Stable - private                               X X
Stationery store                               X X
Stock yard - non-commercial          S          X X
Studio - artist                                X X
Studio - dance                                 X X
Studio - health                                X X
Studio - music                                 X X
Studio - photography                           X X
Substation - public utility          X   X  X X  X  X X
Swimming pool - private              X   X  X X  X  X X
Swimming pool - public               X   X  X X  X  X X
Telephone exchange                   X   X  X X  X  X X
Theater - indoor                               X X
Theater - outdoor                    X   X  X X  X  X X
Tinsmith shop                                  X X
Tire sales and repair                          X X
Tire recapping                                  X
Townhouses                                X X  X  X X
Truck garden                         X   X  X X  X  X X
Upholstery shop                                X X
Vegetable stand                      S          X X
Veterinary hospital - no outside run           X X
Veterinary hospital - outside run              X X
Veterinary office                              X X
Warehouse                                       X
Water tank                           X   X  X X  X  X X
Wholesale distribution                         X X
Wrecking yard                                   X
 
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall build or alter any building in violation of any detailed
statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine of not more than $200 and each day
such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof, where anything
in violation of this chapter shall be placed, or shall exist, and any
architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in
connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any such
violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof
shall be fined as hereinbefore provided.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating §§
154.075 through
154.080 or any portion thereof shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $2,000, and each day that such
violation occurs or continues shall be considered a separate offense and
punishable accordingly.
(Ord. 10-82, passed 8-13-1982; Ord. 1-97, passed 7-10-1997)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   AGREEMENTS
      
II.   PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS
TABLE I: AGREEMENTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
–      12-14-1978  Agreement the State of Texas for highway maintenance
                    
 
TABLE II: PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS
 
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
06-  2-9-   Vacating and abandoning all of the north 20-foot easement designated
02   2006   on the Freerkerns’ tract, being 1406 W. Mesquite Street
           
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Texas Codes
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO TEXAS CODES
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
 
Statutory Cite Code Section
Title 31       90.075
               
 
CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
 
Statutory Cite Code Section
Article 45.047 151.52
               
 
GOV’T CODE
 
Statutory Cite Code Section
Chapter 29     32.01
29.003         32.02
Chapter 552    111.38
Chapter 2253   153.111
               34.15;
Chapter 2256   34.19;
               34.21
               
 
HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE
Statutory Cite Code Section
Statutory Cite            Code Section
Chapter 821               90.104;
                          90.106
                          90.001;
                          90.123—
                          90.125;
Chapter 822               90.128;
                          90.133;
                          90.139;
                          90.999
                          90.001;
                          90.129—
                          90.131;
Chapter 822, Subchapter D 90.134;
                          90.135;
                          90.139;
                          90.999
                          90.001;
Chapter 822, Subchapter E 90.141;
                          90.145
822.003                   90.126—
                          90.128
822.102                   90.145
                          
 
INSURANCE CODE
 
Statutory Cite Code Section
Article 7.19-1 153.111
               
 
LOC. GOV’T CODE
Statutory Cite Code Section
Statutory Cite Code Section
Chapter 42     153.007
               70.01;
Chapter 51     93.01;
               151.15
Chapter 53     10.01
Chapter 54     151.15
54.001         10.99
54.044         151.52
Chapter 212    153.001;
               153.085
               151.01;
Chapter 214    151.02;
               151.15
212.009(b-2)   153.085
212.016        153.007;
               153.025
212.0091       153.085
212.0093       153.085
212.0095       153.085
217.002        10.99
Chapter 391    31.01
               
 
PENAL CODE
 
Statutory Cite Code Section
7.02           130.01—
               130.05
               
 
REV. CIV. STAT.
Statutory Cite Code Section
Statutory Cite  Code Section
Article 4.15    32.02
Article 4.14    32.02
Chapter 45      32.02
Article 1011g   154.001
Article 2529b-1 34.21
Article 4436-A1 31.02
Article 5221f   154.075
                
 
 
TAX CODE
 
Statutory Cite Code Section
Article 179d   33.01
               
 
TRANSPORTATION CODE
 
Statutory Cite Code Section
Chapter 311    70.01
Chapter 501    70.01
551.301(2)     70.04
Chapter 681    71.05
               
 
WATER CODE
 
Statutory Cite Code Section
16.315         152.01
               
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No.  Date Passed Code Section
–       - -         31.02
04132023A 4-13-2023   34.15—
                      34.25
060823    6-8-2023    33.02
                     
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.  Date Passed Code Section
                      110.50—
–       - -         110.59;
                      110.99
–       8-12-1978   11.01
–       12-14-1978  TSO Table I
04-80     10-9-1980   92.02;
                      92.99
                      30.02;
05-80     12-1-1980   92.01;
                      92.99
06-80     12-11-1980  71.01
05-82     5-13-1982   33.01
                      154.001—
                      154.004;
                      154.015;
                      154.030;
                      154.031;
                      154.045;
                      154.046;
                      154.060;
10-82     8-13-1982   154.061;
                      154.095;
                      154.096;
                      154.110;
                      154.111;
                      154.155—
                      154.168;
                      154.180—
                      154.184;
                      154.999
02-85     12-12-1985  71.04
04-87     12-10-1987  91.01
01-88     3-10-1988   71.02
02-91     10-10-1991  150.03
                      50.01—
01-91     12-12-1991  50.04;
                      50.99
02-92     11-12-1992  154.162
                      111.01—
                      111.05;
02-93     10-14-1993  111.20—
                      111.24;
                      111.35—
                      111.44
1-95      1-12-1995   34.02
–       12-14-1995  70.02
                      154.075—
1-97      7-10-1997   154.080;
                      154.999
01-99     11-11-1999  71.03
02-2000   2-10-2000   154.125—
                      154.129
02-01     4-12-2001   150.02
05-01     3-10-2005   70.04
05-11     8-11-2005   34.03
05-08     12-8-2005   70.02;
                      70.03
06-02     2-9-2006    TSO Table II
89-07     8-9-2007    31.01
                      152.01—
                      152.12;
                      152.25—
–       9-11-2008   152.28;
                      152.40—
                      152.44;
                      152.99
1211-01   12-11-2008  93.08;
                      93.99
1211-02   12-11-2008  154.140—
                      154.142
                      110.20—
09-81309  8-13-2009   110.39;
                      110.99
                      110.01—
09-813091 8-13-2009   110.06;
                      110.99
10-02     8-12-2010   71.05
1-6-21    1-6-2021    34.01
21-3-1    3-1-2021    70.05
51221     5-12-2021   32.01—
                      32.09
                      151.01—
–       10-14-2021  151.03;
                      151.99
                      93.01—
                      93.07;
–       2-17-2022   93.09—
                      93.14;
                      93.99
                      153.001—
                      153.009;
                      153.020—
                      153.025;
                      153.040—
                      153.047;
                      153.060—
                      153.070;
                      153.085—
                      153.090;
–       2-17-2022   153.105—
                      153.113;
                      153.125—
                      153.135;
                      153.150—
                      153.155;
                      153.170—
                      153.172;
                      153.185—
                      153.195;
                      153.999
                      151.15—
                      151.32;
                      151.45—
122022 PO 12-8-2022   151.52;
                      151.65;
                      151.66;
                      151.99
–       - -2023     150.01;
                      150.99
01122023A 1-12-2023   130.01—
                      130.08
01122023B 1-12-2023   30.01
                      90.001—
                      90.008;
                      90.020—
                      90.030;
                      90.045—
                      90.051;
                      90.065—
04132023B 4-13-2023   90.077;
                      90.090—
                      90.109;
                      90.120—
                      90.146;
                      90.160—
                      90.172;
                      90.999
                      92.15—
04132023C 4-13-2023   92.24;
                      92.99
110923A   11-9-2023   70.01
                     
 
 
