MANSFIELD, TEXAS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-36 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance OR-2431-25, passed 12-8-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
CITY OFFICIALS
Mayor
Michael Evans
Councilmembers
Tamera Bounds
Brent Newsom
Juan Fresquez
Todd Simmons
Todd Tonore
Larry Broseh
City Manager
Joe Smolinski
City Attorney
Victor Flores
City Secretary
Susana Marin
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO. 1369
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE RECODIFICATION OF CIVIL AND CRIMINAL ORDINANCES OF
THE CITY TO BE KNOWN AS THE CODE OF ORDINANCES, CITY OF MANSFIELD, TEXAS;
PROVIDING FOR PUBLICATION OF THIS ORDINANCE; PROVIDING FOR PENALTIES; PROVIDING
A CUMULATIVE CLAUSE; PROVIDING A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE; AND PROVIDING AN
EFFECTIVE DATE.
   WHEREAS, the City of Mansfield, Texas is a home rule city acting under its
charter adopted by the electorate pursuant to Article XI, Section 5 of the
Texas Constitution and Chapter 9 of the Local Government Code; and
   WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 53.001 of the Local Government Code, the city
caused the preparation of a codification of the civil and criminal ordinances
of the city, adopted on November 10, 1978; and
   WHEREAS, the city council now deems it necessary to revise that code and
recodify the ordinances of the city.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MANSFIELD,
TEXAS, THAT:
SECTION 1.
ADOPTION OF A CITY CODE
   The recodification of the civil and criminal ordinances of the city,
designated as the Code of Ordinances, City of Mansfield, Texas ("Code")
published by the American Legal Publishing Corporation is hereby adopted. The
Code is attached to this ordinance as Exhibit "A," and is incorporated into
this ordinance for all purposes.
SECTION 2.
PENALTIES
   (a)   Whenever in the Code an act is prohibited, or made or declared to be
unlawful, an offense, or a misdemeanor, or the doing of an act is required,
other than duties of city officers and employees, or the failure to do an act
is declared to be unlawful, and the act relates to fire safety, zoning, and
public health, or sanitation, including dumping of refuse, the violation of the
provision is punishable by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00.
   (b)   When an act described in Subsection (a) is unrelated to fire safety,
zoning, public health or sanitation and no specific penalty is provided, the
violation of the provision is punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection (a) and (b), when an act
described in Subsection (a) is one for which a penalty is fixed by state law,
the penalty for the offense is the same as fixed by state law.
SECTION 3.
ORDINANCE RECORDS
   The city secretary is directed to record the Code of Ordinances of the City
of Mansfield, in the city's ordinance records in accordance with Section 53.001
(b) of the Local Government Code.
SECTION 4.
PUBLICATION
   The city secretary is directed to publish this entire ordinance, not
including Exhibit "A," at least one time in the official newspaper of the city
in accordance with 3.13(c) of the Mansfield Home Rule Charter and Section
53.002 of the Local Government Code.
SECTION 5.
CUMULATIVE CLAUSE
   This ordinance and the Code of Ordinances, City of Mansfield, Texas shall be
cumulative of all provisions of ordinances of the City of Mansfield except
where the provisions of this ordinance or the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Mansfield are in direct conflict with the provisions of such ordinances, in
which event the conflicting provisions of such ordinances are hereby repealed.
SECTION 6.
SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the
phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this ordinance are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
ordinance shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of
any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect
any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
this ordinance, since the same would have been enacted by the city council
without the incorporation in this ordinance of any such unconstitutional
phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
SECTION 7.
SAVINGS CLAUSE
   All rights and remedies of the City of Mansfield are expressly saved as to
any and all violations of the provisions of the Code of Ordinance of the City
of Mansfield, as amended, or any other ordinances affecting recodification of
civil and criminal ordinances which have accrued at the time of the effective
date of this ordinance; and, as to such accrued violations and all pending
litigation, both civil and criminal, whether pending in court or not, under
such ordinances, same shall not be affected by this ordinance but may be
prosecuted until final disposition by the courts.
SECTION 8.
EFFECTIVE DATE
   This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
and publication as required by law, and it is so ordained.
   PASSED AND APPROVED on the first reading this 27th day of August, 2001.
   PASSED AND APPROVED on the second reading this 10th day of September, 2001.
   PASSED AND ADOPTED on the third and final reading by the City Council of the
City of Mansfield, Texas this the 24th day of September, 2001.
                                                   
   David Harry, Mayor
ATTEST:
                                                                 
Barbara J. Greene, Acting City Secretary
EFFECTIVE:  October 1, 2001
APPROVED AS TO FORM AND LEGALITY:
                                            
Allen Taylor, City Attorney
HOME RULE CHARTER OF MANSFIELD, TEXAS
RESOLUTION OF CERTIFICATION OF HOME RULE CHARTER ADOPTION
   Whereas, the citizens of the City of Mansfield are of the belief that
Municipal Government is the form of government that is closest to the people;
and
   Whereas, the Citizens of the City of Mansfield are of the belief that
Municipal Government should be a democratic government and should reflect the
highest ideals and morals of a democratic government; and
   Whereas, the Citizens of the City of Mansfield are of the belief that Home
Rule is the form of Municipal Government that is the highest expression of a
truly democratic government; and
   Whereas, the people of the sovereign State of Texas through their
Legislature have provided for the adoption of Home Rule Charter for Cities by
affirmative vote of their citizens; and
   Whereas, the citizens of the City of Mansfield, County of Tarrant, State of
Texas, on the 25th day of January, 1975, in a duly called and conducted
election did approve and adopt (by an affirmative majority vote) the attached
Home Rule Charter for the City of Mansfield, Texas; and
   Whereas, the City Council of the City of Mansfield, County of Tarrant, State
of Texas, on the 28th day of January, 1975, canvassed the returns of said Home
Rule Charter election as required by law and found that approval of said Home
Rule Charter for the City of Mansfield, Texas, passed by an affirmative
majority vote;
   Therefore, Be It Resolved that the following Home Rule Charter for the City
of Mansfield, Texas, is adopted by the citizens of the City of Mansfield,
County of Tarrant, State of Texas, as the governing document and controlling
law of the City of Mansfield, Texas; and be it further
   Resolved, that the City Secretary shall transmit an appropriate copy of this
Resolution and of said Home Rule Charter to appropriate authorities of the
State of Texas as required by law and shall maintain and preserve this
Resolution and a copy of said Home Rule Charter among the permanent records of
the City of Mansfield.
   Passed and Unanimously Adopted by the City Council, City of Mansfield in
regular meeting assembled on the 28th day of January, 1975.
   Thomas Y. Watson
   Mayor
ATTEST:
Mary Ann Johnston
City Secretary
PREAMBLE
Recognizing that effective government is a government of law rather than of
man, we the people of Mansfield, Texas invoke the guidance of God in
establishing this Charter as the basic law of our City. This Charter will
provide a home rule government which will recognize and protect individual
freedom, encourage interest and participation by the citizens, and serve in
behalf of the general welfare.
ARTICLE I. FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES
SEC. 1.01. INCORPORATION.
   All the inhabitants of the City of Mansfield, Tarrant County, Texas residing
within the boundaries and limits of said City as are herein established or may
hereafter be established, shall be a political subdivision of the State of
Texas, incorporated under and to be known by the name and style of the "City of
Mansfield" with such powers, rights and duties as provided in this Home Rule
Charter in accordance with the Constitution and statutes of the State of Texas.
SEC. 1.02. FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be of the Council-
Manager form. The Council, consisting of the Mayor and Councilmen elected by
and responsible to the people, shall appoint a City Manager, who shall be
directly responsible to the Council, for the execution of the laws and the
administration of the government of the City.
SEC. 1.03. BOUNDARIES OF THE CITY.
   The bounds and limits of the City of Mansfield shall be the same as have
heretofore been established and as they exist on the date of acceptance of this
Charter.
SEC. 1.04 EXTENSION OF BOUNDARIES.
   The Council shall have the powers to fix the boundary limits of the City, to
provide for the extension of said boundary limits and the annexation of
additional territories lying adjacent to said City, to provide for the
disannexation of territory within said City and to provide for the exchange of
territory with other cities and towns, according to such rules as may be
provided by this Charter or any other method that may be prescribed by the laws
of the State of Texas. Such rules or methods shall not be inconsistent with the
procedural rules of the Municipal Annexation Act of the State of Texas.
   (a)   Annexation of lands by petition: The qualified voting property owner
or owners of any land contiguous and adjacent to the City may, by petition in
writing to the Council request the annexation of such contiguous and adjacent
land, describing it by metes and bounds. The Council shall thereafter hear such
petition and the arguments for and against the same, and grant or refuse such
petition. The council may by proper ordinance, under such procedural rules as
may be prescribed by law, receive and annex such territory as a part of the
City.
   (b)   Annexation by election:  The Council shall have the power to order an
election or elections if it so desires for the purpose of annexing territory
adjacent to the City. Said election shall be in accordance with this Charter or
as prescribed by State statutes.
   (c)   Annexation of lands by ordinance: The Council may by ordinance annex
territory adjacent to the City with or without the consent of the inhabitants
or owners thereof, subject to such procedural rules as may be prescribed by
law.
   (d)    Annexed territory to become part of the City: Upon completion of any
one of the procedures hereinabove provided, the territory so annexed shall
become a part of the City, and said land and its residents and future residents
shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of other citizens of the
City and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of
the City.
SEC. 1.05. CONTRACTION OF BOUNDARIES.
   Whenever there exists within the corporate limits of the City any territory
not deemed suitable or necessary for City purposes, which territory adjoins the
outer boundaries of the City, the Council may with or without a petition signed
by a majority of the property owners residing in said territory, disannex such
territory. Provided, however, that the right of disannexation shall not be
available to any particular annexed area which was lawfully within the City
limits of Mansfield at the time of the approval or sale of any obligation bonds
of the City if proceeds therefrom have been expended for capital improvements
to serve such particular area, unless said property owners of said territory
are willing to monetarily reimburse the City for its percentage of the then
outstanding indebtedness of the City for bonds and warrants and a fair
proportion of the then existing budget which the assessed value of all property
within said territory on the tax rolls next preceding the presentation of such
petition bears to the total of all property on said rolls. Any disannexation
will be consistent with State Statutes governing same.
ARTICLE II. POWER OF THE CITY
SEC. 2.01. POWERS OF THE CITY.
   The City shall have all powers possible for a City to have under the
Constitution and laws of this State as fully and completely as though they were
specifically enumerated in this Charter.
(Amended: 5-7-88)
SEC. 2.02. CONSTRUCTION.
   The powers of the City under this Charter shall be construed liberally in
favor of the City, and the specific mention of particular powers in the Charter
shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power stated in this
article.
(Amended: 5-7-88)
SEC. 2.03. INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS.
   The City may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and
may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation by contract
or otherwise, with any one or more States, and divisions or agencies thereof,
or the United States or any agency thereof.
(Amended: 5-7-88)
ARTICLE III. THE CITY COUNCIL
SEC. 3.01. NUMBER, SELECTION AND TERM.
   The legislative and governing body of the City shall consist of a Mayor and
six (6) Councilmembers and shall be known as the "Council of the City of
Mansfield." The Councilmembers shall be elected by place at large under the
general provisions provided by Article IV of this Charter for three (3) year
terms. The three (3) year terms shall be staggered so that two (2) and not more
than three (3) members be elected each year. The Mayor and each Councilperson,
unless sooner removed under the provisions of this Charter, shall hold office
until his successor is elected and qualified. Regular terms of office shall
commence at the beginning of the first regular meeting of the Council following
the final election as provided in Section
4.05.
(Amended: 8-11-79, 5-7-88)
SEC. 3.02. QUALIFICATIONS.
   The Mayor and each member of the City Council shall be:
   (a)   A resident citizen of the City of Mansfield for a period of not less
than twelve (12) months immediately preceding his election of a resident of any
of the territory not formerly within the corporate limits of the City but which
is annexed under the provisions of this Charter for twelve (12) months
preceding his election;
   (b)   A qualified voter of the State of Texas.
If the Mayor or any Councilman fails to maintain the foregoing qualification,
shall be absent without valid excuse from three (3) consecutive regularly
scheduled meetings, or shall fail to maintain an eighty (80) percent attendance
record for each elected year without valid excuse, the Council must declare a
vacancy at its next regular meeting and shall fill the vacancy as set forth in
this Charter.
(Amended: 8-11-79) (Amended 11-3-20)
SEC. 3.03. COUNCIL TO BE THE JUDGE OF ELECTION QUALIFICATION.
   The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its own
members.
SEC. 3.04. COMPENSATION.
   The Mayor and each Councilman may receive a salary set by the Council, plus
actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of his specified
official duties of the office. All expenses shall be subject to the approval of
the Council.
(Amended: 8-11-79)
SEC. 3.05. VACANCIES.
   When a vacancy occurs in the Mayor's office or the Council, the Council
shall order a special election to be held as provided by State Law.
(Amended: 8-11-79, 5-7-88)
SEC. 3.06. MAYOR AND MAYOR PRO TEM.
   (a)   Mayor: The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Council, shall be
recognized as head of the City Government for all ceremonial purposes and by
the Governor for purposes of military law, but shall have no administrative
duties.
(Amended: 8-11-79)
   (b)   Election of Mayor Pro Tem: There shall be appointed a Mayor Pro Tem
who shall perform all the duties of the Mayor in the absence or disability of
the Mayor. (Amended 11-3-20)
   (c)   Emergency powers of the Mayor: The emergency powers of the Mayor shall
be set forth by State law and local ordinances.
(Amended: 5-7-88)
SEC. 3.07. POWER OF COUNCIL.
   All powers of the City shall be vested in the Council, except as otherwise
provided by laws or this Charter. The Council shall provide for the exercise
thereof and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed upon the
City by law.
SEC. 3.08. PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   Holding other office: Except where authorized by law, no Mayor or
Councilman shall hold any other compensated City office or employment by the
City during the term for which he was elected to the Council, and no former
Mayor or Councilman shall hold any compensated appointive City office or
employment until one (1) year after the expiration of the term for which he was
elected to the Council.
   (b)   Appointment and removals: Neither the Council nor any of its members
shall in any way dictate the appointment or removal of any City administrative
officer or employees whom the City Manager or any of his subordinates are
empowered to appoint, unless otherwise provided in this Charter. The Council
may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the City Manager
anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and employees.
   (c)   Interference with administration: Except for the purpose of inquiries
and investigations by the direction of the Council, unless provided otherwise
in this Charter, the Council or its members shall deal with City officers and
employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the City Manager
solely through the City Manager, and neither the Council nor its members shall
give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately.
   (d)   Admission of liability: Neither the Council nor its members shall
accept or admit liability or pay any claim for damages asserted against the
City without first obtaining a written opinion from the City Attorney regarding
the City's liability therein.
(Amended: 5-10-08)
SEC. 3.09. MEETINGS AND PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Meetings: Council meetings shall be held at City Hall unless
justification is announced and posted as required herein and the Council shall
meet regularly at least twice in every month at such time as the Council may
prescribe by rule. Meetings may be held on the call of the Mayor or three (3)
members and whenever practicable, upon no less than seventy-two (72) hours
notice to each member except that emergency meetings may be called by the Mayor
or Mayor Pro Tem in the Mayor’s absence or three (3) members after notice has
been posted two (2) hours, or as otherwise provided by law, provided, however,
that all meetings shall be open to the public and public notice thereof given
as required by the statutes of Texas, as now or hereafter amended. (Amended 11-
3-20)
   (b)   Minutes and rules: The Council shall determine its own rules and order
of business and shall provide for keeping minutes of its proceedings in
accordance with State law. The minutes shall be a public record.
   (c)   Voting: Every Councilperson and the Mayor must vote on all issues
unless there is a declared and recorded conflict of interest. The minutes shall
record those voting aye, those voting nay and those abstaining. Four (4)
members of the Council shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may
adjourn from time to time and may compel the attendance of absent members in
the manner and subject to the penalties prescribed by the rules of the Council.
In case of a 3-2 vote with five (5) people on any issue, item would
automatically be scheduled for re-consideration for the next Council meeting.
No action by the Council can be passed or failed unless four (4) of the Council
members present at the meeting vote for its passage or failure.
(Amended: 5-7-88) (Amended 11-3-20)
SEC. 3.10. INVESTIGATION BY COUNCIL.
   The Council shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any office,
department, agency, officer or employee of the City and to make investigations
as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses,
administer oaths and compel the production of books, documents, or other
tangible evidence. Failure to obey such subpoena or to produce books, documents
or other tangible evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section
shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by fine not to exceed
two hundred dollars ($200.00) and/or dismissal.
SEC. 3.11. OFFICIAL BONDS FOR CITY EMPLOYEES.
   The City Manager, City Secretary and such other city officers and employees
as the Council may require, shall, before entering upon the duties of their
offices, enter into a good and sufficient fidelity bond in the sum to be
determined by the Council payable to the City and conditioned upon a faithful
discharge of duties of such persons and upon a faithful accounting for all
monies, credits, and things of value coming into the hands of such persons, and
such bonds shall be signed as surety by some company authorized to do business
under the laws of the State of Texas, and the premium on such bonds shall be
paid by the City, and such bonds must be acceptable to the Council.
(Amended: 5-7-88)
SEC. 3.12. INDEPENDENT ANNUAL AUDIT.
   Not more than sixty (60) days after the end of each fiscal year, the Council
shall designate a certified public accountant who, at the end of the next
fiscal year, shall make an independent audit of accounts and other evidences of
financial transactions of the City Government and shall submit his written
report to the Council. He shall be required to make spot check audits at his
own discretion or as determined by the Council. Notice of the annual audit and
a summary shall be given by publication in some newspaper of general
circulation in the City of Mansfield. Such accountant shall have no personal
interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the City Government
during which time he was retained by the Council. He shall not maintain any
accounts or records of the City business, but, within specifications approved
by the Council, shall post-audit the books and records of the City.
(Amended: 5-7-88)
SEC. 3.13. ORDINANCES IN GENERAL.
   (a)   Action requiring an ordinance: In addition to other acts required by
law or by specific provisions of this Charter to be done by ordinance.
      (1)   Amend or repeal any ordinance previously adopted, except as
otherwise provided in Article VII;
      (2)   Levy taxes;
      (3)   Regulate the rates charged for its services by a public utility;
      (4)   Convey, lease or authorize the conveyance or lease of any lands of
the City;
      (5)   Authorize the borrowing of money;
      (6)   Adopt, with or without amendment, ordinances proposed under the
initiative power;
      (7)   Grant, renew, extend or abolish a franchise. Acts other than those
referred to in the preceding sentence may be done either by ordinance or by
resolution; and,
      (8)   Fees and all other charges shall be passed by ordinance.
   (b)   Form: Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in
the form required for final adoption. The enacting clause of every ordinance
shall be, "Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Mansfield..." The
subject of any ordinance shall be clearly stated in its title. Any ordinance
which repeals or amends an existing ordinance shall state sections and
subsections to be amended or repealed.
   (c)   Procedure for adoption: An ordinance may be introduced at any regular
or special meeting of the Council in accordance with rules established by the
Council. No ordinance shall be introduced for action except as provided in
Section 3.14 (Emergency Ordinances) unless such ordinance has been posted by
title on the agenda for which action is to occur in accordance with State law.
Ordinances shall be considered and approved on one reading by the City Council
save and except ordinances changing a zoning classification or approving a
planned development zoning classification. Ordinances changing a zoning
classification or approving a planned development zoning classification shall
be considered and approved on two separate readings. The City Attorney shall
approve all ordinances adopted by the Council as to legality thereof or shall
file with the City Secretary written legal objections thereto. Every ordinance
shall be authenticated by the signature of the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem and the
City Secretary. (Amended 11-3-20)
   Except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, the City Secretary
shall give notice of the enactment of every ordinance imposing any penalty,
fine or forfeiture for any violation of any of its provisions, and of every
other ordinance required by law or this Charter to be published by causing the
said ordinance, or its caption and penalty, to be published at least one (1)
time within ten (10) days after final passage thereof in a weekly or daily
newspaper in general circulation in the City of Mansfield. The affidavit of
such publication by the publisher of such newspaper taken before any officer
authorized to administer oaths and filed with the City Secretary shall be
conclusive proof of the legal publication and promulgation of such ordinance in
all courts. Such ordinances shall take effect ten (10) days after the date of
such publication provided that any penal ordinance shall take effect
immediately upon it's publication except as provided in Section
3.14.
   A copy of every ordinance and resolution as codified shall be maintained and
available for free reference in the office of the City Secretary.
(Amended: 5-7-88)
SEC. 3.14. EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.
   The Council may adopt emergency ordinances only to meet public emergencies
affecting life, health, property, or the public peace in accordance with State
law. In particular, such ordinances shall not levy taxes, grant or renew or
extend a franchise, or regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its
services. Neither shall they authorize the borrowing of money, except as
provided in Article IX. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form
and manner generally prescribed for ordinances, except that it shall be plainly
designed in the title as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the
enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing
it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance can be adopted with or
without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced. The
affirmative vote of three (3) members of the Council shall be required for
adoption. After adoption, the ordinance shall be published as required for
other adopted ordinances, but may become effective immediately upon enactment.
(Amended: 5-7-88) (Amended 11-3-20)
ARTICLE IV. ELECTIONS
SEC. 4.01. NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS.
   (a)   Regular elections: The regular City elections will be held annually on
the first Saturday in May unless specifically prescribed by State law. The
Council shall order the election and designate the place for holding such an
election.
(Amended: 5-7-88)
   (b)   Special elections: The Council may, by ordinance or resolution, order
a special election for ordinances, bond issues, charter amendments, filling
vacancies in an existing elected office, or any other reason the Council deems
necessary. The Council will fix the place and date for holding this type of
election which may or may not be held simultaneously with a regular election.
   (c)   Publicizing City elections: It is the responsibility of the Council to
inform the voters as to the time, place, date, purpose and filing period for
the upcoming City election. Notice shall be given as provided by law. The
provisions for absentee balloting shall also be publicized at this time. Sample
ballots shall be posted outside the City offices and shall be published in some
newspaper of general circulation in the City of Mansfield not less than ten
(10) days prior to the election.
   (d)   Conduct and regulation of City elections: All City elections shall be
governed by the Constitution of the State of Texas, Election Code of the State,
this Charter, and ordinances of the City, in the order named. Municipal
elections shall be conducted by the election officials appointed and approved
by the Council. Sample ballots identical to the voting format for the specific
election shall be posted in the voting place for the benefit of the voters.
   (e)   Voter qualification: All duly qualified electors under the laws of the
State of Texas, who are residents of the City, shall be qualified to vote in
any City election.
SEC. 4.02. FILING FOR OFFICE.
   (a)   Eligibility to file for office: Each candidate for an elective
position in the City shall meet the requirements set forth under Section
3.02 of this Charter.
   (b)   Procedure for filing for office: Any eligible person who desires to
become a candidate for election shall file an application with the City
Secretary in accordance with state law. Such an application shall clearly
designate the office and position to which the candidate seeks election, and
shall contain a sworn statement by the candidate that he is fully qualified
under the provisions of this Charter to hold the office sought.
(Amended: 5-7-88, 5-10-08)
   (c)   General campaign regulations: Candidates for office are responsible
for familiarizing themselves and complying with all campaign regulations such
as: Campaign Manager appointment and expenditure statements prescribed by the
Election Code.
   The City Secretary may assist candidates with their questions, but has no
legal duty to inform candidates, or has any legal authority, other than to act
as file clerk for regulatory statements. Questions should be directed to a
private attorney or the Election Division of the Secretary of State's Office in
Austin.
   Failure to comply with certain regulations can subject a candidate's right
to have his name placed on the ballot.
SEC. 4.03. OFFICIAL BALLOTS.
   (a)   Candidates' names on ballots: The names of all candidates who have
filed for office shall be printed on the official ballots without party
designation. The order on the ballot of the names of the candidates for each
office or position shall be determined by lot in a drawing to be held under the
supervision of the City Secretary.
   (b)   Early balloting: Early voting shall be governed by the Election Code
of the State of Texas.
   (c)   Write-in votes: Write in voting shall be permitted in accordance with
state law.
(Amended: 5-10-08)
SEC. 4.04. DETERMINATION OF ELECTION RESULTS.
   (a)   Canvassing: Canvassing shall be conducted in accordance with state
law.
   (b)   Majority rules: The candidates for each place on the ballot who shall
have received the majority of votes cast for such place shall be declared
elected. In the event that no candidate for a designated office receives a
majority of the votes cast for that place in the regular or special election, a
runoff election shall be held between the candidates who received the two (2)
greatest number of votes for such place. Notwithstanding, the provisions of
Section
4.01(c), such a runoff election shall be held in accordance with State law.
(Amended: 5-7-88, 5-10-08)
SEC. 4.05. TAKING OFFICE.
   The City Secretary shall promptly notify all persons elected to office. A
candidate who is elected in a special or runoff City election shall, after
taking the oath of office, take office, and enter upon his duties as provided
in Section
3.01 or at the next Council meeting after the date of the final election.
ARTICLE V. RECALL OF OFFICERS
SEC. 5.01. RECALL.
   Any elected City official shall be subject to recall and removal from office
by the qualified voters of the City on grounds of incompetency, misconduct or
malfeasance in office.
SEC. 5.02. PETITIONS FOR RECALL.
   Before the question of recall of such officer shall be submitted to the
qualified voters of the City, a petition demanding such question to be
submitted, shall first be filed with the person performing the duties of City
Secretary, which said petition shall be signed by qualified voters of the City
equal in number to at least thirty (30) percent of the number of votes cast at
the last regular municipal election of the City, but in no event less than one
hundred fifty (150) such petitioners. Each signer of such recall petition shall
personally sign his name thereto in ink or indelible pencil, and shall write
after his name his place of residence, giving name of street and number, or
place of residence, and shall also write thereon the day, the month and year
his signature was affixed.
SEC. 5.03. FORM OF RECALL PETITION.
   The recall petition mentioned above must be addressed to the Council of the
City of Mansfield, must distinctly and specifically point out the ground or
grounds upon which such petition for removal is predicated, and, if there be
more than one (1) ground, such as for incompetency, misconduct or malfeasance
in office, shall specifically state each ground with such certainty as to give
the office sought to be removed, notice of the matters and things with which he
is charged. The signature shall be verified by oath in the following form:
"State of Texas               )
County of Tarrant/Johnson/Ellis         )
I,___________________ , being first duly sworn, on oath depose and say that I
am one of the signers of the above petition and that the statements made
therein are true and that each signature appearing thereto was made in my
presence on the day and date it purports to have been made, and I solemnly
swear that the same is the genuine signature of the person whose name it
purports to be.
Sworn and Subscribed to before me this _______ day of _______________, 20___,
   ____________________________________
   Notary Public in and for the State of Texas"
(Amended: 5-7-88)
SEC. 5.04. VARIOUS PAPERS CONSTITUTING PETITION.
   The petition may consist of one (1) or more copies, or subscription lists,
circulated separately, and the signatures thereon may be upon the paper or
papers containing the form of petition or upon other papers attached thereto.
Verifications provided for in the next preceding section of this article may be
made by one (1) or more petitioners; and the several parts of copies of the
petition may be filed separately and by different persons; but no signatures to
such petition shall remain effective or be counted which were placed thereon
more than thirty (30) days prior to the filing of such petition or petitions
with the person performing the duties of City Secretary. All papers comprising
a recall petition shall be filed with the person performing the duties of City
Secretary on the same day, and the said Secretary shall immediately notify, in
writing, the officer so sought to be removed, by mailing such notice to his
Mansfield address.
SEC. 5.05. PRESENTATION OF PETITION TO THE COUNCIL.
   Within five (5) days after the date of filing of the papers constituting the
recall petition, the person performing the duties of City Secretary shall
present such petition to the Council of the City of Mansfield at a special
meeting called for this purpose.
SEC. 5.06. PUBLIC HEARING TO BE HELD.
   The officer whose removal is sought may, within five (5) days after such
recall petition has been presented to the Council, request that a public
hearing be held to permit him to present facts pertinent to the charges
specified in the recall petition. In this event, the Council shall order such
public hearing to be held, not less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen
(15) days after receiving such request for a public hearing.
SEC. 5.07. ELECTION TO CALLED.
   If an officer whose removal is sought does not resign, then it shall become
the duty of the Council to order an election to be held on the first uniform
election date that permits compliance with the requirements of law.
(Amended: 5-10-08)
SEC. 5.08. BALLOTS IN RECALL ELECTION.
   Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following
requirements:
   (a)   With respect to each person whose removal is sought the question shall
be submitted:
      "Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of (name of office) by
recall?"
   (b)   Immediately below each such question there shall be printed the
following words, one above the other, in the order indicated:
      "YES"
      "NO"
SEC. 5.09. RESULT OF RECALL ELECTION.
   If the majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be "NO" that is
against the recall of the person named on the ballot, he shall continue in
office for the remainder of his unexpired term, subject to recall as before. If
a majority of the votes cast at such an election be "YES" that is for the
recall of the person named on the ballot, he shall, regardless of any technical
defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office and the vacancy
be filled as vacancies in the Council are filled, as provided in Section 3.05
of this Charter.
SEC. 5.10. RECALL, RESTRICTION THEREON.
   No recall petition shall be filed against any officer of the City within six
(6) months after his election, nor within six (6) months after an election for
such officer's recall. Nothing herein shall prevent impeachment of an officer
of the City nor removal for other causes as provided for herein.
ARTICLE VI. ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
SEC. 6.01. CITY MANAGER.
   (a)   Appointment and qualification: The Council shall appoint a City
Manager who shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the City
and shall be responsible to the Council for the administration of all the
affairs of the City. He shall be chosen by the Council solely on the basis of
his executive and administrative training, experience, ability and character,
and need not when appointed, be a resident of the City. However, he shall
become a resident of the City within six (6) months after appointment unless
otherwise specifically excused by the Council.
   (b)   Term and salary: The City Manager shall serve at the will and pleasure
of the Council and may be removed from office in accordance with the following
procedures:
      (1)   The Council may by the affirmative vote of four (4) members suspend
the manager from duty for a period not to exceed forty-five (45) days. A copy
of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the manager. (Amended 11-3-20)
      (2)   Within five (5) days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to
the manager, he may file with the Council a written request for a public
hearing. This hearing shall be held at the Council meeting not earlier than
fifteen (15) days nor later than thirty (30) days after the request is filed.
The manager may file with the Council a written reply not later than five (5)
days before the hearing.
      (3)   The Council may adopt a final resolution of removal, which may be
made effective immediately, by affirmative vote of four (4) at any time after
five (5) days from the date when a copy of the preliminary resolution was
delivered to the manager, if he has not requested a public hearing, or at any
time after the public hearing if he has requested one. (Amended 11-3-20)
   The manager shall continue to receive his salary until the effective date of
a final resolution of removal. The action of the Council in suspending or
removing the City Manager shall be final; it being the intention of this
Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility of such suspension or
removal in the Council. In case of the absence or disability of the City
Manager, the Council may designate some qualified person to perform the duties
of the office during such absence or disability. The City Manager shall receive
such compensation as may be fixed by the Council.
(Amended: 5-7-88)
   (c)   Powers and duties: The powers herein conferred upon the City Manager
shall include but shall not be limited to the following:
      (1)   To appoint and remove any officer or employee of the City except
those officers and employees whose appointment or election is otherwise
provided for by law or this Charter.
      (2)   Prepare and submit the annual budget and a five (5) year capital
improvement program to the Council.
      (3)   Submit to the Council monthly a report on the finances and
administrative activities of the City and a complete report as of the end of
each fiscal year.
      (4)   Provide each Department Head with a financial report of his
department monthly.
      (5)   Attend all meetings of the Council except when excused by Council.
      (6)   To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter
or required of him by the Council, not inconsistent with provisions of this
Charter.
SEC. 6.02. OTHER DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS.
   The Council, after obtaining the City Manager's recommendation, may abolish
or consolidate such offices and departments as it may deem to be in the best
interest of the City, and may divide the administration of any such departments
as it may deem advisable; may create new departments, and may discontinue any
offices or departments at its discretion.
   The Council shall create, establish, or appoint, as may be required by law,
circumstances, or this Charter, those boards, commission, and committees which
are deemed necessary to carry out the functions and obligations of the City.
The Council shall prescribe accountability and tenure of each board,
commission, and committee where such are not prescribed by law or this Charter.
The Council shall also prescribe the purpose, composition, function, and duty
of each board, committee, or commission where such are not prescribed by law or
this Charter.
SEC. 6.03. CITY SECRETARY.
   (a)   Selection: The City Council shall appoint a person who is an officer
of the city and who shall have the title of City Secretary. The City Secretary
holds office at the will and pleasure of the City Council and the City Council
has sole authority to remove the City Secretary.
   (b)   Responsibilities: The City Secretary shall:
      (1)   Give notices of City Council meetings;
      (2)   Keep the journal of the City Council's proceedings;
      (3)   Authenticate by the City Secretary's signature, record in full, and
index all ordinances and resolutions; and
      (4)   Perform such other duties as the City Council assigns, as provided
for elsewhere in this Charter, and as established by state law. (Added: 11-3-
20)
ARTICLE VII. LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE, INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
SEC. 7.01. GENERAL POWER.
   The qualified voters of the City, in addition to the method of legislation
hereinbefore provided, shall have the power of direct legislation by initiative
and referendum.
SEC. 7.02. INITIATIVE.
   Qualified voters of the City may initiate legislation by submitting a
petition addressed to the Council which requests the submission of a proposed
ordinance or resolution to a vote of the qualified voters of the City. Said
petition must be signed by qualified voters of the City equal in number to at
least thirty (30) percent of the number of votes cast at the last regular
municipal election of the City, but in no event less than one hundred fifty
(150) such petitioners. Each copy of the petition shall have attached to it a
copy of the proposed legislation. The petition shall be signed in the same
manner as recall petitions are signed, as provided in Section
5.02 of this Charter, and shall be verified by oath in the manner and form
provided by recall petitions in Section
5.03 of this Charter. The petition may consist of one (1) or more copies as
permitted for recall petitions in Section
5.04 of this Charter. Such petition shall be filed with the person performing
the duties of City Secretary. At the next regular Council meeting after the
filing of such petition, the person performing the duties of City Secretary
shall present said petition and proposed ordinance or resolution to the
Council. Upon presentation of the petition and draft of proposed ordinance or
resolution, it shall become the duty of the Council, within ten (10) days after
the receipt thereof, to pass and adopt such ordinance or resolutions without
alteration as to meaning or effect in the opinion of the persons filing the
petition, or to call a special election, to be held on the first uniform
election date that permits compliance with the requirements of law, at which
the qualified voters of the City shall vote on the question of adopting or
rejecting the proposed legislation. However, if any other municipal election is
to he held within sixty (60) days after the filing of the petition, the
question may be voted on at such election.
(Amended: 5-10-08)
SEC. 7.03. REFERENDUM.
   Qualified voters of the City may require that any ordinance or resolution,
with the exception of ordinances or resolutions authorizing the issuance of
either tax or revenue bonds whether original or refunding, levying taxes, or
appropriate money, passed by the Council be submitted to the voters of the City
for approval or disapproval, by submitting a petition for this purpose within
ninety (90) days after final passage of said ordinance or resolution, or within
ninety (90) days after its publication. Said petition shall be addressed,
prepared, signed and verified as required for petitions initiating legislation
as provided in Section
7.02 of this Charter and shall be submitted to the person performing the duties
of City Secretary. Immediately upon the filing of such petition, the person
performing the duties of City Secretary shall present said petition to the
Council. Thereupon the Council shall immediately reconsider such ordinance or
resolution and, if it does not entirely repeal the same, shall submit it to
popular vote as provided in Section
7.02 of this Charter. Until such ordinance or resolution is approved by the
voters as herein provided, the ordinance or resolution specified in the
petition shall not go into effect, or further action thereunder shall be
suspended if it shall have gone into effect.
SEC. 7.04. VOLUNTARY SUBMISSION OF LEGISLATION BY THE COUNCIL.
   The Council, upon its own motion and by a majority vote of its members, may
submit to popular vote at any election for adoption or rejection any proposed
ordinance or resolution or measure, or may submit for repeal any existing
ordinance, resolution or measure, in the same manner and with the same force
and effect as provided in this article for submission on petition, and may in
its discretion call a special election for this purpose.
SEC. 7.05. FORM OF BALLOTS.
   The ballots used when voting upon such proposed and referred ordinances,
resolutions, or measure, shall set forth their nature sufficiently to identify
them and shall also set forth upon separate lines the words:
               "FOR THE ORDINANCE," and
               "AGAINST THE ORDINANCE," or
               "FOR THE RESOLUTION" and
               "AGAINST THE RESOLUTION."
SEC. 7.06. PUBLICATION OF PROPOSED AND REFERRED ORDINANCE.
   The person performing the duties of City Secretary shall publish at least
once in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Mansfield the
proposed or referred ordinance or resolution within fifteen (15) days before
the date of the election, and shall give such other notices and do such other
things relative to such election as are required in general municipal elections
or by the ordinance or resolution calling said election.
SEC. 7.07. ADOPTION OF ORDINANCES.
   If a majority of the qualified voters voting on a proposed ordinance or
resolution or measure shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon, or at
any time fixed therein, become effective as a law or as a mandatory order to
the Council.
SEC. 7.08. INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES.
   If the provisions or two (2) or more proposed ordinances or resolutions
approved at the same election are inconsistent, the ordinance or resolution
receiving the highest number of votes "FOR" or "AGAINST" shall prevail.
SEC. 7.09. ORDINANCES PASSED BY POPULAR VOTE, REPEAL OF AMENDMENT.
   No ordinance or resolution which may have been passed by the Council as a
result of popular vote under the provisions of this article shall be repealed
or amended except in response to a referendum vote or by submission as provided
in Section
7.03 of this Charter.
SEC. 7.10. ORDINANCES BY THE COUNCIL (FURTHER REGULATIONS).
   The Council may pass ordinances or resolutions providing other and further
regulations for carrying out the provisions of this article not inconsistent
herewith.
SEC. 7.11. FRANCHISE ORDINANCES.
   Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to be in conflict with
any of the provisions of Article II of this Charter, pertaining to ordinances
granting franchises when valuable rights have accrued thereunder.
ARTICLE VIII. LEGAL AND JUDICIAL SERVICES
SEC. 8.01. MUNICIPAL COURT.
   There shall be established and maintained a court designated as the
Municipal Court of the City of Mansfield for the trial of misdemeanor offenses,
with all such powers and duties as are now or hereafter may be prescribed by
laws of the State of Texas relative to Municipal Courts.
SEC. 8.02. JUDGE OF THE MUNICIPAL COURT.
   The Judge of said Court shall be appointed by the Council. Said Judge shall
receive such salary as may be fixed by the Council. In case of the disability
or absence of the Judge of the Municipal Court, the Council shall appoint a
temporary Municipal Court judge, to fill the unexpired term. The Judge of said
court shall be appointed to a two (2) year term. The Judge of the Municipal
Court may be removed for cause, after a hearing, by a majority vote of the
Councilmen qualified and serving.
SEC. 8.03. CLERK OF THE MUNICIPAL COURT.
   In accordance with state law, the City shall appoint a clerk of the
Municipal Court. The Clerk of said Court and his deputies shall have the power
to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of said
Court thereto and generally do and perform any and all acts usual and necessary
by the Clerk of Courts in issuing process of said Courts and conducting the
business thereof.
(Amended: 5-10-08)
SEC. 8.04. ASSOCIATE JUDGES OF THE MUNICIPAL COURT.
   The Council shall be empowered to appoint Associate Judges of the Municipal
Court to serve under the direction of the Judge of the Municipal Court. An
Associate Judge shall bear all powers and duties as are now or hereafter may be
prescribed by laws of the State of Texas relative to Municipal Courts.
(Amended: 5-7-88)
SEC. 8.05. CITY ATTORNEY.
   The City Council shall appoint a competent and duly qualified and licensed
attorney in the State of Texas who shall serve as the City Attorney. (Amended
11-3-20)
   (a)   The City Attorney shall be required to:
      (1)   Serve as the legal advisor to the Council and to the City Manager;
      (2)   Represent the City in litigation and legal proceedings;
      (3)   Review and provide opinions as requested by the Council or by the
City Manager on contracts, legal instruments, and ordinances of the City.
   (b)   Limitation: This Section shall not be a constraint upon the right of
the Council to retain special counsel at any time that the Council may deem
necessary and appropriate.
   (c)   Compensation: Compensation shall be fixed by contract with approval of
Council or by appointment subject to the approval of Council.
(Amended: 5-7-88)
ARTICLE IX. MUNICIPAL FINANCE
SEC. 9.01. FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of October and end
the last day of September. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget
and accounting year.
SEC. 9.02. SUBMISSION OF BUDGET.
   The City Manager shall, not less than sixty (60) days prior to the close of
fiscal year, prepare and submit to the Council a proposed balanced budget for
the ensuing fiscal year as outlined in Section
9.03 of this Charter. A copy shall be filed with the City Secretary for public
inspection.
SEC. 9.03. BUDGET.
   (a)   Budget message: A budget message explaining the budget both in fiscal
terms and in terms of the work programs shall be submitted with the budget. It
shall outline the proposed financial programs of the City for the ensuing
fiscal year, the capital program, the capital projects for five (5) fiscal
years succeeding the budget year. It shall describe the important features of
the budget and indicate any major changes from the current year in financial
policies, expenditures, and revenues including the reasons for such changes. It
shall also summarize the City's debt position and contain such other materials
or information as the City Manager deems desirable.
   (b)   Budget scope: The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of
all City funds and activities and, except as required by law or this Charter,
shall be in such form as the City Manager deems desirable or the Council may
require. The budget shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for
actual and budgeted income and expenditures for the preceding fiscal year;
budgeted and estimated income and expenditure for the current fiscal year; and
estimated income and expenditures for the next fiscal year. The total of
proposed expenditures for the budgeted year shall not exceed the total of the
established income and surplus.
   (c)   Content: The budget shall contain in separate sections the following:
      (1)   A clear general summary of contents;
      (2)   A consolidated statement of receipts and expenditures of all funds,
listed and itemized individually;
      (3)   An analysis and itemization of all estimated income of the City
from surplus, miscellaneous income and taxes with miscellaneous income
subclassified by sources;
      (4)   Tax rates schedule for proposed budget as well as tax rates and
collections for the preceding five (5) years;
      (5)   An itemized statement of expenditures for pending and proposed new
capital projects. Included shall be the amounts appropriated from the budget,
the amounts to be raised by issuance of bonds, and the amount required for down
payment;
      (6)   The amount required for sinking funds, for maturing serial bonds,
and for interest on the City's debts;
      (7)   The total amount of the City's outstanding debts, with a schedule
of maturity on bond issues in an attachment;
      (8)   A detailed estimate of the operating expenses of each department,
office or agency;
      (9)   Statement of estimated net surplus or deficit for the ensuing
fiscal year of each utility owned and operated by the City. A subsidiary budget
for each utility shall be included giving details of income and expenditures;
      (10)   Such other information as is required by the Council or deemed
desirable by the City Manager;
      (11)   A contingency fund may be included not to exceed five (5) percent
of the general fund proposed expenditure; and
      (12)   Such dedicated reserves as may be required.
SEC. 9.04. PUBLIC NOTICE AND HEARING OF BUDGET.
   The Council shall post in City office and publish in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City, the budget message of the proposed budget with a
notice stating:
   (1)   The time and places where copies of the message and proposed budget
are available for inspection by the public.
   (2)   The time and place, not less than two (2) weeks after publication, for
a public hearing of the budget.
SEC. 9.05. COUNCIL ACTION ON BUDGET.
   (a)   The Council shall hold a public hearing on the budget as submitted at
the time and place so advertised in accordance with Section
9.04. All interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard either
for or against any item or items of the proposed budget.
   (b)   After a public hearing, the Council may increase or decrease items of
the budget, except those items in proposed expenditures fixed by law. In no
case shall the Council increase the total proposed expenditures unless it has
provided for an increase of anticipated revenue to maintain a balanced budget.
   (c)   After a public hearing the Council may adopt the budget with or
without amendment with an affirmative vote of a majority of the entire Council.
Adoption of the budget shall constitute appropriation of the amounts specified
therein as expenditures from the funds indicated, and shall constitute a levy
of the Property Tax therein proposed.
SEC. 9.06. FAILURE TO ADOPT BUDGET.
   If the Council fails to adopt the budget by the fifteenth day of September,
the amounts appropriated for operating during the current fiscal year shall be
deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all
items in it prorated accordingly, until such time as the Council adopts a
budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The levy of property tax normally approved
as part of the budget adoption will be set such that the tax receipts for the
budgeted year shall equal the tax receipts of the current fiscal year.
SEC. 9.07. PUBLIC RECORDS.
   Copies of the approved budget, capital improvement program, and supporting
papers shall be filed with the City Secretary and shall be public records
available to the public upon request.
SEC. 9.08. BUDGET ESTABLISHED TAXATION.
   From the effective date of the budget, the amount stated therein as the
amount to be raised by property tax shall constitute a determination of the
amount of the levy for the purposes of the City, in the corresponding tax year;
provided the levy does not exceed legal limits provided by the laws of the
State of Texas.
   A certified copy of the budget tax schedule shall be filed with the tax
office, board, or commission whose duty it shall be to levy such taxes for the
corresponding tax year.
SEC. 9.09. AMENDMENTS AFTER ADOPTION.
   (a)   Supplemental appropriations: If during the fiscal year the City
Manager certifies that there are available for appropriation revenues in excess
of those estimated in the budget, the Council may carry the excess into the
next fiscal year or by resolution may make supplemental appropriations to
retire indebtedness or to fund emergency appropriations as described in Section
9.09(b).
   (b)   Emergency appropriations: To meet a public emergency affecting life,
health, property or the public peace, the Council may make emergency
appropriations. Such appropriations may require emergency notes, which may be
renewed from time to time, but the emergency notes and renewals of any fiscal
year shall be paid not later than the last day of the fiscal year in which the
emergency appropriation was made.
   (c)   Reduction of appropriations: If at any time during the fiscal year it
appears probable to the City Manager that the revenues available will be
insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he shall report to the Council
without delay, indicating the estimated amount of deficit, any remedial action
taken by him and his recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The
Council shall then take such further action that it deems necessary to prevent
or minimize any deficit.
   (d)   Transfer of appropriations: At any time during the fiscal year the
City Manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance
among programs within a department, office or agency. The Council may require
their approval of these transfers within departments above a limit they wish to
establish. Upon written request by the City Manager, the Council only may
approve transfer of part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from
one (1) department, office or agency to another.
   (e)   Limitations: No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or
transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by
law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance.
   (f)   Effective date: The supplemental and emergency appropriations and
reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made
effective immediately upon adoption or resolution by the Council.
SEC. 9.10. CAPITAL PROGRAM.
   The City Manager shall submit a five (5) year capital program as an
attachment to the annual budget. The program as submitted shall include:
   (a)   A clear general summary of its contents;
   (b)   A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken
during the five (5) fiscal years succeeding the budget year, with appropriate
supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements;
   (c)   Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedules for
each such improvement; and
   (d)   The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities
to be constructed or acquired.
   The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard to
capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or
acquisition.
(Amended: 5-7-88)
SEC. 9.11. LAPSE OF APPROPRIATIONS.
   Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure,
shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been
expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall
continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished
or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned
if three (3) years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the
appropriation.
SEC. 9.12. ADMINISTRATION OF BUDGET.
   (a)   Payments and obligations prohibited: No payment shall be made or
obligation incurred against any allotment or appropriation except in accordance
with appropriations duly made and unless the City Manager or his designee first
certifies that there is a sufficient, unencumbered balance in such allotment or
appropriation that sufficient funds are or will be available to cover the claim
or meet the obligation when it becomes due and payable. Any authorization of
payment or incurring obligation in violation of the provisions of this Charter
shall be void and any payment so made illegal. Such action shall be cause for
removal of any officer who knowingly authorized or made such payment or
incurred such obligations, and he shall be liable to the City for any amount so
paid. However, this prohibition shall not be construed to prevent the making or
authorizing of payments or making of contracts for capital improvements to be
financed wholly or partly by the issuance of bonds, certificates of
obligations, or grants from other governmental bodies, or to prevent the making
of any contract or lease providing for payments beyond the end of the fiscal
year, provided that such action is made or approved by ordinance. All
disbursements above a limit set by Council shall designate those authorized to
sign the disbursements.
   (b)   Financial reports: The City Manager shall submit to the Council each
month a report covering the financial condition of the City.
   (c)   Annual audit: An annual audit shall be performed by a competent
certified public accounting firm as provided in Section
3.12.
SEC. 9.13. BORROWING.
   (a)   The right to borrow: The City shall have the right and power, except
as prohibited by law, to borrow money by whatever method it may deem to be in
the public interest and in accordance with laws of the State of Texas.
   (b)   General obligation bonds: The City shall have the power to borrow
money on the credit of the City and to issue general obligation bonds for
permanent public improvements or for any other public purpose not prohibited by
law, and to issue refunding bonds to refund outstanding bonds previously
issued.
   (c)   Revenue bonds: The City shall have the power to borrow money for the
purpose of constructing, purchasing, improving, extending, or repairing of
public utilities, recreational facilities or any other self-liquidating
municipal function not prohibited by law, and to issue revenue bonds to
evidence the obligation created. Such bonds shall be a charge upon and payable
from any or all City properties or interest pledged, or the income from the
City properties, or both. The holders of the revenue bonds shall never have the
right to demand payment out of monies raised or to be raised by taxation.
   (d)   Borrowing in anticipation of property tax: In any budget year, the
Council may, by resolution, authorize the borrowing of money in anticipation of
the collection of the property tax for the same year whether levied or to be
levied. Notes may be issued for periods not exceeding one (1) year and must be
retired by the end of the budget year in which issued.
SEC. 9.14. PURCHASING.
   The Council may confer upon the City Manager general authority to contract
for expenditures without further approval of the Council for all budgeted items
not exceeding limits set by Council or State law. All contracts for
expenditures involving more than the set limits must be approved by the
Council. All contracts or purchases involving more than the limits set, shall
be let as provided by law or ordinance; provided that the Council, or City
Manager in such cases as he is authorized to contract for the City, shall have
the right to reject any and all bids.
   Emergency contracts as authorized by law may be negotiated by the Council,
or City Manager if given authority by the Council, without competitive bidding.
Such emergency shall be declared by the City Manager and approved by Council or
may be declared by Council.
(Amended: 5-10-08)
SEC. 9.15. POWER TO TAX.
   The Council shall have the power to levy, assess and collect an annual tax
upon real and personal property within the City to the maximum provided by the
Constitution and general laws of the State of Texas. The Council shall also
have the power to levy such additional taxes as now or hereafter may be
authorized by the State of Texas.
SEC. 9.16. PROPERTY SUBJECT TO TAX, METHOD OF ASSESSMENT.
   All real and personal property within the City of Mansfield, not expressly
exempted by law, shall be subject to annual taxation as provided herein except
as may be required by State law.
(Amended: 5-7-88)
SEC. 9.17. TAXES - WHEN DUE AND PAYABLE.
   All taxes due the City of Mansfield shall be payable at the office of the
City Tax Assessor-Collector and may be paid at any time after the tax rolls for
the year have been completed and approved, which shall be not later than
October 1st. Taxes shall be paid on or before January 31st and all such taxes
not paid on or prior to such date shall be deemed delinquent and shall be
subject to such penalty and interest as prescribed by State statute. The
Council may provide further by ordinance that all taxes, either current or
delinquent, due the City of Mansfield, may be paid by installments. Failure to
levy and assess taxes through omission in preparation of the approve tax roll
shall not relieve the person, firm or corporation so omitted from obligation to
pay such current or past due taxes as shown to be payable by recheck of the
rolls and receipt for the years in question.
(Amended: 5-7-88)
SEC. 9.18. TAX LIENS.
   The tax levied by the City is hereby declared to be a lien, charge, or
encumbrance upon the property as of January 1st of each year, upon which the
tax is due, which lien, charge or encumbrance the City is entitled to enforce
and foreclose in any court having jurisdiction over the same, and the lien,
charge or encumbrance on the property is such as to give the State Courts
jurisdiction to enforce and foreclose said lien on the property on which the
tax is due, not only as against any resident of this State or person whose
residence is unknown, but as against nonresidents. All taxes upon real estate
shall especially be a lien and a charge upon the property upon which the taxes
are due, and such lien may be foreclosed in any court having jurisdiction. Such
lien shall be, prior to all other claims, and no gift, sale, assignment or
transfer of any kind, or judicial writ of any kind, can ever defeat such lien.
   In addition to the liens herein provided, on the first day of January of any
year the owner of real and personal property subject to taxation by the City
shall be personally liable for the taxes due thereon for such year. The City
shall have the power to sue for and recover personal judgment for taxes without
foreclosure, or to foreclose its lien or liens, or to recover both personal
judgment and foreclosure. In any such suit where it appears that the
description of any property in the City assessment rolls is insufficient to
identify such property, the City shall have the right to plead a good
description of the property intended to be assessed, to prove the same, and to
have its judgment foreclosing the tax lien and/or personal judgment against the
owner for such taxes.
ARTICLE X. PLANNING AND ZONING
SEC. 10.01. THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   There shall be established a Planning and Zoning Commission, which shall
consist of seven (7) residents from the City of Mansfield. The members of said
Commission shall be appointed by the Council for a term of two (2) years. Three
(3) members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be so appointed each
odd-numbered year and for (4) members shall be appointed each even-numbered
year. The Commission shall elect a chairman from among its membership and shall
meet not less than once each month. Vacancies and unexpired terms shall be
filled by the Council for the remainder of the term. A majority of the members
shall constitute a quorum. Members of the Commission may be removed with the
consent of a majority of the Council and for cause set forth in writing. A
member may request a public hearing within five (5) days of notice of removal
by the Council, said hearing to be scheduled not less than ten (10) nor more
than thirty (30) days after said notice.
   The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings which shall be of
public record. The Commission shall serve without compensation. (Amended: 5-7-
88, 5-10-08, 11-3-20)
SEC. 10.02. POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall:
   (a)   Recommend a City Plan for the physical development of the City,
   (b)   Recommend to the Council approval or disapproval of proposed changes
in the zoning plan, and
   (c)   Exercise control over platting or sub-dividing land within the
corporate limits of the City and outside said corporate limits to the extent
authorized by law.
   The Commission shall be responsible to and act as an advisory body to the
Council and shall have and perform such additional duties as may be prescribed
by ordinance.
SEC. 10.03. THE MASTER PLAN.
   The master plan for the physical development of the City of Mansfield shall
contain the Commission's recommendations for growth, development and
beautification of the City. A copy of the master plan, or any part thereof,
shall be forwarded to the Council, which may adopt this plan in whole or in
parts, and may adopt any amendments thereto after at least, one (1) public
hearing on the proposed action. The Council shall act on such plan, or part
thereof, within sixty (60) days following its submission. If such plan, or part
thereof, shall be rejected by the Council, the Commission may modify such plan,
or part thereof, and again forward it to the Council for consideration.
   All amendments to the master plan recommended by the Commission shall be
submitted in the same manner as outlined above to the Council for approval and
all recommendations affecting the master plan shall be accompanied by a
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission.
SEC. 10.04. LEGAL EFFECT OF THE MASTER PLAN.
   Upon the adoption of a master plan by the Council, no subdivision, street,
park or any public way, ground or space, public building or structure, or
public utility whether publicly or privately owned, which is in conflict with
the master plan shall be constructed or authorized by the City until and unless
the location and extent thereof shall have been submitted to and approved by
the Commission. In case of disapproval, the Commission shall communicate its
reasons to the Council, which shall have the power to over-rule such
disapproval, and upon such over-ruling, the Council shall have power to
proceed. The widening, narrowing, re-locating, vacating or change in the use of
any street, alley or public way, or ground or the sale of any public building,
or real property, shall be subject to similar submission and approval by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and failure to approve may be similarly
overruled by the Council.
ARTICLE XI. FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES
SEC. 11.01. POWERS OF THE CITY.
   In addition to the City's power granted elsewhere in this Charter, the City
shall have the power to buy, own, sell, construct, lease, maintain, and operate
public service within or without the City limits and to manufacture, distribute
and sell the output of such service operation within or without the City
limits. The City shall have such regulatory and other power as may now or
hereafter be granted under the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas.
Public service shall include utilities or service to the public of every
character.
SEC. 11.02. POWER TO GRANT FRANCHISE.
   The Council shall have power by ordinance to grant, amend, renew and extend,
all franchises of all public utilities of every character operating within the
City of Mansfield. All ordinances granting, amending, renewing, or extending
franchises for public utilities shall be read at two (2) separate regular
meeting of the Council, and shall not be finally passed until twenty-eight (28)
days after the first reading, and no such ordinance shall take effect until
thirty (30) days after its final passage; and pending such time, the full text
of such ordinance shall be published once each week for three (3) consecutive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Mansfield; and the
expense of such publication shall be borne by the proponent of the franchise.
No franchise shall be for an indeterminate period nor be transferable except
with the approval of the Council expressed by ordinance.
SEC. 11.03. FRANCHISE VALUE NOT TO BE ALLOWED.
   No value shall be assigned to any franchise granted by the City of Mansfield
under this Charter in fixing reasonable rates and charges for utility service
within the City and in determining the just compensation to be paid by the City
for public utility property which the City may acquire by condemnation or
otherwise.
SEC. 11.04. RIGHT OF REGULATION.
   All grants, renewals, extensions, or amendments of public utility
franchises, whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject
to the right of the City:
   (a)   To repeal the same by ordinance at any time for failure to begin
construction or operation within the time prescribed or for failure otherwise
to comply with the terms of the franchise, such power to be exercised only
after due notice and hearing.
   (b)   To require an adequate and reasonable extension of plant and service,
and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the standard necessary to
render the highest reasonable quality of utility service to the public.
   (c)   To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products
and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates.
   (d)   (1)   To prescribe the form of accounts kept by each such utility;
provided, that if the utility shall keep its accounts in accordance with the
uniform systems of accounts for said utility prescribed by the National
Association of Railroad and Public Utility Commissioners, the Federal Power
Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, the Railroad Commission of
Texas, or their successors, or other State or federal utility regulating
agencies, this shall be deemed sufficient compliance with this paragraph.
      (2)   At any time to examine and audit the accounts and other records of
any such utility and to require annual and other reports, including reports on
local operations by each such public utility.
   (e)   To impose such reasonable regulations and restrictions as may be
deemed desirable or conducive to safety, welfare, and accommodation of the
public.
   (f)   To require the franchise to restore at the franchisee's expense, all
public or private property to a condition equally as good as or better than
before disturbed by construction, repair or removal.
   (g)   To require every franchisee to furnish within a reasonable time to the
City, without cost to the City, a general map, with updates outlining the
location, character, size length, and terminals of all facilities of such
franchisee in, over, and under ground of property in the City and to provide
detailed information on request.
SEC. 11.05. GRANT NOT TO BE EXCLUSIVE.
   No grant or franchise to construct, maintain or operate a public utility
and/or renewal or extension of such grant shall be exclusive.
SEC. 11.06. CONSENT OF PROPERTY OWNERS.
   The consent of abutting and adjacent property owners shall not be required
for the construction, extension, maintenance or operation of any public
utility; but nothing in this Charter or in any franchise granted thereunder
shall ever be construed to deprive any such property owner of any right of
action for damage or injury to his property as now or hereafter provided by
law.
SEC. 11.07. EXTENSIONS.
   All extensions of public utilities within the City limits shall become a
part of the aggregate property of the public utility, shall be operated as
such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained
in this Charter and in any original grant thereafter made. The right to use and
maintain any extension shall terminate with the original grant and shall be
terminable as provided in Section
11.04 of this Charter. In case of an extension of a public utility operated
under a franchise hereafter granted, such right shall be terminated at the same
time and under the same conditions as the original grant.
SEC. 11.08. TEMPORARY PERMITS.
   Permits unconditionally revocable at the will of the Council for minor or
temporary privileges in the streets, public ways and public places of the City
may be granted and revoked by resolution from time to time, and such permits
shall not be deemed franchises as the term is used in this Charter.
(Amended: 5-7-88)
SEC. 11.09. OTHER CONDITIONS.
   All franchises heretofore granted are recognized as contracts between the
City and the grantee, and the contractual rights as contained in any such
franchises shall not be impaired by the provisions of this Charter, except that
the power of the City to exercise the right of eminent domain in the
acquisition of any utility property is in all things reserved, and except the
general power of the city heretofore existing and herein provided for to
regulate the rates and services of a utility, which shall include the right to
require adequate and reasonable extension of plant and service and the
maintenance of the plant fixtures at the standard necessary to render the
highest reasonable quality of utility service to the public. Every public
utility franchise hereafter granted shall be held subject to all the terms and
conditions contained in the various sections of this article whether or not
such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchises. Nothing in this
Charter shall operate to limit in any way, as specifically stated, the
discretion of the Council or the electors of the City in imposing terms and
conditions as may be reasonable in connection with any franchise grant
including the right to require such compensation or rental as may be permitted
by the laws of the State of Texas.
SEC. 11.10. FRANCHISE RECORDS.
   Within six (6) months after this Charter takes effect, every public utility
and every owner of public utility franchise shall file with the City, as may be
prescribed by ordinance, certified copies of all franchises owned or claimed,
or under which utility is operated in the City. The City shall compile and
maintain a public record of public utility franchises.
SEC. 11.11. ACCOUNTS OF MUNICIPALLY OWNED UTILITIES.
   Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the
City, in such manner as to show the true and complete financial results of such
City ownership and operation, including all assets, appropriately subdivided
into different classes, all liability subdivided by classes, depreciation
reserve, other reserves, and surplus; also revenues; operating expenses
including depreciation interest payments, rental, and other disposition of
annual income. The accounts shall show the actual capital cost to the City of
each public utility owned, also the cost of all extensions, additions, and
improvements and the source of the funds expended for such capital purposes.
They shall show as nearly as possible the cost of any service furnished to or
rendered by any such utility to any other City or governmental department. The
Council shall annually cause to be made by a certified public accountant, and
shall publish a report showing the financial condition of said public utility
and the financial results of such City ownership and operation, giving the
information specified in this section and such additional data as the Council
shall seem expedient.
SEC. 11.12 SALE OF PUBLIC SERVICES.
   (a)   The Council shall have the power and authority to sell and distribute
any public service to any person, firm or corporation outside the limits of the
City and to permit them to connect with said system under contract with the
City under such terms and conditions as may appear to be for the best interests
of the City.
   (b)   The Council shall have the power and authority to prescribe the kind
of materials used within or beyond the limits of the City where it furnishes
the service, and to inspect the same and require them to be kept in good order
and condition at all times and to make such rules and regulations, as shall be
necessary and proper, and prescribe penalties for noncompliance with same.
SEC. 11.13. REGULATION OF RATES.
   The Council shall have full power after notice and hearing to regulate by
ordinance the rates, charges and fares of every public utility franchise holder
operating in the City, provided that no such ordinance shall be passed as an
emergency measure.
   (a)   The Council, upon receiving a request from a public service desiring a
change in rates, charges or fares, shall call a meeting for consideration of
such change.
   (b)   The public service shall show the necessity for such change by
establishing by clear, competent and convincing evidence:
      (1)   Cost of its investment property allocable to service in the City;
      (2)   Amount and character of its expenses and revenues connected with
the rendering of such service; and
      (3)   Any additional evidence required by Council.
   (c)   The Council may, if not satisfied with the sufficiency of the legal
evidence furnished by the public service, select and employ rate consultants
and auditors to investigate any requests or changes in rates, charges or fares.
The public service shall reimburse the City for fifty (50) percent of its
reasonable and necessary expenses incurred.
   (d)   The public service may, if not satisfied with the rate, charge or fare
ordered by Council, make a motion for rehearing within twenty (20) days of the
entry of such order. Such motion will be deemed overruled if not acted upon by
the Council within thirty (30) days, provided that the Council may by
resolution extend such time for action on the motion to a maximum of sixty (60)
days.
   (e)   No public service may institute legal action contesting such rate,
charge or fare fixed by the Council until such public service has exhausted
remedies provided herein.
ARTICLE XII. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 12.01. PUBLICITY OF RECORDS.
   All records and accounts of every office, department, or agency of the City
shall be open to inspection by any citizen or by any representative of the
press at all reasonable times and under such reasonable regulations as may be
established by the Council, provided that police records and vital statistic
records, and any other records closed to the public by law, shall not be
considered records for the purpose of this section.
SEC. 12.02. PERSONAL FINANCIAL INTERESTS.
   (a)   Any City officer, appointee, or employee who has a substantial
financial interest, direct or indirect, or by reason of ownership of stock in
any corporation, in any contract with the City or in the sale of any land,
material, supplies, or services to the City or to a contractor supplying the
City shall make known that interest to the Council and refrain from voting upon
or otherwise participating in his capacity as a City officer, appointee, or
employee in the making of such sale or in the making or performance of such
contract. Any City officer, appointee, or employee who conceals such a
substantial financial interest or violates the requirements of this section
shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall forfeit his
office or position. Violation of this section with the knowledge express or
implied of the person or corporation contracting with or making sale to the
City shall render the contract or sale voidable by the City Manager or the
Council.
   (b)   When ownership of stock in a corporation is involved, such stock
ownership in an amount in excess of one (1) percent of the stock of such
corporation shall constitute substantial interest.
SEC. 12.03. PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   Activities prohibited:
      (1)   In appointments to and removal from any City office or employment,
persons shall not be favored or discriminated against because of race, sex,
religion, age, national origin or handicap.
(Amended: 5-7-88)
      (2)   No person who seeks appointment or promotion with respect to any
City position or appointive City administrative office shall directly or
indirectly give, render or pay any money, service or other valuable thing to
any person for or in connection with his test, appointment, proposed
appointment, promotion or proposed promotion,
      (3)   No City official or employee, elected or appointed, shall orally,
by letter, or otherwise solicit or assist in soliciting any assessment,
subscription or contribution for any political party or political purpose
whatever from any subordinate City official or employee holding any compensated
City position.
      (4)   No person who holds any compensated City position shall solicit or
receive any contribution to the campaign funds of any candidate for municipal
office or take part in the management, affairs, or political campaign of any
municipal candidate, unless specifically permitted by state law.
      (5)   A person who holds any compensated City position shall not engage
in political activity relating to a campaign for an elective office while in
uniform or on active duty.
      (6)   For purposes of this section, a person engages in political
activity if the person:
         1.   Makes a public political speech supporting or opposing a
candidate;
         2.   Distributes a card or other political literature relating to the
campaign of a candidate;
         3.   Wears a campaign button;
         4.   Circulates or signs a petition for a candidate;
         5.   Solicits votes for a candidate; or
         6.   Solicits campaign contributions for a candidate.
      (7)   While out of uniform and not on duty a person who holds any
compensated City position may engage in political activity, including each
activity listed in Section
12.03(5).
   (b)   Penalties: Any person who by himself or with others violates any of
the provisions or paragraphs (1) through (3) of the preceding subsection (a)
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Any person
who by himself or with others violates any of the provisions of paragraph (4)
of the preceding subsection (a) shall be guilty of an offense and upon
conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00). Any person convicted under this section shall be ineligible
for a period of five (5) years thereafter to hold any City office or position
and, if an officer or employee of the City, shall immediately forfeit his
office or position.
(Amended: 5-10-08)
SEC. 12.04. NEPOTISM.
   No person related within the second degree by affinity, or within the third
degree by consanguinity to any elected officer of the City, or to the City
Manager, shall be appointed to any office, position or clerkship or other
service of the City. This prohibition shall not apply, however, to any person
who shall have been continuously employed by the City for a period of two (2)
years prior to the election of the Councilman or appointment of the City
Manager so related to him.
SEC. 12.05. ASSIGNMENT, EXECUTION AND GARNISHMENT.
   The property, real and personal belonging to the City shall not be liable to
be sold or appropriated under any writ of execution or cost bill. The funds
belonging to the City, in the hands of any person, firm or corporation, shall
not be liable to garnishment, attachment, or sequestration; nor shall the City
be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property
it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the City nor any of its
officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ of garnishment or
any account whatever. The City shall not be obligated to recognize any
assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents, or contractors.
SEC. 12.06. SECURITY AND BONDS.
   It shall not be necessary in any bond, undertaking, or security to be
demanded or executed by or on behalf of said City in any of the State Courts,
but in all such actions, suits, appeals, or proceedings, same shall be
conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been
given as required by law.
SEC. 12.07. DAMAGE SUITS.
   Before the City shall be liable to damage claim or suit for personal injury,
or damage to property, the person who is injured or whose property is damaged
or someone in his behalf shall give the City Manager or the person performing
the duties of City Secretary, notice in writing duly verified within thirty
(30) days after the occurrence of the alleged injury, or damage, stating
specifically in such notice when, where and how the injury or damage was
sustained, and setting forth the extent of the injury or damage as accurately
as possible. No action at law for damages shall be brought against the City for
personal injury or damage to property prior to the expiration of thirty (30)
days after notice herein-before described has been filed with the City Manager
or the person performing the duties of City Secretary and not later than two
(2) years after the occurrence of the injury or damage to property. In case of
injuries resulting in death, before the City shall be liable in damages
therefor the person or persons claiming such damages shall after the death of
the injured person give notice as above required in case of personal injury,
provided however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to mean that
the City waives any rights, privileges, defense or immunities in tort actions
which are provided under the common law, the Constitution and General Laws of
the State of Texas. The notice herein required shall be waived only by
appropriate resolution of the Council.
SEC. 12.08. WELFARE AND/OR PENSION PLAN FOR CITY EMPLOYEES.
   The council shall have the power exercisable in its discretion, and subject
to such limitations and regulations as it shall deem proper to create, operate,
amend, and contract for a welfare and/or pension plan for any or all City
employees.
SEC. 12.09. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE.
   If any section or part of section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of
this Charter nor the context in which such section or part of section so held
invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of
section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or
part of section to which such holding shall directly apply.
SEC. 12.10. EFFECT OF CHARTER ON EXISTING LAW.
   All ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and contracts now in force
under the City government of Mansfield and not in conflict with the provisions
of this Charter shall remain in force under this Charter until altered,
amended, or repealed by the City Council after this Charter takes effect. All
rights of the City under existing franchises and contracts and all existing
authority for the issuance of bonds, not in conflict with the provisions of any
amendment of this Charter, shall be preserved in full force and effect.
SEC. 12.11. APPLICABILITY OF GENERAL LAWS.
   The Constitution of the State of Texas, the statutes of said State
applicable to home ruled municipal corporations, as now or hereafter enacted,
this Charter and ordinances enacted pursuant hereto shall, in the order
mentioned, be applicable to the City of Mansfield. The City shall also have the
power to exercise any and all powers conferred by the laws of the State of
Texas upon any other kind of city, town, or village, not contrary to the
provisions of any such powers by the City of Mansfield shall be optional with
it, and it shall not be required to conform to the law governing any other
city, town, or villages unless and until by ordinance it adopts same.
SEC. 12.12. AMENDING THE CHARTER.
   Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to the voters of the
City in the manner provided by Chapter 9 of the Texas Local Government Code, as
now or hereafter amended. (Amended 11-3-20)
SEC. 12.13. CHARTER CONSTRUCTION.
   All powers granted heretofore to cities are hereby preserved. In case of any
irreconcilable conflict between the provisions of this Charter and any superior
law, the powers of the City and its officers shall be defined in such superior
laws. In case of any insufficiency or omission that may be supplied by
reference to the general laws, such provisions of the general laws are hereby
adopted, and the city shall have and exercise all of the powers that it could
have acquired by expressly adopting and incorporating into this Charter all of
the provisions of State and general laws, it being the intent of this Charter
that no lawful power of the City shall fall because of any omission,
insufficiency or invalidity of any portion or portions of this Charter. The
insufficiency or invalidity of any portion or portions of this Charter shall
not in any way affect the remainder of the Charter, but the same shall be
construed as if adopted with such portion and/or portions so found invalid or
impotent.
SEC. 12.14. JUDICIAL NOTICE.
   This Charter shall be deemed a public act, may be read in evidence without
pleading or proof, and judicial notice shall be taken thereof in all courts and
places.
SEC. 12.15. GENDER OF WORDING.
   The masculine gender of the wording used throughout this Charter shall
always be interpreted to mean either sex.
   We the undersigned members of the Charter Commission, duly elected as such
Charter Commission in accordance with Articles 1165 and 1166 of the Revised
Civil Statutes of the State of Texas, on the fourteenth day of September, 1974,
have, in accordance with law, framed the Charter for the City of Mansfield,
State of Texas, and herewith respectfully submit the same to the Honorable City
Council of the City of Mansfield on the fourteenth day of December, 1975.
   It is respectfully requested that the Honorable City Council of the City of
Mansfield submit the proposed Charter as framed by the Charter Commission to
the qualified voters of the City of Mansfield, at an election to be held on the
twenty-fifth day of January, 1975, said election to be called in accordance
with the election laws of the State of Texas, and that such other action be
taken by the Honorable City Council as required by law in the submission of
said Charter.
Respectfully submitted:
/s/   _______________________            /s/   ___________________________
   W. M. Brittain, Chairman               Al Stubenrauch, Vice-Chairman
/s/   _______________________            /s/   ___________________________
   Barbara Cook, Secretary               Steve Baker
/s/   _______________________            /s/   ___________________________
   H. E. Baxter, Jr.                  Mack Cain
/s/   _______________________            /s/   ___________________________
   Dwain Cannon                  Virginia Carew
/s/   _______________________            /s/   ___________________________
   Ira Gibson                     Alice Henry
/s/   _______________________            /s/   ___________________________
   Joe Humphries                  James R. Icenhower
/s/   _______________________            /s/   ___________________________
   S. K. Pressley                     Joe T. Spry, Sr.
/s/   _______________________
   Don E. Williams
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      Chapter
         
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the municipality of Mansfield,
Texas shall be designated as the Code of Mansfield, Texas and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Mansfield, Texas.
   CITY SECRETARY, CHIEF OF POLICE, OR OTHER CITY OFFICERS OR DEPARTMENTS. The
words "City Secretary," "Chief of Police," or words designating any other city
officers or departments shall be construed to mean the City Secretary, Chief of
Police or such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the
City of Mansfield, Texas.
('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))
   CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as modified
by  amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Mansfield, Texas.
   COUNTY. Tarrant County, Texas.
   HIGHWAY. Any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square,
bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city,
dedicated or devoted to public use.
('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))
   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
   OWNER. Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land, except as
otherwise defined in this code.
('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, company, firm, organization, government
or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, association and any other group or combination of individuals or
business entity or legal entity.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every species of property, except real property, as
defined in this section.
('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))
   PROPERTY. Real and personal property, and "mixed" if the sense used so
indicates.
('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes land, tenements, and hereditaments.
('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))
   ROADWAY.  That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular traffic and that portion of a street used for drainage.
('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. Any portion of the street between the curb or the lateral line of
the roadway and the adjacent property line, all or a part of which is intended
for the use of pedestrians.
('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))
   SIDEWALK AREA. The space between the lateral line of the roadway and the
boundary separating the public right-of-way and the adjacent private property,
or adjacent public property not constituting an area usable as a sidewalk.
('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when a person cannot write.
('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))
   STATE. The State of Texas.
   STREET. Any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or square,
bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel, causeway, or other public way in
the city, dedicated or devoted to public use.
('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter  analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have subchapters.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Any representation, other than oral, of words,
letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
('78 Code, § 1-5 (part))
   YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the words
YEAR OF OUR LORD.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of
the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
"and/or," if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy may do as the principal, such
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   The phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this
code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any
court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any
of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this
code, since the same would have been enacted by the City Council without the
incorporation in this code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause,
sentence, paragraph, or section.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this municipality exercising the powers, duties
or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this municipality for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the City Council requiring publication shall take
effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly
provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their
passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in anyway be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this code, which
amend, repeal or in any way affect this code, may be numbered in accordance
with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion therein. When
subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or division or any portion
thereof, those repealed portions may be excluded from the code by omission from
reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted
in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of those subsequent
ordinances until such time that this code and subsequent ordinances numbered or
omitted are readopted as a new code by the City Council.
   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code shall be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
code in the following language: "That section     of the Code of Ordinances,
City of Mansfield, Texas is hereby amended to read as follows: . . ." The new
provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (C)   In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to
be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances,
City of Mansfield, Texas is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered
     , which said section reads as follows: . . ." The new section shall then
be set out in full as desired.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: ('78 Code,
§ 1-2) (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, § 54.001) ('78 Code, § 1-2) (Ord. 10, passed 1-
17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-85).
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory reference"
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information.
Example:
   § 31.10 ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS.
      This city has the authority to impose penalties for ordinance violations.
   ('69 Code, § 1-5) (Ord. 10, passed 1-1-80)
   Statutory reference:
      General municipality penalty, see Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, § 54.001
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of
this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by:
      (1)   A fine not to exceed $2,000 in all cases arising under municipal
ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning and public health and sanitation
other than vegetation and litter violations;
      (2)   A fine not to exceed $2,000, if a motor vehicle is used in illegal
dumping or an offense under the law or city ordinance violated by the illegal
dumping;
      (3)   A fine not to exceed $500 in all other cases, provided, however,
that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same
or a similar offense under the laws of the state.
   (B)   Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that any such violation is
designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this Code, such nuisance may
be summarily abated by the City Administrator or the Chief of Police or their
assigns.
Statutory reference:
   Municipal penalties, see Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, § 54.001
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      Chapter
         
30.   PERSONNEL
         
31.   RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
         
32.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
         
33.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
         
34.   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
         
35.   CODE ENFORCEMENT
         
36.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
         
37.   MUNICIPAL COURT
         
38.   TAXATION AND FINANCE
         
39.   PUBLIC ART
CHAPTER 30: PERSONNEL
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Texas Municipal Retirement System (TMRS) - election to participate;
adoption by reference
Officer and Employee Liability Plan
   
30.15   Definitions
   
30.16   Plan established
   
30.17   Coverage
   
30.18   Defense
   
30.19   Limits of coverage; expenses
   
30.20   Exclusions
   
30.21   Notice of occurrence, claim or suit; cooperation
   
30.22   Plan period
   
30.23   Subrogation
   
30.24   Legal presentation
   
30.25   Determination of coverage
   
30.26   No creation of cause of action
   
30.27   Administration
   
30.28   Payments subject to appropriation
   
30.29   No right to fund
   
30.30   Amendment, repeal and termination
Code of Ethics and Conduct for City Elected Officials and Board and Committee
Members
   
30.40   Statement of purpose
   
30.41   Definitions
   
30.42   Affected parties
   
30.43   Standards of conduct
   
30.44   Prohibited conduct
   
30.45   Disclosure of interest
   
30.46   Voting for appointments to City Boards, Commissions and Committees and
applicant responsibility to report campaign contributions
   
30.47   Enforcement
   
30.48   Advisory opinions
   
30.49   Penalties; forfeited position; exemptions; injunctions
   
30.50   Distribution of Code of Ethics and conduct
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM (TMRS) - ELECTION TO PARTICIPATE;
ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Election to participate in the TMRS. On behalf of the city, the City
Council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the
employees of all departments participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement
System (hereafter "TMRS") as provided in Tex. Gov't Code §§ 851.001 et seq., as
amended; and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby
accepted.
   (B)   Election to participate in the TMRS Supplemental Benefits Fund. The
City Council elects to have the employees of all participating departments of
the city participate in and be covered by the Supplemental Benefits Fund of the
Texas Municipal Retirement System, as provided by Tex. Gov't Code §§ 851.001 et
seq.; and all the benefits and obligations of participation in said fund are
hereby accepted by the city as to such employees.
   (C)   Adoption by reference. Ordinances effecting the plan for participation
in the TMRS, employee contributions, updated service credits, increases in
benefits and retirement annuities and any other applicable legislation of the
city and state are adopted by reference into this code of ordinances as if
fully set forth herein and shall be kept on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
(Ord. 317, passed 10-25-76; Ord. 318, passed 10-25-76; Ord. 343, passed 1-10-
78; Ord. 398, passed 10-22-79; Ord. 433, passed 12-23-80; Ord. 434, passed 12-
23-80; Ord. 656, passed 12-9-85; Ord. 715, passed 12-8-86; Ord. 760, passed 12-
14-87; Ord. 761, passed 12-14-87; Ord. 800, passed 10-24-88; Ord. 815, passed
12-12-88; Ord. 854, passed 11-13-89; Ord. 882, passed 11-26-90; Ord. 909,
passed 11-12-91; Ord. 925, passed 2-24-92; Ord. 1280, passed 9-27-99; Ord. OR-
1821-11, passed 11-28-11)
OFFICER AND EMPLOYEE LIABILITY PLAN
§ 30.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY VEHICLE. A vehicle or mobile equipment either leased or owned by the
city.
   COVERAGE. The extent to which the city will defend and indemnify a plan
member under the plan.
   LOSS. An amount which a plan member is legally obligated to pay resulting
from an act or omission which has coverage under the plan.
   PLAN. The officer and employee liability plan as established in this
subchapter.
   PLAN MEMBER. A person who is as follows.
      (1)   An employee of the city.
      (2)   A member of the City Council.
      (3)   A member of a city board, commission or committee created by
Charter, ordinance or resolution of the city.
      (4)   A member of the Board of Directors of a nonprofit corporation
created under the authority of the City Council as an instrumentality of the
city.
      (5)   A volunteer who is as follows.
         (a)   A member of the city's Volunteer Police Reserve.
         (b)   A member of the city's Volunteer Fire Department.
         (c)   Assisting the city pursuant to an official policy adopted or
approved by the City Council.
   PROGRAM ORDINANCE. Ordinance 799, as amended, establishing the city's self-
insurance and risk management program.
('78 Code, § 13-50) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)
§ 30.16 PLAN ESTABLISHED.
   The City Council hereby establishes the city's Officer and Employee
Liability Plan, which consists of the terms and conditions described in this
subchapter.
('78 Code, § 13-51) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)
§ 30.17 COVERAGE.
   (A)   The plan provides coverage in accordance with this section.
   (B)   To the extent coverage is not excluded under §§
30.20 or
30.22, the city shall indemnify and defend a plan member in accordance with
terms of the plan, against a loss arising out of a claim, suit or judgment
resulting from an act or omission of the plan member occurring during the
discharge of the plan member's duties, and which is within the scope of the
plan member's office, employment or assigned volunteer work with the city.
   (C)   A person whose position with the city terminates, has coverage in
accordance with division (A) of this section for any event that occurred while
the person was a plan member.
('78 Code, § 13-52) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)
§ 30.18 DEFENSE.
   (A)   The city will defend a suit against a plan member who has coverage
under this plan even if the suit is groundless or fraudulent.
   (B)   The city may investigate, negotiate and settle any claim or suit as it
determines necessary.
('78 Code, § 13-53) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)
§ 30.19 LIMITS OF COVERAGE; EXPENSES.
   (A)   The city will pay each loss; except, that in cases arising from
incidents or occurrences for which the city's liability would exist by virtue
of the Texas Tort Claims Act (Texas Civil Practices and Remedies Code, Chapter
101), whether or not a claim is made against the city or the city is a
defendant in the suit, the city will pay the loss only up to an amount not
exceeding the limits of liability provided by the Texas Tort Claims Act, as
amended, for a municipality.
   (B)   In addition to the coverage provided in division (A) of this section,
the city will pay the following.
      (1)   The city's expenses in investigating and defending the claim or
lawsuit.
      (2)   Costs taxed against a plan member in a suit defended under this
plan and interest that accrues after entry of judgment before the city has
deposited payment with the court on that part of the judgment which does not
exceed the limits of coverage established in division (A).
      (3)   Reasonable expenses of the plan member incurred at the city's
request.
      (4)   Attorney's fees ordered by the court to be paid by the plan member.
('78 Code, § 13-54) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)
§ 30.20 EXCLUSIONS.
   Coverage under this plan does not apply to a claim or lawsuit that is
brought against a plan member as follows.
   (A)   By the city.
   (B)   Arising out of the intentional, knowing or criminally negligent
violation of a penal statute or ordinance, committed by or with the knowledge
or consent of the plan member or any claim arising out of acts of fraud
committed by or at the direction of the plan member with intent to deceive or
defraud.
   (C)   Arising out of the gross negligence of the plan member; except, the
city will defend the plan member when gross negligence is alleged in a claim or
lawsuit.
   (D)   Arising while the plan member is operating a city vehicle with no
authority to operate the vehicle.
   (E)   For liability assumed by the plan member under a contract, unless the
contract is entered into at the request of the city.
   (F)   If the plan member joins or attempts to join with the suit against the
plan member a claim against the city for benefits under this plan.
   (G)   If the plan member fails to comply with §§
30.21 or
30.23 of this subchapter.
('78 Code, § 13-55) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)
§ 30.21 NOTICE OF OCCURRENCE, CLAIM OR SUIT; COOPERATION.
   To be entitled to coverage under the plan a plan member must do the
following.
   (A)   Notify the Claims Board, in writing, as soon as practicable upon
receipt of written notice of a claim or lawsuit, but no later than three
working days after receipt and deliver to the Claims Board, promptly upon
receipt, any demand, summons, notice or other process received by the plan
member in connection with a claim or suit.
   (B)   Cooperate with the Claims Board and City Attorney and upon the Claims
Board's request, assist in making settlements, in the conduct of suits and in
enforcing any right of contribution or indemnity against a person or
organization who may be liable to the city because of payment by the city of a
loss under the plan.
   (C)   Attend hearings and trials and assist in securing and giving evidence
and obtaining the attendance of witnesses.
   (D)   Comply with Claims Board administrative procedures.
   (E)   Perform the duties and comply with the requirements imposed on the
plan member by this subchapter or the program ordinance.
   (F)   Not, except upon advice of the City Attorney or when questioned by a
police officer at the scene of an accident, give any oral or written statement
or enter into any stipulation or agreement concerning a claim or lawsuit.
   (G)   Not, except at the plan member's own expense, voluntarily make any
payment, assume any obligation or incur any expense with respect to a claim or
lawsuit without consent of the city.
('78 Code, § 13-56) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)
§ 30.22 PLAN PERIOD.
   Coverage under the plan is only for acts or omissions occurring or alleged
to have occurred as follows.
   (A)   While the plan is in effect.
   (B)   Before the plan was in effect and which are not barred by any statute
of limitations.
   (C)   If the plan is canceled, while the plan was in effect and which are
not barred by any statute of limitations.
('78 Code, § 13-57) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)
§ 30.23 SUBROGATION.
   If payment or legal representation is provided under the plan, the city is
subrogated to the plan member's rights of recovery against any person or
organization to the extent of the city's payment or liability for payment. A
plan member must execute and deliver to the Claims Board whatever documents are
necessary in the opinion of the City Attorney to secure this right of
subrogation. The plan member must not do anything after a loss to prejudice
those rights.
('78 Code, § 13-58) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)
§ 30.24 LEGAL PRESENTATION.
   (A)   The city will provide legal representation for a plan member in a
claim or suit in which the plan member has coverage under the plan.
   (B)   If the City Attorney determines that there is a conflict of interest
for the City Attorney in representing a plan member, and the plan member is
otherwise entitled to coverage under the plan, the city will pay the reasonable
fee of a private attorney to represent the plan member. The private attorney
will be selected by the Claims Board.
('78 Code, § 13-59) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)
§ 30.25 DETERMINATION OF COVERAGE.
   If the city denies coverage to a plan member, the plan member may seek a
determination of coverage by a court of proper jurisdiction in Tarrant, Johnson
or Ellis County, Texas. If the court rules in favor of the plan member, the
city shall provide the plan member all benefits under the plan and shall
reimburse the plan member for the reasonable attorney fees, expenses and costs
incurred in obtaining the determination of coverage.
('78 Code, § 13-60)
§ 30.26 NO CREATION OF CAUSE OF ACTION.
   Nothing contained in this plan shall be construed as creating a right or
cause of action against a plan member nor as giving a right to a third party to
institute or maintain a suit which would not otherwise exist under law as a
legal claim against a plan member.
('78 Code, § 13-61) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)
§ 30.27 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Claims Board is responsible for the administration of the plan in
accordance with its terms, subject to the authority of the City Council. In the
course of carrying out this responsibility, the Claims Board shall interpret
and apply the provisions of this subchapter.
('78 Code, § 13-62)
§ 30.28 PAYMENTS SUBJECT TO APPROPRIATION.
   All amounts payable under this subchapter are subject to available and
appropriated funding; except, that appropriation shall not be required to the
extent funding is available under the program ordinance.
('78 Code, § 13-64) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)
§ 30.29 NO RIGHT TO FUND.
   This subchapter does not grant any right to any plan member in or to the
Risk Management Fund created by the program ordinance.
('78 Code, § 13-65) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)
§ 30.30 AMENDMENT, REPEAL AND TERMINATION.
   This subchapter may be repealed or amended at any time, subject to existing
rights of plan members under §§
30.17 and
30.22 of this subchapter, and the city may modify or terminate the plan at any
time.
('78 Code, § 13-63) (Ord. 989, passed 1-24-94)
CODE OF ETHICS AND CONDUCT FOR CITY ELECTED OFFICIALS AND BOARD AND COMMITTEE
MEMBERS
§ 30.40 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the proper
operation of democratic government requires that city elected officials and
members of boards and committees be independent, impartial and responsible only
to the people of the city, that governmental decisions and policy should be
made in the proper channels of the governmental structure; that no city elected
official or member of any board, commission or committee should have any
interest, financial or otherwise, direct or indirect, or engage in any
business, transaction or professional activity or incur any obligation of any
nature which is in conflict with the proper discharge of his or her duties in
the public interest; that public offices are positions of public trust imposing
the duty of a fiduciary upon all office holders, who are not to use their
public position for personal gain, and that the public should have confidence
in the integrity of its government. To implement such a policy, the City
Council deems it advisable to enact this Code of Ethics and Conduct for all
elected city officers and board and committee members, whether elected or
appointed, paid or unpaid, to serve not only as a guide for official conduct of
the city’s public servants, but also as a basis for discipline for those who
refuse to abide by its terms. The Code of Ethics and Conduct is cumulative of
other ordinances, city charter provisions and state statutes defining and
prohibiting conflict of interest.
   (B)   This Code of Ethics and Conduct is not intended to be nor shall it be
used as a political weapon to intimidate or embarrass persons affected.
(Ord. 1466, passed 12-8-03; Am. Ord. OR-2182-20, passed 9-14-20)
§ 30.41 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this Code of Ethics and Conduct, the following words and terms
shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:
   ADVISORY BOARD. A board, commission or committee of the city that functions
only in an advisory or study capacity.
   BENEFIT. Anything reasonably regarded as pecuniary gain or pecuniary
advantage, including benefit to any other person in whose welfare the
beneficiary has a direct and substantial interest. A pecuniary gain or
advantage shall not include insignificant amounts or items of de minimis value.
This policy does not establish dollar limits. "Insignificant" and "de minimis"
shall have their usual meanings and be subject to interpretation on a case by
case basis.
   BUSINESS ENTITY. A sole proprietorship, partnership, firm, corporation,
holding company, joint-stock company, receivership, trust, or any other entity
recognized in law.
   CANDIDATE. Every person who declares for or files for any office of the City
of Mansfield to be filled by election.
   CODE. The Code of Ethics and Conduct.
   COMPENSATION. Any economic benefit received in return for labor, services,
property, or investment.
   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. Information to which the following apply:
      (1)   At the time of the use or disclosure of the information, the
information is not a public record subject to public disclosure under the Texas
Public Information Act; and
      (2)   The use or disclosure of the information will have, or could
reasonably be expected to have, a material financial effect on any investment
or interest in real property that a city officer, board or committee member, or
any person to whom the city officer, board or committee member provides the
information, has at the time of the use or disclosure of the information or
acquires after the use or disclosure of the information.
   CONFLICT OF INTEREST. Action upon any matter which would constitute a
violation of this code of ethics, Texas Penal Code or Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, Ch.
171.
   DECISION. Any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or
other matter voted on by the City Council or other city board or commission, as
well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board or commission
which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body.
   ECONOMIC BENEFIT. Any money, real or personal property, purchase, sale,
lease, contract, option, credit, loan discount, service, or other tangible or
intangible thing of value, whether similar or dissimilar to those enumerated.
   ENTITY. A sole proprietorship, partnership, limited liability partnership,
firm, corporation, professional corporation, holding company, joint stock
company, joint venture, receivership, trust or any other entity recognized by
law through which business may be conducted.
   FALSE. A knowing or willful misrepresentation or concealment of any item
required to be disclosed by this chapter.
   GIFT. A favor, hospitality, or economic benefit, other than compensation,
but does not include campaign contributions reported as required by state law.
   INTENTIONALLY. A person acts intentionally, or with intent, with respect to
the nature of his or her conduct or to a result of his or her conduct when it
is his or her conscious objective or desire to engage in the conduct or cause
the result.
   KNOWINGLY. A person acts knowingly, or with knowledge, with respect to the
nature of his or her conduct or to circumstances surrounding his or her conduct
when he or she is aware of the nature of his or her conduct or that the
circumstances exist. A person acts KNOWINGLY, or with knowledge, with respect
to a result of his or her conduct when he or she is aware that his conduct is
reasonably certain to cause the result.
   MINISTERIAL ACT. An act performed in a prescribed manner and not requiring
the exercise of any judgment or discretion.
   OFFICER. Any member of the City Council and any member of a board,
commission or committee established by ordinance, charter or state law;
provided no member of an advisory board or committee shall be deemed an officer
of the city.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association
or other legal entity.
   SUBSTANTIAL INTEREST.
      (1)   A person has a substantial interest in a business entity if:
         (a)   The interest is ownership of 10% or more of the voting stock or
shares of the business entity or ownership of $15,000 or more of the fair
market value of the business entity;
         (b)   Funds received by the person from the business entity exceed 10%
of the person’s gross income for the previous year;
         (c)   The person holds a position of member of the board of directors
or other governing body of the business entity;
         (d)   The person serves as an elected officer of the business entity;
         (e)   The person is an employee of the business entity;
         (f)   The person is a creditor, debtor or guarantor of any person,
group or business entity in the amount of $5,000 or more; or
         (g)   Property of the person has been pledged to a business entity or
is subject to a lien in favor of the business entity in the amount of $5,000 or
more.
(Ord. 1466, passed 12-8-03; Am. Ord. OR-2182-20, passed 9-14-20)
§ 30.42 AFFECTED PARTIES.
   The persons subject to the provisions hereof shall be:
   (A)   The members of the City Council, including the mayor; and
   (B)   The members of any board, commission or committee established pursuant
to the charter or the ordinances of this city, or the laws of this state,
including, but not limited to:
      Mansfield Housing Finance Corporation
      Mansfield Library Board
      Keep Mansfield Beautiful Commission
      Mansfield Industrial Development Commission
      Historic Landmark Commission
      Economic Development Board
      Mansfield Park Facilities Development Corporation
      Capital Improvement Advisory Board
      Board of Adjustments
      City Council
      Construction Codes Board of Adjustments and Appeals
      Senior Citizens' Advisory Board
      Planning and Zoning Commission
      Animal Shelter Advisory Committee
   (C)   Candidates for any city elected office; and
   (D)   Any person listed within "affected parties" shall include all relevant
information concerning the spouse of said person.
(Ord. 1466, passed 12-8-03; Am. Ord. OR-2182-20, passed 9-14-20)
§ 30.43 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.
   (A)   City officers and advisory board members shall not use their position
to secure special privileges and shall avoid situations that could cause any
person to believe that they may have brought bias or partiality to a question
before the Council, any board, or decision maker. When an item to be considered
by the Council or any board presents a conflict of interest to a city officer
or advisory board member, it will be the responsibility of the city official to
make such conflict known to the City Attorney and to remove himself/herself
from discussion and voting on the matter. Members of the Council will not
condone, overlook or forgive any unethical or illegal activity. All members of
the Council agree to uphold the intent of this policy and to govern their
actions accordingly.
   (B)   City officers and advisory board members shall strive to recognize
their responsibility to future generations by addressing the interrelationship
of the social, cultural, and physical characteristics of the community when
making policies.
   (C)   City officers and advisory board members shall make a commitment to
improve the quality of life for the individual and the community, and be
dedicated to the faithful stewardship of the public trust.
   (D)   City officers and advisory board members shall continue to be
dedicated to friendly and courteous relationships with staff, other city
officials and the public, and shall seek to improve the quality and image of
public service.
(Ord. 1466, passed 12-8-03; Am. Ord. OR-2182-20, passed 9-14-20)
§ 30.44 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   No city officer or advisory board member, or their spouses shall
knowingly:
      (1)   Accept or solicit any gift, favor, service or thing of value from
any person, group or business entity that might reasonably tend to influence
him or herein the discharge of his or her official duties. This prohibition
shall not apply to:
         (a)   An occasional non-pecuniary gift, insignificant in value;
         (b)   An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; or
         (c)   Any gift which would have been offered or given to him or her if
he or she were not a city officer or advisory board member, or their spouses.
      (2)   Grant in the discharge of his or her official duties any improper
favor, service or thing of value to any person, group or business entity.
      (3)   Solicit or accept, from any source, any compensation, gift, favor,
service, economic benefit, or thing of value, including a promise of future
employment, that might reasonably tend to influence him or her, in the
discharge of his or her official duties, in consideration of any person subject
hereto of exercising or having exercised any official power or performing or
having performed any official duty on behalf of the city, from any person group
or business entity:
         (a)   Who is licensed or has a substantial interest in any business
entity that is licensed by any city department, agency, commission or board on
which the city officer or advisory board member serves; or
         (b)   Who has a financial interest in any proposed ordinance or
decision upon which the city officer or advisory board member may or must act
or make a recommendation; provided, however, that any city office or advisory
board member and their spouses, may accept travel and related expenses to
attend ceremonial functions, provided that such acceptance and attendance have
been approved by the city council prior to the occurrence of the ceremonial
function.
      (4)   Disclose any confidential information gained by reason of the
position of the officer, advisory board member or spouse concerning the
property, operations, policies or affairs of the city, or use such confidential
information to advance any personal interest, financial or otherwise, of such
officer or advisory board member, spouse or others. This subsection shall not
preclude disclosure of such confidential information in connection with any
investigation or proceeding regarding whether there has been a violation of the
standards of conduct set forth in this subchapter.
      (5)   Use one's position or office to secure special privileges or
exemption for himself or herself or another or for the private gain of the city
officer, advisory board member or his or her spouse.
      (6)   Hold himself or herself out as representing the city in any
capacity other than that for which he was appointed, or elected.
      (7)   Engage in or accept private employment or render a service when
such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or
her official duties or would tend to impair his or her independent judgment in
the performance of his or her official duties.
      (8)   Make unauthorized use, or permit unauthorized use, of city owned
vehicles, equipment, materials or property.
      (9)   Grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any
citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen.
      (10)   After termination of service with the city, appear before any
board or commission of the city in relation to any case, proceeding or
application in which he or she personally participated or which was under his
or her active consideration during the period of his or her service.
      (11)   Transact any business in his or her official capacity with the
city with a business entity in which he or she has a substantial interest.
      (12)    Engage in any dishonest or criminal act or any other conduct
prejudicial to the government of the city or that reflects discredit upon the
government of the city.
      (13)   Perform or refuse to perform any act in order to deliberately
thwart the execution of city ordinances, rules or regulations or the
achievement of official city programs.
      (14)   Be an interested party to any exchange, purchase, or sale of
property, goods, or services with the city, or enter into any contract with the
city, except in full and impartial compliance with statutes, City Charter,
ordinances and regulations applicable thereto and subject to any restrictions
of the Charter of the city; provided further, that such persons shall receive
no favor or special concession or inducement not customarily available and
granted by the city in such a transaction; and provided further, that any
discretion by officers of the city, in connection with any such transaction
shall be exercised impartially and upon the same standards applied to all
Mansfield citizens.
   (B)   No member of the City Council or city officer shall knowingly
represent, directly or indirectly, any person, group or business entity:
      (1)   Before the City Council or any department, agency, board or
commission of the city;
      (2)   In any action or proceeding against the interests of the city or in
any litigation in which the city or any department, agency, board or commission
is a party; or
      (3)   In any action or proceeding in the municipal court(s) of the city
which was instituted by a city officer or employee in the course of his or her
official duties, or a criminal proceeding in which any city officer or employee
is a material witness for the prosecution.
   (C)   No member of a city board or commission shall knowingly represent,
directly or indirectly, any person, group or business entity:
      (1)   Before the City Council or the board or commission of which he or
she is a member;
      (2)   Before a board or commission which has appellate jurisdiction over
the board or commission of which he or she is a member;
      (3)   In any action or proceeding against the interests of the city or in
any litigation in which the city or any department, agency, board or commission
thereof is a party; or
      (4)   In any action or proceeding in the municipal court(s) of the city
which was instituted by a city officer or employee in the course of his or her
official duties, or a criminal proceeding in which any city officer or employee
is a material witness for the prosecution.
   (D)   The restrictions contained in divisions (B) and (C) do not prohibit
the following:
      (1)   A member of a city board or commission (other than City Council),
or his or her spouse, appearing before the City Council or a city department,
agency, board or commission to represent himself or herself in a matter
affecting his or her property; provided, however, that no such person, or his
or her spouse, shall appear before the board or commission of which he or she
is a member;
      (2)   An officer of an employee organization appearing before the City
Council or a city department, agency, board or commission to address employment
matters.
   (E)   The City Council shall not approve or award any bid or contract for
the city's purchase of goods or services from any person, group, or entity
which at any time-prior to such award or approval, has hired a person who, at
any time within such six-month period, was either a member of the Mansfield
City Council or the chief or assistant administrator of any city department or
agency that had direct, or indirect, review or consideration, or recommending
or approval authority for the project or decision which is the subject of the
award of such bid or contract.
   (F)   A person subject hereto who serves as a corporate officer or member of
the board of directors of a nonprofit entity may not participate in a vote or
decision regarding funding by or through the city for the entity, if said
official receives any fee, compensation or other monetary payment from the
entity, unless the City Council appointed such city official to the board of
directors or such corporate office.
   (G)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the City Council from
participating in a vote or decision relating to salaries or travel budgets of
City Council members.
   (H)   No person subject hereto shall use his official position to secure
confidential information for any purpose other than official responsibilities.
   (I)   No person subject hereto shall use city facilities, personnel,
equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are
customary, incidental or lawfully available to the public.
   (J)   No member of the City Council shall interfere with the City Manager's
administrative duties of appointment to and removal of persons from employment
with the city. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the City Council and its
members shall deal with the city departments and city employees for which the
City Manager is responsible solely through the City Manager, and neither the
Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of
the City Manager, either publicly or privately.
   (K)   The restrictions in §
30.44 do not prohibit the following:
      (1)   Rendering service to the city as an officer, employee or advisory
board member;
      (2)   The paying of taxes, fines, utility service or filing fees;
      (3)   Subject to restrictions contained in the charter of the city,
executing and performing any community facilities contract or plat in
compliance with laws and regulations applicable to any person; provided,
however, that if any city ordinance, rule or regulation allows any discretion
by the appropriate officers of the city in the interpretation or enforcement of
such ordinance, rule or regulation, such officers shall exercise such
discretion in favor of the city in connection with any such community
facilities contract or plat;
      (4)   Purchasing goods or services from the city in full compliance with
all applicable state and local laws; or
      (5)   Members and spouses of members of the advisory boards set up by
ordinance, charter or state law who are not otherwise officers of the city, may
engage in any exchange, purchase or sale of property, goods or services with
the city, or enter into a contract with the city, provided, however, that the
board of which they are a member has no advisory function or cognizance, direct
or indirect, present or prospective, with respect to the transaction in which
such advisory board member engages or proposes to engage; or
      (6)   A city contract for the purchase of services or personal property
with a business entity in which a member of the governing body has a
substantial interest if the business entity is the only business entity that
provides the needed service or product within the jurisdiction of the city and
is the only business entity that bids on the contract.
(Ord. 1466, passed 12-8-03; Am. Ord. OR-2182-20, passed 9-14-20)
§ 30.45 DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST.
   (A)   Every officer or advisory board member must file a conflicts
disclosure statement as required by Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code Chapter 176.
   (B)   If any officer or advisory board member has a substantial interest in
any person, group or business entity, or real property involved in any decision
pending before such officer or advisory board member, or the body of which he
or she is a member, such officer or advisory board member shall disclose such
interest as provided in division (D) below and shall not, except as provided in
division (D) below, discuss the substance of the matter at any time with any
other member of the board of which he or she is a member or any other body
which will vote on the matter or otherwise participate in the consideration of
the matter.
   (C)   If any of the following interests are involved in any decision pending
before any city or advisory board member, or the body of which he is a member,
such officer or advisory board member must disclose such interest as provided
in division (D) below, but he shall be permitted to vote on and participate in
the consideration of such matter:
      (1)   A decision concerning a bank or other financial institution from
which the officer or advisory board member has a home mortgage, automobile
loan, or other installment loan, if the loan is not currently in default, was
originally for a term of more than two years and cannot be accelerated except
for failure to make payments according to the terms thereof;
      (2)   A decision concerning a bank or other financial institution in
which the officer or advisory board member holds a savings account, checking
account or certificate of deposit and which is fully insured by the U.S.
government or an agency thereof;
      (3)   A decision concerning a business entity with which the officer or
advisory board member has a retail or credit card account;
      (4)   A decision concerning the approval of substitution of collateral by
a city depository bank;
      (5)   A decision concerning real property in which the officer-or
advisory board member has a substantial interest if it is not reasonably
foreseeable that such decision would have a special economic effect on the
value of the property, distinguishable from the effect on the public (See Tex.
Loc. Gov’t Code, § 171.004).
   (D)   A city officer or advisory board member shall disclose the existence
of any substantial interest in any person, business entity or real property
involved in any decision pending before such officer or advisory board member,
or the body of which he is a member. To comply with this section, a city
officer or advisory board member shall, prior to any discussion or
determination of the matter, either file an affidavit of disclosure as required
by Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code § 171.004 or, if not so required, shall publicly
disclose in the official records of the city to the city secretary the nature
of the interest. In disclosing a substantial interest in a business entity, a
city officer or advisory board member shall not be required to disclose the
dollar amount of any income that he or she receives from the business entity.
   (E)   Where the interest of a city officer or advisory board member in the
subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city officer
or advisory board member may participate in the vote or decision and need not
disclose the interest.
      (1)   “Remote interest” means an interest of a person or entity,
including a city officer or advisory board member, who would be affected in the
same way as the general public. The interest of a council member in the
property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive
zoning ordinance or similar decisions is incidental to the extent that the
council member would be affected in common with the general public.
      (2)   “Incidental interest” means an interest in a person, entity or
property which is not a substantial interest and which has insignificant value,
or which would be affected only in a de minimis fashion by a decision. This
section does not establish dollar limits on the terms “insignificant value” and
“de minimis” which shall have their usual meanings and be subject to
interpretation on a case by case basis.
(Ord. 1466, passed 12-8-03; Am. Ord. OR-2182-20, passed 9-14-20)
§ 30.46 VOTING FOR APPOINTMENTS TO CITY BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES AND
APPLICANT RESPONSIBILITY TO REPORT CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS.
   Any person being considered, or with an application pending, for appointment
to any city board, commission, or committee established pursuant to the charter
or ordinances of the city, or the laws of the State of Texas, if that person
has made a financial contribution of $250 or more to the election campaign of a
member of the City Council during the two years preceding the date of the
proposed appointment, the council member or members who received such
contribution(s) must abstain from voting on such appointment. All persons shall
enter upon the Application for City Boards, Commissions, information regarding
any financial contribution as noted above, or if an application is on file for
an appointment, shall notify the City Secretary of such contributions for
notation on the application within 30 days of the passage of this subchapter.
The City Secretary shall send a copy of this section to all persons who have an
application on file requesting appointment. The provisions of this section
shall apply only to contributions made on or after January 1, 2004.
(Ord. 1466, passed 12-8-03; Am. Ord. OR-2182-20, passed 9-14-20)
§ 30.47 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The City Council shall have the primary responsibility for the
enforcement of the code.
   (B)   In matters where it is alleged that a city officer or board member,
other than a member of the City Council, violated the code, the City Council
may direct the City Attorney to investigate or prosecute any apparent violation
of the code by one or more such persons. At the direction of the City Council,
the City Attorney shall have the power to investigate any such complaint, to
initiate any suit, to file any complaint in municipal court, and to prosecute
any such complaint or action on behalf of the city where such complaint or
action is appropriate against a city officer or board member, other than a
member of the City Council.
   (C)   In matters where it is alleged that a member of the City Council
violated the code, the City Council may direct the City Attorney to investigate
as in division (B) above, or if the Council feels the alleged conduct is an
extreme violation of the code, the Council may select an outside, independent
attorney to investigate or prosecute any apparent violation of this subchapter
by a member of the City Council. The City Council shall select such attorney
from a list of five experienced, qualified attorneys to be nominated by the
City Attorney. At the direction of the City Council, such independent attorney
shall have the power to investigate any such complaint, to initiate any suit,
to file any complaint in municipal court, and to prosecute any such complaint
or action on behalf of the city where such complaint or action is appropriate
against a member of the City Council.
   (D)   Any person who believes that a violation of any portion of the code
has occurred may file a complaint with the City Council which may then proceed
as provided in divisions (B) or (C) above. However, nothing in the code shall
be construed to prevent complainants from instituting direct legal action
through the appropriate judicial authority.
(Ord. 1466, passed 12-8-03; Am. Ord. OR-2182-20, passed 9-14-20)
§ 30.48 ADVISORY OPINIONS.
   (A)   Where any officer or advisory board member has a doubt as to the
applicability of any provision of the code to a particular situation, or as to
the definition of terms used herein, he may apply to the City Attorney for an
advisory opinion. The officer or advisory board member shall have the
opportunity to present his or her interpretation of the facts at issue and of
the applicability of provisions of the code before such advisory opinion is
made.
   (B)   The City Attorney shall only issue advisory opinions concerning how
the code applies prospectively to a particular situation, or how the definition
of terms used herein applies prospectively to such a situation. The City
Attorney shall not issue advisory opinions to city officer or advisory board
members in matters when a complaint is already pending with the City Council or
the situation in question has already occurred. These matters shall be handled
as provided in §
34.46 hereof.
   (C)   Until amended or revoked, any advisory opinion shall be binding on the
city, the City Council, and the City Attorney in any subsequent actions
concerning the public officer or advisory board member who sought the opinion
and acted on it in good faith, unless material facts were omitted or misstated
in the request for the advisory opinion. Such opinion shall not be binding in
any judicial proceedings initiated by any private citizen.
(Ord. 1466, passed 12-8-03; Am. Ord. OR-2182-20, passed 9-14-20)
§ 30.49 PENALTIES; FORFEITED POSITION; EXEMPTIONS; INJUNCTIONS.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of the code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than
$500 for each violation. Each day that a violation continues or is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Whenever the City Council has determined that any officer or advisory
board member has violated any provision of the code, such officer or advisory
board member shall be subject to discipline, including forfeiture of his or her
office or position. Any removal of an official from elected office shall be
done in accordance with applicable state laws. The code shall be construed to
prohibit any such officer or advisory board member from being re-elected, or
reappointed to any position with the city for a period of three years from the
date of termination.
   (C)   The City Council may exempt from the provisions of the code any
conduct found to constitute a violation by an officer or advisory board member
if it finds that the enforcement of the code with respect to such conduct is
not in the public interest.
   (D)   Any contract or transaction which was the subject of an official act
or action of the city in which there is an interest prohibited by the code, or
which involved the violation of a provision of the code, shall be voidable at
the option of the City Council.
   (E)   At the discretion of the City Council, the City Attorney or the city's
outside independent attorney shall have the power, where a violation of the
provisions of the code threatened or has occurred, to bring a civil action or
proceeding, at law or in equity, for a judgment enjoining any violation of the
provisions of the code or requiring the relinquishment of any prohibited
interest or the voiding of any such contract or transaction, taking into
account the interests of the city and any third persons who may be injured
thereby. Where the City Council determines that the public interest may best be
served by not voiding a contract or transaction entered into in violation of
the code, such contract or transaction may be enforced and an action or
proceeding may be brought against any officer or advisory board member found in
violation of provisions of the code for damages, not to exceed twice the
damages suffered by the city or twice the profit or gain realized by the
officer or advisory board member, whichever is greater.
(Ord. 1466, passed 12-8-03; Am. Ord. OR-2182-20, passed 9-14-20)
§ 30.50 DISTRIBUTION OF CODE OF ETHICS AND CONDUCT.
   The City Secretary shall cause a copy of the code in booklet form to be
distributed to and signed for by every officer and advisory board member of the
city within 30 days after enactment of the code. Each officer and advisory
board member thereafter elected or appointed shall be furnished and sign for a
copy before entering upon the duties of his or her office.
(Ord. 1466, passed 12-8-03; Am. Ord. OR-2182-20, passed 9-14-20)
CHAPTER 31: RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
Section
   
31.01   Definitions
   
31.02   City records declared public property
   
31.03   Policy
   
31.04   Designation of Records Management Officer; duties
   
31.05   Reserved
   
31.06   Development of Records Management Plan
   
31.07   Duties and responsibilities of department heads
   
31.08   Designation of records liaison officer; duties
   
31.09   Development of records control schedules
   
31.10   Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records
under schedule
   
31.11   Destruction of unscheduled records
   
31.12   Records center
   
31.13   Micrographics
§ 31.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT HEAD. The officer who by ordinance, order or administrative
policy is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records.
   ESSENTIAL RECORD. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or
continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, to the re-
creation of the legal and financial status of the city or to the protection and
fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT RECORDS. All documents, papers, letters, books, maps,
photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape or other
information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and
regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws
of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or
employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby
declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained and
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or procedures
authorized by it and in no other manner.
   PERMANENT RECORD. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a
records control schedule is given as permanent.
   RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULE. A document prepared by or under the authority of
the Records Management Officer listing the records maintained by the city,
their retention periods and other records disposition information that the
Records Management Program may require.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT. The application of management techniques to the
creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation and disposal of records for
the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency or record-
keeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the
management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of
essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of
inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports
and correspondence and the management of micrographics and other records
storage systems.
   RECORDS LIAISON OFFICERS. The persons designated under §
31.08(A) of this chapter.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER. The person designated in §
31.04(A) of this chapter.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN. The plan developed under §
31.06 of this chapter.
   RECORDS RETENTION SCHEDULE. A listing issued by the State Library that
specifies the time period each record obtained by the city should be retained.
   RETENTION PERIOD. The minimum time that must pass after the creation,
recording or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions
associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(‘78 Code, §§ 2-10, 2-11) (Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90; Am. Ord. 1251, passed 3-
22-99; Am. Ord. OR-2352-24, passed 3-25-24)
§ 31.02 CITY RECORDS DECLARED PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   All city records as defined in §
31.01 of this chapter are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No
city official or employee has, by virtue of his/her position, any personal or
property right to such records even though he/she may have developed or
compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files or use of such
records is prohibited.
('78 Code, § 2-12) (Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90)
§ 31.03 POLICY.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient,
economical and effective controls over the creation, distribution,
organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all city records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records
from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the
requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act, Tex. Local Gov't Code,
§§ 201.001 et seq., and accepted records management practice.
('78 Code, § 2-13) (Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90)
§ 31.04 DESIGNATION OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER; DUTIES.
   (A)   The City Secretary, and the successive holders of the office, shall
serve as Records Management Officer for the city. As provided by state law,
each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the
Director and Librarian of the State Library within 30 days of the initial
designation or of taking up the office, as applicable.
('78 Code, § 2-14)
   (B)   In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, the Records
Management Officer shall do the following.
      (1)   Administer the Records Management Program and provide assistance to
department heads in its implementation.
      (2)   Plan, formulate and prescribe records disposition policies,
systems, standards and procedures.
      (3)   In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and
establish a disaster plan for each city office and department to ensure maximum
availability of the records in order to reestablish operations quickly and with
minimum disruption and expense.
      (4)   Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the
historically valuable records of the city.
      (5)   Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for
record-keeping supplies.
      (6)   Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform
filing system and a forms design and control system for the city.
      (7)   Provide records management advice and assistance to all city
departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and
by on-site consultation.
      (8)   Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued
by the State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the Records
Management Program and the city's records control schedules are in compliance
with state regulations.
      (9)   Disseminate to the City Council and department heads information
concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government
records.
      (10)   Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies
and procedures of the Records Management Plan and their duties in the Records
Management Program.
      (11)   Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct
of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control
schedules as required by state law and this chapter.
      (12)   Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming,
destruction or other disposition of the city is carried out in accordance with
the policies and procedures of the Records Management Program and the
requirements of state law.
      (13)   Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved
records control schedules or the volume of records microfilmed, and the
estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition.
      (14)   Bring to the attention of the City Manager, or his or her
designee, noncompliance by department heads or other city personnel with the
policies and procedures of the Records Management Program or the Local
Government Records Act, Tex. Local Gov’t Code Ch. 201, as amended.
(‘78 Code, § 2-17)
(Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90; Am. Ord. OR-2352-24, passed 3-25-24)
Statutory reference:
   Duties of Records Management Officer, see Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 203.023
§ 31.05 RESERVED.
§ 31.06 DEVELOPMENT OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   The Records Management Officer shall develop a Records Management Plan
for the city for submission to the City Council. The plan must contain policies
and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of
record-keeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the city and to
properly preserve those records of the city that are of historical value. The
plan must be designed to enable the Records Management Officer to carry out his
or her duties prescribed by state law and this chapter effectively.
   (B)   Once approved by the City Council, the Records Management Plan shall
be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions,
bureaus, boards, committees or similar entities of the city and records shall
be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed or disposed of in accordance with
the Plan.
   (C)   State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities or record-
keeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or
the records in the department head's care from the application of this chapter
and the Records Management Plan adopted under it and may not be used by the
department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the Records Management
Program of the city.
(‘78 Code, § 2-16) (Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90; Am. Ord. OR-2352-24, passed 3-
25-24)
§ 31.07 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEPARTMENT HEADS.
   In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, department heads shall
do the following.
   (A)   Cooperate with the Records Management Officer in carrying out the
policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and
economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   Adequately document the transaction of government business and the
services, programs and duties for which the department head and his or her
staff are responsible.
   (C)   Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their
preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition only in accordance
with the policies and procedures of the Records Management Program of the city
and the requirements of this chapter.
('78 Code, § 2-18) (Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90)
§ 31.08 DESIGNATION OF RECORDS LIAISON OFFICERS; DUTIES.
   (A)   Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff to
serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the Records
Management Program in the department. If the Records Management Officer
determines that in the best interests of the Records Management Program more
than one records liaison officer should be designated for a department, the
department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers
specified by the Records Management Officer. Persons designated as records
liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and
maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the
city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement,
dismissal or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as
a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly designate another
person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison
officer for his or her department.
('78 Code, § 2-19)
   (B)   In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, records liaison
officers shall do the following.
      (1)   Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of
the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules.
      (2)   In cooperation with the Records Management Officer coordinate and
implement the policies and procedures of the Records Management Program in
their departments.
      (3)   Disseminate information to department staff concerning the Records
Management Program.
('78 Code, § 2-20)
(Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90)
§ 31.09 DEVELOPMENT OF RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULES.
   (A)   The city adopts records retention schedules that comply with the
minimum requirements of records retention schedules issued by the Texas State
Library and Archives Commission.
   (B)   The Records Management Officer shall complete a declaration of
compliance with the records scheduling requirements of the Local Government
Records Act and file it with the state.
('78 Code, § 2-21) (Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90; Am. Ord. 1251, passed 3-22-99)
§ 31.10 IMPLEMENTATION OF RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULES; DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS
UNDER SCHEDULE.
   (A)   A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and
adopted shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers
according to the policies and procedures of the Records Management Plan.
   (B)   A record whose retention period has expired on a records control
schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the
record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit or
the department head requests in writing to the Records Management Officer that
the record be retained for an additional period.
   (C)   Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control
schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the Records
Management Officer and the City Attorney, or their designees.
(‘78 Code, § 2-23) (Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90; Am. Ord. OR-2352-24, passed 3-
25-24)
§ 31.11 DESTRUCTION OF UNSCHEDULED RECORDS.
   A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control
schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same
manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the Records
Management Officer has submitted to and received back from the Director and
Librarian an approved destruction authorization request.
('78 Code, § 2-23) (Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90)
§ 31.12 RECORDS CENTER.
   A records center, developed pursuant to the Plan required by §
31.06, shall be under the direct control and supervision of the Records
Management Officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use
of the records center shall be contained in the Records Management Plan
developed under §
31.06.
('78 Code, § 2-24) (Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90)
§ 31.13 MICROGRAPHICS.
   Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by
order of the City Council, all microfilming of records will be centralized and
under the direct supervision of the Records Management Officer. The Records
Management Plan will establish policies and procedures for the microfilming of
city records, including policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in
accordance with standards and procedures for the filming of local government
records established in rules of the Texas State Library and Archives
Commission. The plan will also establish criteria for determining the
eligibility of records for microfilming and protocols for ensuring that a
microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized operations is,
nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the Records Management Officer as
to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency and compliance with Commission
rules.
('78 Code, § 2-25) (Ord. 886, passed 12-11-90)
CHAPTER 32: DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Senior Citizen Board
   
32.01   Creation; membership
   
32.02   Appointments; terms
   
32.03   Organization
   
32.04   Rules; meetings
   
32.05   Function
Mansfield Hospital Authority
   
32.15   Establishment
   
32.16   Organization
Cross references:
   Fire Department, see
Ch. 33
   Library Board, see §§
95.01 et seq.
   Parks and Recreation Board, see §
96.37
SENIOR CITIZEN BOARD
§ 32.01 CREATION; MEMBERSHIP.
   There is created and established for the city a Senior Citizen Board which
shall be composed of seven members. All seven members shall be residents of the
city and qualified voters of the city and shall be appointed by the City
Council.
(Ord. 1132, passed 10-28-96)
§ 32.02 APPOINTMENTS; TERMS.
   (A)   The members of the Senior Citizen Board shall be appointed by the City
Council for two-year terms. All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired
term in the same manner as provided for the original appointments. Members of
the Board may be removed by the governing body for cause. The members of the
Board shall serve without compensation.
   (B)   The City Council desires to create a membership structure in which the
entire membership of the Board does not change at one time. Continuity on the
Board is to be maintained by ensuring that some members' terms overlap those of
other members. To implement this structure, four members of the initial Board
shall be appointed for a one-year term while the remaining three members shall
be appointed for a two-year term. The staggering of the appointments of the
initial Board is intended only to ensure that when subsequent two-year
appointments are made, the membership of the Board will continuously operate on
overlapping terms.
(Ord. 1132, passed 10-28-96)
§ 32.03 ORGANIZATION.
   The Senior Citizen Board shall annually select its own Chairman. The Board
shall also select a Vice-Chairman and Secretary from its members.
(Ord. 1132, passed 10-28-96)
§ 32.04 RULES; MEETINGS.
   The Senior Citizen Board shall promulgate its own rules consistent with the
ordinances of the city and laws of the state. The Board shall hold at least one
meeting each calendar quarter and such special meetings as it deems necessary.
(Ord. 1132, passed 10-28-96)
§ 32.05 FUNCTION.
   The Senior Citizen Board shall act as an advisory body to the City Council
in the procurement, development, supervision and administration of the
Mansfield Senior Citizen Center and its activities, as related to the senior
citizens of the city.
(Ord. 1132, passed 10-28-96)
MANSFIELD HOSPITAL AUTHORITY
§ 32.15 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   It is hereby officially found and determined that it is to the best
interest of the city and its inhabitants to create a hospital authority.
   (B)   By virtue of the power conferred upon the city by the Hospital
Authority Act, being Tex. Health & Safety Code §§ 262.001, a hospital authority
comprising the territory included within the boundaries of the city is hereby
created as a body politic and corporate, and Mansfield Hospital Authority is
designated as the name by which the authority shall be known.
('78 Code, § 9-5(a) and (b)) (Ord. 352, passed 4-4-78)
§ 32.16 ORGANIZATION.
   Mansfield Hospital Authority shall be governed by a Board of Directors
consisting of seven members. The first Directors for the authority shall be
those named in ordinance 352, dated April 4, 1978, and each of the Directors
shall, unless other provision is made in the bond resolution or trust indenture
in connection with the issuance of bonds as provided in the Hospital Authority
Act, being Tex. Health & Safety Code §§ 262.001, serve for a term of two years
from the date hereof and until their successors have been appointed by the
governing body of the city and have duly qualified.
('78 Code, § 9-5(c)) (Ord. 352, passed 4-4-78)
CHAPTER 33: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Arson reward
   
33.02   Firefighter's Relief and Retirement Fund law
Fire Marshal
   
33.15   Office created; compensation
   
33.16   Investigation and record of fires
   
33.17   Right of entry
   
33.18   Taking testimony; prosecution of criminal suspects
   
33.19   Gathering evidence
   
33.20   Recalcitrant witness
   
33.21   Privacy of investigation; separation of witnesses
Ambulance
   
33.35   Ambulance service established
   
33.36   Fees for ambulance service
   
33.37   Service boundaries
   
33.38   Service area defined
Cross reference:
   Departments, Boards and Commissions, see
Ch. 32
   Fire Protection and Prevention, see
Ch. 91
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 ARSON REWARD.
   The city hereby offers a reward of $250 for the arrest and conviction of any
person or persons found guilty of committing the crime of arson within the
corporate limits of the city. This reward is a standing offer and shall be paid
out of the General Fund of the city.
('78 Code, § 8-1) (Ord. 148, passed 11-13-62)
Statutory reference:
   Crime of arson, see Tex. Penal Code, § 28.02
§ 33.02 FIREFIGHTER'S RELIEF AND RETIREMENT FUND LAW.
   (A)   Adoption.
      (1)   There is hereby adopted the Firefighter's Relief and Retirement
Fund law, S.B. No. 411, 65th Legislature, a copy of which is filed and
available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk.
      (2)   There is further adopted the ten-year "buy back" and "accrued time"
plan as specified in the law.
('78 Code, § 8-2)
   (B)   City's contribution; Volunteer Fire Department membership. There shall
be a maximum of 35 firefighters as members of the City Volunteer Fire
Department. The city shall contribute $12 per man per month towards the
Firefighter's Relief and Retirement Fund, S.B. No. 411. This is in addition to
the annual sum paid toward the "buy-back" and "accrued time" plan as described
in division (A) of this section.
('78 Code, § 8-3)
(Ord. 6-15, passed 6-24-85)
FIRE MARSHAL
§ 33.15 OFFICE CREATED; COMPENSATION.
   The office of Fire Marshal is hereby created. The office shall be filled by
appointment as provided in the Charter.
('78 Code, § 8-20) (Ord. 235, passed 10-12-71)
§ 33.16 INVESTIGATION AND RECORD OF FIRES.
   The Fire Marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of
every fire occurring within this city by which property has been destroyed or
damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was
the result of carelessness or design. The investigation shall be begun within
24 hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The Fire
Marshal shall keep in his/her office a record of all fires, together with all
facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the
amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by
this subchapter.
('78 Code, § 8-21) (Ord. 235, passed 10-12-71)
§ 33.17 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Fire Marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when
necessary, in the performance of the duties imposed upon him/her by the
provisions of this subchapter, to enter upon and examine any building or
premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises
adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason
and good discretion.
('78 Code, § 8-22) (Ord. 235, passed 10-12-71)
§ 33.18 TAKING TESTIMONY; PROSECUTION OF CRIMINAL SUSPECTS.
   The Fire Marshal, when in his/her opinion further investigation is
necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all
persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in
relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be
reduced to writing; and if he/she shall be of the opinion that there is
evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the
attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal
conduct in connection with such fire, he/she shall cause the person to be
lawfully arrested and charged with the offense, or either of them, and shall
furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the
names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him/her, including a
copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case.
('78 Code, § 8-23) (Ord. 235, passed 10-12-71)
§ 33.19 GATHERING EVIDENCE.
   The Fire Marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him/her to
testify in relation to any matter which is by the provisions of this subchapter
a subject of inquiry and investigation and may require the production of any
books, papers or documents deemed pertinent thereto. The Fire Marshal is hereby
authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons
appearing as witnesses before him/her.
('78 Code, § 8-24) (Ord. 235, passed 10-12-71)
§ 33.20 RECALCITRANT WITNESS.
   Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or
who disobeys any lawful order of the Fire Marshal, or who fails or refuses to
produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, or
who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the
Fire Marshal in the matter of the investigation or inquiry after being summoned
to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as aforesaid,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and it shall be the duty of the Fire
Marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. Any person being
convicted of such misdemeanor shall be fined as provided in §
10.99.
('78 Code, § 8-25) (Ord. 235, passed 10-12-71)
§ 33.21 PRIVACY OF INVESTIGATION; SEPARATION OF WITNESSES.
   All investigations held by or under the direction of the Fire Marshal may,
in his/her discretion, be private, and persons other than those required to be
present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and
witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to
communicate with each other until they have been examined.
('78 Code, § 8-26) (Ord. 235, passed 10-12-71)
AMBULANCE
§ 33.35 AMBULANCE SERVICE ESTABLISHED.
   There is established an emergency ambulance service in the city under the
supervision of the City Manager or designee who shall have the authority to
promulgate and publish necessary rules and regulations governing the
establishment of funding, operations and management of the necessary emergency
ambulance services.
(‘78 Code, § 17-7) (Ord. 373, passed 12-11-78; Ord. 703, passed 11-10-86; Ord.
OR-2254-22, passed 5-9-22)
§ 33.36 FEES FOR AMBULANCE SERVICE.
   (A)   The fees and charges for the use of the city ambulance service, along
with specified collection standards, shall be established by the City Council
and City Manager annually as part of the budget process. Upon final budget
approval by the City Council, the ambulance fee schedule shall be posted on the
city’s website and the emergency ambulance service fees shall be in effect
until such time as a new emergency ambulance service fee schedule is approved.
   (B)   Any person(s) receiving emergency ambulance services shall be
responsible to remit payment to the city based upon the then-current schedule
of fees and charges in effect on the date of receipt of services. In the case
of emergency ambulance services being received by a minor, the parent or legal
guardian shall be responsible to remit payment to the city.
(‘78 Code, § 17-8) (Ord. 373, passed 12-11-78; Ord. 396, passed 10-8-79; Ord.
703, passed 11-10-86; Am. Ord. 1236, passed 11-9-98; Am. Ord. 1358, passed 7-9-
01; Am. Ord. 1667, passed 1-28-08; Am. Ord. OR-1844-12, passed 9-24-12; Am.
Ord. OR-2254-22, passed 5-9-22)
§ 33.37 SERVICE BOUNDARIES.
   Service may be provided outside the corporate limits of the city pursuant to
agreements between the city and other cities or governmental entities or by
emergency authorization of the Fire Chief or his designee.
(‘78 Code, § 17-9) (Ord. 703, passed 11-10-86; Am. Ord. 1236, passed 11-9-98;
Am. Ord. OR-2254-22, passed 5-9-22)
§ 33.38 SERVICE AREA DEFINED.
   It shall be the sole responsibility of the City Fire Department medical
personnel on the scene as to which emergency medical facility a patient will be
transported to, based on the capability of the emergency medical facility, the
severity of the patient condition, road conditions, inclement weather,
available units, or any other factor that may influence on-scene medical
personnel in determining the appropriate destination emergency medical
facility.
(‘78 Code, § 17-10) (Ord. 703, passed 11-10-86; Am. Ord. 1236, passed 11-9-98;
Am. Ord. 1667, passed 1-28-08; Am. Ord. OR-2254-22, passed 5-9-22)
CHAPTER 34: LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
Section
City Marshal
   
34.01   Office created
   
34.02   Duties
   
34.03   Qualifications
   
34.04   Survivor's assistance benefits
Law Enforcement Assistance During Civil Emergencies
   
34.15   Mutual law enforcement assistance authorized
   
34.16   Status of officers from another governmental unit
   
34.17   Rights while serving outside this city
   
34.18   Reimbursement of other governmental units
Police Reserve Force
   
34.30   Establishment
   
34.31   Appointment; term of members
   
34.32   Police Chief in control of Force
   
34.33   Training of applicants
   
34.34   Size, composition and organization of Force; compensation of members
   
34.35   Carrying of weapons
   
34.36   Reserve Force to act in supplementary capacity to regular Police Force
Disposal of Abandoned Property
   
34.50   Definition
   
34.51   Removal
   
34.52   Record
   
34.53   Notice to owner
   
34.54   Disposition of unclaimed property
   
34.55   Exceptions
CITY MARSHAL
§ 34.01 OFFICE CREATED.
   The office of City Marshal for the jail division of the law enforcement
center of the city is hereby created. The City Marshal and his/her deputies
shall be appointed by the City Manager. Their compensation shall be established
by ordinance.
('78 Code, § 13.5-36) (Ord. 867, passed 6-12-90)
§ 34.02 DUTIES.
   The City Marshal and his/her deputies, acting under the direction of the
Jail Administrator, shall perform the following duties.
   (A)   The City Marshal's office shall transport persons already in custody
to and from the Mansfield Law Enforcement Center.
   (B)   The City Marshal's office shall transport persons already in custody
from a point of origin to a point of destination for other recognized law
enforcement or detention agencies as provided for per agreement between the
city and any such other agency.
   (C)   The City Marshal's office shall transport and remain with persons
requiring hospital treatment who have been officially entered into the jail
book of the Mansfield Law Enforcement Center.
   (D)   In the event of a natural disaster, personnel of the City Marshal's
office may be incorporated into the emergency services of the city.
   (E)   The City Marshal's office is authorized to provide City Marshal
personnel to work as Bailiff and/or Warrant Officers for the Mansfield
Municipal Court and perform any law enforcement duties as authorized by law,
and as directed by the City Marshal, including the authority to arrest, detain
or issue summons or citations.
(’78 Code, § 13.5-37) (Ord. 867, passed 6-12-90; Ord. OR-1831-12, passed 2-27-
12)
§ 34.03 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The City Marshal and his/her deputies shall meet all qualifications
necessary to be certified as peace officers by the Texas Commission on Law
Enforcement Standards and Education.
('78 Code, § 13.5-38) (Ord. 867, passed 6-12-90)
§ 34.04 SURVIVOR'S ASSISTANCE BENEFITS.
   The City Marshal and his/her deputies are not members of the Police
Department of the city; however, they are paid law enforcement officers for the
purpose of qualifying for survivor's assistance benefits under the provisions
of Tex. Gov't Code §§ 615.071 et seq., as amended.
('78 code, § 13.5-39) (Ord. 867, passed 6-12-90)
LAW ENFORCEMENT ASSISTANCE DURING CIVIL EMERGENCIES
§ 34.15 MUTUAL LAW ENFORCEMENT ASSISTANCE AUTHORIZED.
   The City Council does hereby appoint the City Manager, at his/her
discretion, to send the regularly employed law enforcement officers to assist
any other county or municipality when the Mayor or other officer authorized to
declare a state of civil emergency requests this assistance, and there exists
in such other county or municipality, its inhabitants and the visitors thereto,
by reason of riot, unlawful assembly characterized by the use of force and
violence, or threat thereof by three o r more persons acting together or
without lawful authority, or during time of natural disaster or man-made
calamity.
('78 Code, § 2-1)
Cross reference:
   Emergency powers of Mayor, see Charter, §
3.06(c)
Statutory reference:
   Authority for mutual assistance, see Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 362.002
   Emergency powers of Mayor, see Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 22.042
§ 34.16 STATUS OF OFFICERS FROM ANOTHER GOVERNMENTAL UNIT.
   Whenever any law enforcement officer of any other county or municipality is
assigned to this city, under authority of an order adopted by the governing
body of such other county or municipality, to assist under circumstances as
described above which may exist in this city, that such officer shall be a
peace officer of this city and shall be under the command of the Chief of
Police of this city while so assigned. He/she shall have all the powers of a
regular law enforcement officer of this city as fully as though he/she were
within the county or municipality where regularly employed, and his/her
qualifications, respectively, for office where regularly employed shall
constitute his/her qualification for office in this city, and no other oath,
bond or compensation shall be made.
('78 Code, § 2-2)
§ 34.17 RIGHTS WHILE SERVING OUTSIDE THIS CITY.
   When any law enforcement officer of this city is ordered by proper authority
to perform peace officer duties outside the territorial limits of this city,
he/she shall be entitled to the same wage, salary, pension and all other
compensation and all other rights for such service, including injury or death
benefits, the same as though the service had been rendered within the limits of
this city; and he/she shall also be paid for any reasonable expenses of travel,
food or lodging, as well as for damage to equipment and clothing, and medical
expenses which he/she may incur while on duty outside such limits, or while
traveling to or from such assignment.
('78 Code, § 2-3)
§ 34.18 REIMBURSEMENT OF OTHER GOVERNMENTAL UNITS.
   When any law enforcement officer is assigned to this city from another city
under the circumstances described in this subchapter, and upon request of the
proper authority of this city, this city will, upon proper request, reimburse
the county or city furnishing the services of such law enforcement officer for
his/her actual expenses of travel, food, lodging and for such cost or damage to
equipment and clothing resulting from the services of such law enforcement
officer in this city and for which the county or city where he/she is regularly
employed has paid.
('78 Code, § 2-4)
POLICE RESERVE FORCE
§ 34.30 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established a Police Reserve Force of the Police Department
of the city, which shall be a voluntary force of reserve peace officers
hereafter referred to as the "Police Reserve Force."
('78 Code, § 13.5-11) (Ord. 420, passed 7-28-80)
§ 34.31 APPOINTMENT; TERM OF MEMBERS.
   Members of the Police Reserve Force shall be appointed at the discretion of
the Chief of Police, shall serve at the discretion of the Chief of Police and
may be called into active service at any time the Chief of Police considers it
necessary to have additional peace officers to preserve the peace and enforce
the law.
('78 Code, § 13.5-12) (Ord. 420, passed 7-28-80)
§ 34.32 POLICE CHIEF IN CONTROL OF FORCE.
   The Police Reserve Force shall function under the general direction and
control of the Chief of Police and shall be subject to such rules, regulations
and orders as may be promulgated from time to time by the Chief of Police in
accordance with the authority vested in the Chief of Police by the City Charter
or the ordinances of the city.
('78 Code, § 13.5-13) (Ord. 420, passed 7-28-80)
§ 34.33 TRAINING OF APPLICANTS.
   Prior to performing any duties as a reserve police officer, each police
reserve applicant shall receive training from the City Police Department in
accordance with the requirements of the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement
Officer Standards and Education and shall apply for certification by the
Commission as a reserve police officer.
('78 Code, § 13.5-14) (Ord. 420, passed 7-28-80; Ord. 462, passed 4-26-82)
§ 34.34 SIZE, COMPOSITION AND ORGANIZATION OF FORCE; COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.
   The Police Reserve Force shall be an auxiliary police force composed of
volunteers who shall serve without pay or other compensation. The City Council
shall establish the size of the Police Reserve Force by appropriate resolution
from time to time. The Chief of Police shall establish the composition and
organization of the Police Reserve Force.
('78 Code, § 13.5-15) (Ord. 420, passed 7-28-80; Ord. 900, passed 8-12-91)
§ 34.35 CARRYING OF WEAPONS.
   No person appointed to the Police Reserve Force may carry a weapon or
otherwise act as a peace officer without the prior approval of the City
Council. After such approval, the police reserve officer may carry a weapon
only when authorized to do so by the Chief of Police and only when discharging
official duties in accordance with the rules, regulations and orders
promulgated by the Chief of Police.
('78 Code, § 13.5-16) (Ord. 420, passed 7-28-80; Ord. 462, passed 4-26-82; Ord.
900, passed 8-12-91)
§ 34.36 RESERVE FORCE TO ACT IN SUPPLEMENTARY CAPACITY TO REGULAR POLICE FORCE.
   Reserve police officers of the Police Reserve Force shall act only in a
supplementary capacity to the regular Police Force of the city and shall not
assume the full-time duties of regular police officers without first complying
with all requirements for such regular police officers.
('78 Code, § 13.5-17) (Ord. 420, passed 7-28-80)
DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED PROPERTY
§ 34.50 DEFINITION.
   ABANDONED PROPERTY. For the purpose of this subchapter, this term shall mean
any personal property that is left unattended on public property within the
city for more than 48 hours or any personal property that has remained on
private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the
property for more than 48 hours.
('78 Code, § 13.5-26) (Ord. 402, passed 1-28-80)
§ 34.51 REMOVAL.
   All abandoned, stolen or recovered property may be summarily removed by or
at the direction of the Chief of Police.
('78 Code, § 13.5-27) (Ord. 402, passed 1-28-80)
§ 34.52 RECORD.
   The Chief of Police shall maintain a list of all property seized or stored
pursuant to this subchapter.
('78 Code, § 13.5-28) (Ord. 402, passed 1-28-80)
§ 34.53 NOTICE TO OWNER.
   If the identity of the owner of the property can be ascertained, the Chief
of Police shall send a notice by mail to the owner's last known address
requesting that the owner claim the property. If a claim is made for property
which is being held for evidence purposes, the claimant shall leave his/her
name and current mailing address and shall claim such property after notice of
its availability.
('78 Code, § 13.5-29) (Ord. 402, passed 1-28-80)
§ 34.54 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.
   (A)   All abandoned, stolen or recovered property which remains in the
possession of the Chief of Police for a period of 60 days without being claimed
by its owner may be sold or disposed of as provided in this subchapter.
   (B)   If the unclaimed property is determined to have no value, it may be
destroyed.
   (C)   If the unclaimed property is determined to have value, notice of the
time and place of the sale of the property shall be posted in a prominent place
at the City Hall and shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation on a date more than 30 days prior to such sale.
   (D)   The public auction provided for in the preceding paragraph shall be
conducted at the place and time designated in the notice. The City Manager
shall conduct such public auction and shall keep an accurate statement of each
article sold and the price bid and paid therefor. All sales shall be for cash.
All funds received shall be paid to the city.
   (E)   Prior to the public auction, the head of any department of the city
may request, in writing, that any items offered or to be offered for sale be
assigned to his/her department. On the date designated for the public auction,
the City Manager may, in his/her discretion, assign such item or items to such
department or sell such item or items at public auction.
   (F)   No employee or officer of the city shall, either directly or
indirectly, submit a bid or purchase any property sold pursuant to this
subchapter.
('78 Code, § 13.5-30) (Ord. 402, passed 1-28-80)
§ 34.55 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the following.
   (A)   Motor vehicles.
   (B)   Prohibited weapons, as that term is defined in the Texas Penal Code.
   (C)   Gambling equipment, criminal instruments or weapons whose disposition
is governed by Chapter 18 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure.
   (D)   Personal property subject to escheat under Tex. Prop. Code §§ 71.001
et seq.
   (E)   Property subject to forfeiture under the Texas Controlled Substances
Act.
('78 Code, § 13.5-31) (Ord. 402, passed 1-28-80)
CHAPTER 35: CODE ENFORCEMENT
Section
Issuance of Search Warrants and Enforcement Orders
   
35.01   Definitions
   
35.02   Conflicts
   
35.03   Search warrants authorized
   
35.04   Authorized searches without a warrant
   
35.05   Probable cause for search warrant
   
35.06   Content of search warrant
   
35.07   Execution of search warrant
   
35.08   Time allowed for execution of search warrant
   
35.09   Power of Inspector executing search warrant
   
35.10   Enforcement orders authorized
   
35.11   Authorized entry without enforcement order
   
35.12   Content of enforcement order
   
35.13   Execution of enforcement order
   
35.14   Power of Inspector executing enforcement order
 
   
35.99   Penalty
ISSUANCE OF SEARCH WARRANTS AND ENFORCEMENT ORDERS
§ 35.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ENFORCEMENT ORDER. A written order by a Magistrate authorizing entry by the
city onto specified premises for the purpose of abating a nuisance or other
condition which is in violation of city ordinance or state statute.
   INSPECTOR. Any official Inspector for any department of the city who is
charged with the enforcement of city ordinances, including but not limited to
Inspectors for the departments of zoning, environmental control, housing,
building inspection, fire inspection and health inspection.
   MAGISTRATE. The Judge of the Municipal Court of the city, or any other
person or position designated as a Magistrate by state law.
   SEARCH WARRANT. A written order issued by a Magistrate and directed to any
Inspector or peach officer commanding him/her to a specified premises to
determine the presence of a violation of any ordinance of the city.
(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)
§ 35.02 CONFLICTS.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to conflict with any
state or federal law and shall be in addition to any rights granted thereby.
The city or any Inspector or peace officer may seek other available enforcement
remedies, both civil and criminal, in addition to those allowed by this
chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the city or any
Inspector from performing inspections or abatement work without the necessity
of a warrant or order where authorized by law.
(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)
§ 35.03 SEARCH WARRANTS AUTHORIZED.
   Except as provided in §
35.04, Inspectors are hereby authorized to seek and obtain search warrants from
Magistrates as provided in this chapter before making an inspection incidental
to the enforcement of any provision of the Zoning Ordinance, Building Code,
Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, Electrical Code, Fire Code or any ordinances
related to the use or condition of property or a nuisance on the property.
(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)
§ 35.04 AUTHORIZED SEARCHES WITHOUT A WARRANT.
   Search warrants shall not be required under the following circumstances.
   (A)   When permission to inspect the premises has been granted by someone
with apparent charge or control of those premises. For the purpose of this
paragraph, permission to inspect may be granted either verbally, in writing or
by some other action indicating consent.
   (B)   When there exists an imminent danger or peril to human life, limb or
property and any delays resulting from the application for a search warrant
would materially increase the likelihood of loss from such danger or peril.
   (C)   When the inspection can be executed by a person who is an invitee on
premises held open to the general public. For the purposes of this division
(C), a person ceases to be an invitee when he/she has been instructed to leave
the premises or otherwise terminate his/her inspection by someone having charge
or control of those premises.
   (D)   When the inspection can be executed from public property or adjacent
private property with the permission of someone with apparent charge or control
of such adjacent private property.
   (E)   When the inspection is an open fields inspection of or from an
unoccupied or undeveloped area.
(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)
§ 35.05 PROBABLE CAUSE FOR SEARCH WARRANT.
   No search warrant shall be issued pursuant to this chapter except on the
presentation of evidence of probable cause to believe that a violation is
present or that reasonable administrative standards for conducting an
inspection are satisfied with respect to the premises sought to be inspected. A
sworn affidavit setting forth substantial facts toward establishing probable
cause or reasonable administrative standards shall be filed in every instance
in which a search warrant is requested. In determining probable cause, the
Magistrate shall consider the totality of the circumstances behind the issuance
of the search warrant and may consider and weigh evidence of specific knowledge
or any other evidence that a substantial basis exists that a search warrant
would uncover evidence of a violation. In determining whether reasonable
administrative standards are satisfied for the issuance of a warrant, the
Magistrate may consider and weigh the following.
   (A)   The age and general condition of the premises.
   (B)   Previous violations or hazards found present on the premises and the
scope and objects of the search.
   (C)   The type of premises.
   (D)   The purposes for which the premises are used.
   (E)   The presence of hazards or violations and the general condition of
premises near the premises sought to be inspected.
   (F)   The passage of time since a previous inspection.
(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)
§ 35.06 CONTENT OF SEARCH WARRANT.
   A search warrant issued pursuant to this chapter shall be sufficient if it
contains the following requisites.
   (A)   That it run in the name of the "State of Texas."
   (B)   That it identify as near as may be the premises to be inspected and
the scope and objects of the search.
   (C)   That it command an Inspector or peace officer to inspect forthwith the
premises described.
   (D)   That it be dated and signed by the Magistrate.
(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)
§ 35.07 EXECUTION OF SEARCH WARRANT.
   The Inspector shall, upon going to the premises ordered to be inspected,
give notice of his/her purpose to the person who has charge or control of the
premises described in the warrant. If the person cannot be found, a search may
be conducted in accordance with the search warrant provided that a copy of the
warrant shall be affixed to the front door of the building or gate of the
premises inspected. In every instance, entry shall be effected using the
minimum force necessary according to the circumstances.
(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)
§ 35.08 TIME ALLOWED FOR EXECUTION OF SEARCH WARRANT.
   An Inspector to whom a search warrant is delivered shall execute it without
delay and forthwith return it to the proper Magistrate. The time allowed for
the execution of a search warrant shall be three whole days exclusive of the
day of its issuance and of the day of its execution, or such shorter period as
may be ordered by the Magistrate. The Magistrate issuing a search warrant under
the provisions of this section shall endorse on the search warrant the date and
hour of the issuance of the same. Upon returning the search warrant, the
Inspector shall state on the back of same or on some paper attached to it, the
manner in which it has been executed and shall likewise deliver to the
Magistrate a copy of the report resulting from that inspection. The Magistrate
shall keep a record of all proceedings had before him/her in the cases of
search warrants as part of the official records of his/her court.
(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)
§ 35.09 POWER OF INSPECTOR EXECUTING SEARCH WARRANT.
   In the execution of a search warrant, the Inspector may call to his/her aid
any number of citizens in the city who shall be bound to aid in the execution
of same. Any person interfering with the execution of a lawful search warrant
issued pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The execution
of a search warrant issued pursuant to this chapter shall not include any
authority to seize tangible goods or any authority to make arrests without the
assistance of a peace officer.
(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)
Penalty, see § 35.99
§ 35.10 ENFORCEMENT ORDERS AUTHORIZED.
   Where civil enforcement by the city is authorized by ordinance or statute,
Inspectors are hereby authorized to seek and obtain an administrative
enforcement order from the Magistrate authorizing entry upon private property
for the purpose of abating any public nuisance or other violation of an
ordinance or statute which adversely affects the public health, safety or
welfare. The Inspector shall present to the Magistrate a sworn affidavit
setting forth substantial facts establishing that a violation of the city
ordinance or state statute exists and that requisite notice has been given
under the ordinance or statute. The Magistrate shall issue an enforcement order
if he/she determines the following.
   (A)   That facts exist to show that a violation of a statute or ordinance
has occurred.
   (B)   That the abatement of the nuisance or violation is in the best
interest of the public health, safety or welfare.
   (C)   That the proposed abatement action is reasonable under the
circumstances.
(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)
§ 35.11 AUTHORIZED ENTRY WITHOUT ENFORCEMENT ORDER.
   An administrative enforcement order shall not be required under the
following circumstances.
   (A)   When permission to perform the abatement work or improvements has been
granted by someone with apparent charge or control of the premises. For
purposes of this division (A), permission may be granted either verbally, in
writing or by some other action indicating consent.
   (B)   Where there exists an imminent danger or peril to human life, limb or
property and any delays resulting from the application for an enforcement order
would materially increase the likelihood of loss from such danger or peril.
   (C)   When the abatement work or improvements are on open fields or
unoccupied or undeveloped areas.
(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)
§ 35.12 CONTENT OF ENFORCEMENT ORDER.
   An enforcement order issued by a Magistrate pursuant to this chapter shall
contain the following requisites.
   (A)   That it identify as near as may be the premises which are in violation
of ordinance or statute.
   (B)   That it reasonably specify the scope of the work or improvements to be
performed by the city in abating the violation.
   (C)   That it set forth such other requirements or conditions as the
Magistrate deems necessary to assure that the premises will be adequately
protected and that the work or improvements are no greater than is reasonably
necessary to abate all conditions which adversely affect the public health,
safety or welfare.
   (D)   That it specify a reasonable amount of time in which to carry out such
enforcement order.
(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)
§ 35.13 EXECUTION OF ENFORCEMENT ORDER.
   The Inspector shall, upon entering the premises for the purpose of
abatement, give notice of his/her purpose to the person who has charge or
control of the premises. If the person cannot be found, the work may be
performed in accordance with the enforcement order provided that a copy of the
order shall be affixed to the front door of the building or gate of the
premises. In every instance, entry shall be effected using the minimum force
necessary according to the circumstances.
(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)
§ 35.14 POWER OF INSPECTOR EXECUTING ENFORCEMENT ORDER.
   In the execution of an enforcement order, the Inspector may call to his/her
aid any number of citizens in the city who shall be bound to aid in the
execution of same. Any person interfering with the execution of a lawful
enforcement order issued pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)
Penalty, see § 35.99 
§ 35.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be fined not more than $2,000 for all violations
involving fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including
dumping of refuse and shall be fined $500 for all other violations of this
chapter. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 1197, passed 3-9-98)
CHAPTER 36: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
36.01   Emergency Management Director, Coordinator, organization
   
36.02   Powers and duties of Director
   
36.03   Emergency Management Plan
   
36.04   Interjurisdictional program
   
36.05   Override
   
36.06   Liability
   
36.07   Commitment of funds
   
36.08   Offenses
 
   
36.99   Penalty
Cross reference:
   Law enforcement assistance during civil emergencies, see §§
34.15 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   Emergency powers of Mayor, see Charter, §
3.06(c)
§ 36.01 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR, COORDINATOR, ORGANIZATION.
   There exists the office of Emergency Management Director of the city which
shall be held by the Mayor in accordance with state law.
   (A)   An Emergency Management Coordinator may be appointed and serve at the
pleasure of the Director.
   (B)   The Director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive
emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and
responsibilities set forth in this chapter. He/she may delegate authority for
execution of these duties to the Coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for
the execution shall remain with the Director.
   (C)   The operational emergency management organization of the city shall
consist of the officers and employees for the city so designated by the
Director in the Emergency Management Plan, as well as organized volunteer
groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed
among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the Emergency
Management Plan.
('78 Code, § 7-1) (Ord. 758, passed 11-23-87)
§ 36.02 POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Emergency Management Director shall
include the following.
   (A)   Conduct an on-going survey of actual or potential hazards which
threaten life and property within the city and an on-going program of
identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which
would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a
disaster did occur.
   (B)   Supervision of the development and approval of an Emergency Management
Plan for the city and recommendation for adoption by the City Council all
mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of the Plan.
   (C)   Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may
not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except by or
with the declaring, continuing or terminating a local state of disaster shall
be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the City
Secretary.
   (D)   Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which
are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter; such
proclamations, regulations or directives shall be disseminated promptly by
means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public
and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly
filed with the City Secretary.
   (E)   Direction of the operations of the city emergency management
organization.
   (F)   Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that
may arise within the emergency management organization of the city, relative to
an actual disaster.
   (G)   Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state,
regional or federal emergency management organizations.
   (H)   Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any
department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the
Emergency Management Plan.
   (I)   Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in
cooperation with the representatives of the state, and the drafting and
execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county and with other
municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency
management efforts.
   (J)   Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all
necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions
which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within
the city.
   (K)   Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the City Attorney, for
use of private property for public shelter and other purposes.
   (L)   Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies
and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein.
   (M)   Other requirements as specified in Texas Disaster Act 1975 (Tex.
Gov't. Code, §§ 418.001 et seq.).
('78 Code, § 7-2) (Ord. 758, passed 11-23-87)
§ 36.03 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   A comprehensive Emergency Management Plan shall be developed and
maintained in a current state. The Plan shall set forth the form of the
organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties and powers and designate officers and employees
to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   As provided by state law, the Plan shall follow the standards and
criteria established by the State Division of Emergency Management of the State
of Texas. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology
shall conform to the recommendations of the State Division of Emergency
Management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies
to perform the functions assigned by the Plan and to maintain their portion of
the Plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The Emergency Management
Plan shall be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of
law during the time of a disaster.
('78 Code, § 7-3) (Ord. 758, passed 11-23-87)
§ 36.04 INTERJURISDICTIONAL PROGRAM.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized to join with the County Judge and the Mayors
of the other cities in the county in the formation of an Emergency Management
Council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the
preparation of a Joint Emergency Management Plan and in the appointment of a
Joint Emergency Management Coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to
participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as the
program may affect the city.
('78 Code, § 7-4) (Ord. 758, passed 11-23-87)
§ 36.05 OVERRIDE.
   During an active or eminent emergency, when the orders, rules and
regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect,
they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and
regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith; provided that
nothing stated herein shall override any provision of the City Charter.
('78 Code, § 7-5) (Ord. 758, passed 11-23-87)
§ 36.06 LIABILITY.
   This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for
the protection of the public peace, health and safety, and neither the city,
the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm,
partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of the agents
thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply
with, any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result
of the activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises
who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license of
privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the
whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of
sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or
natural or man-made disaster shall, together with his/her successors in
interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any
person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege
or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person.
('78 Code, § 7-6) (Ord. 758, passed 11-23-87)
§ 36.07 COMMITMENT OF FUNDS.
   No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in
carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter
without prior approval by the City Council, nor shall any person have any right
to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific
approval of the City Council unless during a declared disaster. During a
declared disaster, the Mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city
when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life or
property.
('78 Code, § 7-7) (Ord. 758, passed 11-23-87)
§ 36.08 OFFENSES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or
delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of
any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or to do any act
forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained
in this chapter.
   (B)   It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display
any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification of the city, unless
authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
   (C)   Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device as
to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed
guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties
imposed in §
36.99.
('78 Code, § 7-8(a)-(c)) (Ord. 758, passed 11-23-87)
§ 36.99 PENALTY.
   Conviction for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable by fine not to exceed $1,000.
('78 Code, § 7-8(d)) (Ord. 758, passed 11-23-87)
CHAPTER 37: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
General Provisions
   
37.01   Establishment
   
37.02   Terms of government
   
37.03   Judge
   
37.04   Magistrates
   
37.05   Municipal Court Clerk
   
37.06   Court Reporter
Consolidated Fee on Conviction of a Nonjailable Misdemeanor
   
37.15   Amount of fee, assessment, collection
Municipal Court Building Security Fund
   
37.20   Establishment of Municipal Court Building Security Fund
   
37.21   Designated use of Fund
Local Truancy Prevention and Diversion Fund
   
37.25   Establishment of Local Truancy Prevention and Diversion Fund
   
37.26   Designated use of Fund
Municipal Court Technology Fund
   
37.30   Establishment of Municipal Court Technology Fund
   
37.31   Designated use of Fund
Municipal Jury Fund
   
37.35   Establishment of Municipal Jury Fund
   
37.36   Designated use of Fund
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 37.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The City Council hereby establishes the Mansfield Municipal Court as a
Municipal Court of Record in order to provide a more efficient disposition of
cases arising in the city, and in order to more effectively enforce the
ordinances of the city. The Mansfield Municipal Court shall become a Court of
Record from and after the first day of October, 1995, and shall be designated
the City Municipal Court of Record No. 1.
(‘78 Code, § 9.9-1) (Ord. 1086, passed 7-24-95; Am. Ord. OR-2303-23, passed 5-
22-23)
§ 37.02 TERMS OF GOVERNMENT
   (A)   The Mansfield Municipal Court of Record No. 1 is established pursuant
to the authority granted in Tex. Gov’t Code, Ch. 30, and the terms set forth
therein are hereby adopted governing the operation of the court.
   (B)   The Mansfield Municipal Court of Record No. 1 shall have the
jurisdiction and authority provided by Tex Gov’t Code, § 30.00005, as amended,
including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Jurisdiction over criminal cases arising under ordinances
authorized by Tex. Local Gov’t Code §§ 215.072, 217.042, 341.903, and 551.002,
as amended;
      (2)   Concurrent jurisdiction with a justice court in any precinct in
which the city is located in criminal cases that arise within the territorial
limits of the city and are punishable only by fine;
      (3)   Concurrent jurisdiction with a district court or a county court at
law under Tex. Local Gov’t Code, Ch. 54, Subch. B, within the city's
territorial limits and property owned by the city located in the city's
extraterritorial jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing health and safety
and nuisance abatement ordinances;
      (4)   Civil jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing municipal
ordinances enacted under Tex. Local Gov’t Code, Ch. 214, Subch. A, or Tex.
Transp. Code, Ch. 683, Subch. E; and
      (5)   Authority to issue:
         (a)   Search warrants for the purpose of investigating a health and
safety or nuisance abatement ordinance violation; and
         (b)   Seizure warrants for the purpose of securing, removing, or
demolishing the offending property and removing the debris from the premises.
(‘78 Code, § 9.9-2) (Ord. 1086, passed 7-24-95; Am. Ord. OR-2303-23, passed 5-
22-23)
§ 37.03 JUDGE.
   The Municipal Court of Record shall be presided over by a Municipal Judge
appointed by the City Council who shall serve for a two-year term. The initial
term shall be from the effective date of Ordinance 1086 through April 1997. The
Municipal Judge must be a licensed attorney in good standing in the state and
must have two or more years of experience in the practice of law in Texas. The
Judge must be a citizen of the United States and of the State of Texas. The
City Council may appoint one or more similarly qualified persons to serve as
alternate or associate Municipal Judge when the Municipal Judge is temporarily
absent for any reason, or to serve under the direction of the Municipal Court
Judge.
('78 Code, § 9.9-3) (Ord. 1086, passed 7-24-95)
§ 37.04 MAGISTRATES.
   The City Council may appoint one or more Magistrates who need not possess
all the qualifications necessary to be a Municipal Court Judge of the Court of
Record. The Magistrate may conduct an arraignment, hold an indigency hearing,
accept a plea, sign a judgment, set the amount of bond and perform other
functions under the Code of Criminal Procedure, Art. 15.17. A Magistrate may
not preside over the Court or hear contested cases.
('78 Code, § 9.9-4) (Ord. 1086, passed 7-24-95)
§ 37.05 MUNICIPAL COURT CLERK.
   The City Manager shall appoint a Clerk of the Municipal Court of Record who
shall perform duties in accordance with statutes, the City Charter and city
ordinances.
('78 Code, § 9.9-5) (Ord. 1086, passed 7-24-95)
§ 37.06 COURT REPORTER.
   The Municipal Court Clerk shall appoint a Court Reporter who must meet the
qualifications provided by law for official Court Reporters. The Court Reporter
may use written notes, transcribing equipment, video or audio equipment, or a
combination of those methods to record the proceedings of the Court. The Court
Reporter is not required to record testimony in any case unless the Judge or
one of the parties requests a record in writing, and files the request with the
Court before trial. If a record is made, it shall be kept for the 20-day period
beginning the day after the last day of the Court proceeding, trial or denial
of motion for new trial, whichever occurs last. The Court Reporter is not
required to be present during proceedings of the Municipal Court of Record,
provided that proceedings that are required to be recorded are recorded by a
good quality electronic recording device.
('78 Code, § 9.9-6) (Ord. 1086, passed 7-24-95)
CONSOLIDATED FEE ON CONVICTION OF A NONJAILABLE MISDEMEANOR
§ 37.15 AMOUNT OF FEE, ASSESSMENT, COLLECTION.
   (A)   A person convicted of a nonjailable misdemeanor offense, including a
criminal violation of a city ordinance, shall pay $14 as a court cost, in
addition to all other costs, on conviction.
   (B)   A person is considered to be convicted in a case if:
      (1)   A judgment, a sentence, or both a judgment and a sentence are
imposed on the person;
      (2)   The person receives community supervision, deferred adjudication,
or deferred disposition; or
      (3)   The court defers final disposition of the case or imposition of the
judgment and sentence.
   (C)   The Clerk of the Mansfield Municipal Court of Record No. 1 shall
collect the fee and pay the fee to the municipal treasurer of the city to
deposit into the municipal treasury.
   (D)   Money collected for the fee on offenses committed on or after January
1, 2020, shall be allocated as follows:
      (1)   35% into the municipal court building security fund;
      (2)   35.7143% into the local truancy prevention and diversion fund;
      (3)   28.5714% into the municipal court technology fund; and
      (4)   0.7143% into the municipal jury fund.
   (E)   Money collected for the fee on offenses committed before January 1,
2020, shall be distributed using historical data so that each account or fund
receives the same amount of money the account or fund would have received if
the court costs for the accounts and funds had been collected and reported
separately. The historical amounts for each previously existing fund,
applicable for offenses committed on or after September 1, 1999, are:
      (1)   Municipal Court Technology Fee - $4; and
      (2)   Municipal Court Building Security Fund - $4.90.
(Ord. OR-2303-23, passed 5-22-23; Am. Ord. OR-2379-24, passed 9-9-24; Am. Ord.
OR-2416-25, passed 8-25-25)
MUNICIPAL COURT BUILDING SECURITY FUND
§ 37.20 ESTABLISHMENT OF MUNICIPAL COURT BUILDING SECURITY FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created and established a Municipal Court Building
Security Fund in the treasury of the city pursuant to Tex. Code of Criminal
Procedure, Art. 102.017.
   (B)   The Municipal Court Building Security Fund shall be administered by or
under the direction of the City Council.
(Ord. OR-2303-23, passed 5-22-23)
§ 37.21 DESIGNATED USE OF FUND.
   (A)   Money deposited into the Municipal Court Building Security Fund may be
used only for security personnel, services, and items related to buildings that
house the operations of municipal courts.
   (B)   For purposes of this chapter, the term SECURITY PERSONNEL, SERVICES
AND ITEMS includes:
      (1)   The purchase or repair of X-ray machines and conveying systems;
      (2)   Handheld metal detectors;
      (3)   Walkthrough metal detectors;
      (4)   Identification cards and systems;
      (5)   Electronic locking and surveillance equipment;
      (6)   Video teleconferencing systems;
      (7)   Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables, or contract security
personnel during times when they are providing appropriate security services;
      (8)   Signage;
      (9)   Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems;
      (10)   Locks, chains, alarms, or similar security devices;
      (11)   The purchase or repair of bullet-proof glass;
      (12)   Continuing education on security issues for court personnel and
security personnel; and
      (13)   Warrant officers and related equipment.
(Ord. OR-2303-23, passed 5-22-23)
LOCAL TRUANCY PREVENTION AND DIVERSION FUND
§ 37.25 ESTABLISHMENT OF LOCAL TRUANCY PREVENTION AND DIVERSION FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created and established a Local Truancy Prevention and
Diversion Fund in the treasury of the city pursuant to Section 134.151 of the
Tex. Local Gov’t Code.
   (B)   The Local Truancy Prevention and Diversion Fund shall be administered
by or under the direction of the City Council.
(Ord. OR-2303-23, passed 5-22-23)
§ 37.26 DESIGNATED USE OF FUND.
   (A)   Money in the Local Truancy Prevention and Diversion Fund may be used
to finance the salary, benefits, training, travel expenses, office supplies,
and other necessary expenses relating to the position of a juvenile case
manager employed under Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure, Article 45.056.
   (B)   If there is money in the Local Truancy Prevention and Diversion Fund
after the costs under division (A) are paid, subject to the direction of the
City Council and with approval of the Mansfield Municipal Court of Record No.
1, a juvenile case manager may direct the remaining money to be used to
implement programs directly related to the duties of the juvenile case manager,
including juvenile alcohol and substance abuser programs, educational and
leadership programs, and any other projects designed to prevent or reduce the
number of juvenile referrals to the Mansfield Municipal Court of Record No. 1.
   (C)   Money in the Local Truancy Prevention and Diversion Fund may not be
used to supplement the income of an employee whose primary role is not that of
a juvenile case manager.
(Ord. OR-2303-23, passed 5-22-23)
MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY FUND
§ 37.30 ESTABLISHMENT OF MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created and established a Municipal Court Technology
Fund in the treasury of the city pursuant to Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure,
Art. 102.0172.
   (B)   The Municipal Court Technology Fund shall be administered by or under
the direction of the City Council.
(Ord. OR-2303-23, passed 5-22-23)
§ 37.31 DESIGNATED USE OF FUND.
   Money in the Municipal Court Technology Fund may be used only to finance the
purchase of or to maintain technological enhancements for the Mansfield
Municipal Court of Record No. 1, including:
   (A)   Computer systems;
   (B)   Computer networks;
   (C)   Computer hardware;
   (D)   Computer software;
   (E)   Imaging systems;
   (F)   Electronic kiosks;
   (G)   Electronic ticket writers; and
   (H)   Docket management systems.
(Ord. OR-2303-23, passed 5-22-23)
MUNICIPAL JURY FUND
§ 37.35 ESTABLISHMENT OF MUNICIPAL JURY FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created and established a Municipal Jury Fund in the
treasury of the city pursuant to Tex. Local Gov’t Code, § 134.151.
   (B)   The Municipal Jury Fund shall be administered by or under the
direction of the City Council.
(Ord. OR-2303-23, passed 5-22-23)
§ 37.36 DESIGNATED USE OF FUND.
   Money in the Municipal Jury Fund may only be used to fund juror
reimbursements and otherwise finance jury services.
(Ord. OR-2303-23, passed 5-22-23)
CHAPTER 38: TAXATION AND FINANCE
Section
General Provisions
   
38.01   Sales and use tax
   
38.015   Taxation of tangible personal property in transit
   
38.02   Delinquency penalties and interest
   
38.03   Penalty schedule; interest rate
   
38.04   Payment of delinquency tax
   
38.05   Collection by Tax Attorney
Hotel Occupancy Tax
   
38.15   Levied
   
38.16   Definitions
   
38.17   Duty to collect
   
38.18   Monthly tax payments
   
38.19   Tax Assessor/Collector to have access to books and records
   
38.20   Use of funds
   
38.21   Penalty
Tax Relief for Historic Structures
   
38.30   Granting of exemptions
   
38.31   Percentage of value exempted
   
38.32   Application
   
38.33   Inspection, approval or denial certification
   
38.34   Appeal of Historic Landmark Commission’s determination
   
38.35   Adoption of ordinance by City Council
   
38.36   Rendition and assessment of historic resources for ad valorem taxation
   
38.37   Definitions
Cross reference:
   Taxation procedure, see Charter, §§
9.15 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to levy, assess and collect taxes, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Arts.
1028, 1029, 1041, 1175(7)-(9)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 38.01 SALES AND USE TAX.
   (A)   All action concerning the submission of the proposition to the voters
of the city having been taken and the tax authorized by Section 4A of the Act
having been approved by the voters of the city, the City Council does hereby
authorize the levy of a sales and use tax (the "Tax") within the city for the
benefit of a corporation established under Section 4A of the Act at a rate of
one-half of one percent on the sale of items at retail and an excise tax at the
same rate on the use, storage or other consumption within the city of tangible
personal property purchased, leased or rented from a retailer during such time
as the tax is effective within the city.
   (B)   The tax shall be administered, collected and remitted in accordance
with the Act and, to the extent not inconsistent with the Act, in accordance
with the Tex. Tax Code, Ch. 321, as amended.
(Ord. 1151, passed 3-10-97)
§ 38.015 TAXATION OF TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY IN TRANSIT.
   Goods in transit as defined by § 11.253 of the Tex. Tax Code which are not
exempt from taxation under other law shall be subject to ad valorem taxation
for tax year 2012 and for every year thereafter, and shall not be exempt from
taxation as provided by, and in accordance with § 11.253 of the Tex. Tax Code.
(Ord. 1657, passed 12-10-07; Ord. OR-1820-11, passed 11-28-11)
§ 38.02 DELINQUENCY PENALTIES AND INTEREST.
   (A)   For the maintenance, management and expenses of the city and for the
general improvement of the city and its property and in the interest of the
citizens of the city, there is hereby ordered to be charged the hereinafter
specified penalty and interest against all delinquent taxes collected.
   (B)   Such penalty and interest as herein provided shall be charged and
shall accrue until the unpaid and delinquent taxes, together with such accrued
penalty and interest have been paid and satisfied.
('78 Code, § 14-1) (Ord. 209, passed 2-11-69)
§ 38.03 PENALTY SCHEDULE; INTEREST RATE.
   (A)   From and after February first next following the date any duly levied
or assessed tax shall have been due and payable to the city, the following
penalty and interest shall be assessed until the unpaid taxes, penalty and
interest have been paid and satisfied.
      (1)   During the month of February, 1%.
      (2)   During the month of March, 2%.
      (3)   During the month of April, 3%.
      (4)   During the month of May, 4%.
      (5)   During the month of June, 5%.
      (6)   On and after July 1, 8%.
   (B)   Additionally, all delinquent taxes shall bear interest at the rate of
6% per annum from the date of their delinquency.
('78 Code, § 14-2) (Ord. 209, passed 2-11-69)
§ 38.04 PAYMENT OF DELINQUENCY TAX.
   At the time of the payment of any delinquent tax due the city, the City
Assessor-Collector or other officer charged with the duty of collecting same,
shall carefully figure and compute the amount of the delinquency and interest
due on the date of such payment and collect same, together with such delinquent
taxes, for and on behalf of the city.
('78 Code, § 14-3) (Ord. 209, passed 2-11-69)
§ 38.05 COLLECTION BY TAX ATTORNEY.
   (A)   Whenever any accounts for delinquent property taxes owed to the city
are given to its Tax Attorney for collection, on or after July 1 of the year
they become delinquent, the city shall be entitled to, and shall collect, an
additional penalty of 15% of the delinquent taxes and penalty (including any
interest owed) due on each delinquent property at the time of collection,
either before or after suit and or foreclosure sale, as provided by the Texas
Property Tax Code, § 33.07.
   (B)   In addition to the collection expenses provided for in division (A)
above, whenever a delinquent tax suit is filed, the city shall be entitled to
recover reasonable expenses, subject to the approval of the Court, that are
incurred by the city in determining the name, identity and location of
necessary parties and in procuring necessary legal descriptions of the property
on which a delinquent tax is due, as provided by the Texas Property Tax Code, §
33.48(a)(3).
('78 Code, § 14-4) (Ord. 537, passed 5-31-84)
HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX
§ 38.15 LEVIED.
   Under the provisions of Tex. Tax. Code §§ 351.002 and 352.003, there is
hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any sleeping room furnished
by any hotel, where the cost of occupancy is at the rate of $2 or more per day,
such tax to be equal to 7% of the consideration paid by the occupant for such
room to such hotel, exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by other
governmental agencies.
('78 Code, § 10-60) (Ord. 634, passed 9-23-85)
§ 38.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSIDERATION. The cost of the room in such hotel only if the room is one
ordinarily used for sleeping, and shall not include the cost of any food served
or personal services rendered to the occupant of the room not related to the
cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy.
   HOTEL. Any building or buildings, trailer, railroad pullman not being
utilized for the transportation of travelers, or any other facility in which
the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term
shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses,
inns, rooming houses, trailer houses, trailer motels, railroad pullman cars
parked on a siding or other area and used for sleeping accommodations not
involving the transportation of travelers, dormitory space where bed space is
rented to individuals or groups, apartments not occupied by permanent residents
as that term is hereinafter defined, and all other facilities where rooms or
sleeping facilities or open space are furnished for consideration, but HOTEL
shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums, convalescent
homes, or nursing homes.
   OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to use or possession, of any
room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and if the
occupant’s use, possession or right to use or possession extends for a period
of less than 30 days.
   OCCUPANT. Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right
to use or possess any room in a hotel, if the room is one ordinarily used for
sleeping.
   PERMANENT RESIDENT. Any person who has the right to use or possess a room or
occupy space in a hotel as that term is defined herein for at least 30
consecutive days, so long as there is no interruption of payment for the
period.
(‘78 Code, § 10-61) (Ord. 634, passed 9-23-85; Ord. OR-2201-21, passed 2-8-21)
§ 38.17 DUTY TO COLLECT.
   Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel, or
collecting funds for the cost of occupancy of any sleeping room or space on
behalf of the owner, operator, or manager of any hotel shall collect the tax
imposed by this subchapter for the city.
(‘78 Code, § 10-61) (Ord. 634, passed 9-23-85; Ord. OR-2201-21, passed 2-8-21)
§ 38.18 MONTHLY TAX PAYMENTS.
   (A)   The taxes provided for herein shall be paid on a monthly basis.
   (B)   On the last day of the month following each monthly period, every
person required by this subchapter to collect the taxes imposed herein shall
file a report with the Tax Assessor and Collector of the city showing the
consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding month, and the
amount of taxes collected on such occupancies, and such other information as
the Assessor and Collector of taxes may reasonably require. Such persons shall
pay the taxes due on such occupancies at the time of filing the report. There
shall also be furnished to the Tax Assessor and Collector of the city at the
time of payment of such tax, a copy of the monthly tax report filed with the
state comptroller in connection with the State of Texas hotel occupancy tax.
(‘78 Code, § 10-63) (Ord. 634, passed 9-23-85; Ord. OR-2201-21, passed 2-8-21)
§ 38.19 TAX ASSESSOR/COLLECTOR TO HAVE ACCESS TO BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   The Assessor and Collector of taxes of the city shall have the power to make
such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax
levied herein, and shall upon reasonable notice have access to the books and
records necessary to enable the Tax Assessor and Collector to determine the
correctness of any report filed as required by this subchapter, and the amount
of taxes due under the provisions of this subchapter.
('78 Code, § 10-64) (Ord. 634, passed 9-23-85)
§ 38.20 USE OF FUNDS.
   The revenue derived from the hotel occupancy tax authorized by this
subchapter may be used for those purposes stated in Tex. Tax Code, Subch. 351,
as it may be amended, and any other purposes allowed under the laws of the
state; provided that a portion of the tax revenue equal to 1% of the cost of
the occupancy of hotel rooms shall be reserved for the purposes stated for such
reserved tax revenue in Tex. Tax Code § 351.005, as it may be amended. These
reserved tax revenue funds may be used by the city for the purposes allowed or
the city may contract with persons or organizations to use these reserved tax
revenue funds for the purposes allowed.
(Ord. OR-2201-21, passed 2-8-21)
§ 38.21 PENALTY.
   (A)   If any person shall fail to collect the tax imposed in §§
38.15 et seq., or fail to file a report as required in §§
38.15 et seq., or shall fail to pay to the Assessor and Collector of taxes the
tax imposed when the report for payment is due, or shall file a false report,
then such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.
   (B)   The City Attorney or other attorney acting for the city may bring suit
against a person who is required to collect the tax imposed in §§
38.155 et seq. and pay the collections over to the city and who has failed to
file a tax report or pay the tax when due to enjoin the person from operating a
hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report filed, as applicable, as
provided by the Court’s order.
   (C)   If any person fails to report when required to pay the tax when due,
any person shall pay a penalty of 5% of the amount of the tax due pursuant to
§§
38.15 et seq. If any person fails to file the report or pay the tax before the
thirty-first day after the date that the report or tax payment was due, he/she
shall pay an additional penalty of 5% of the amount of the tax due.
   (D)   Any person who is required to pay the taxes imposed in §§
38.15 et seq. shall report and send the taxes collected herein to the city as
provided.
   (E)   Delinquent taxes and accrued penalties draw interest at the rate of
10% a year beginning 60 days after the date of which the tax was due.
(‘78 Code, § 10-65) (Ord. 634, passed 9-23-85; Ord. 773, passed 4-11-88; Ord.
OR-2201-21, passed 2-8-21)
TAX RELIEF FOR HISTORIC STRUCTURES
§ 38.30 GRANTING OF EXEMPTIONS.
   The City Council shall by ordinance, concurrent with the levy of taxes for
each current year, approve for partial exemption from ad valorem taxes certain
historic resources which have been recommended for exemption pursuant to
provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. OR-2146-19, passed 9-9-19)
§ 38.31 PERCENTAGE OF VALUE EXEMPTED.
   Historic resources which are approved for exemption by ordinance pursuant to
the provisions of this subchapter shall have the following percentage of
assessed improvement value exempt from ad valorem taxes levied by the city:
   (A)   Level 1. Residential and commercial structures which have obtained an
“H”, Historic Landmark Overlay District designation shall be eligible for a
one-time exemption of 25% of the assessed improvement value of the structure
for a period of ten years.
   (B)   Level 2. 
      (1)   Residential structures with an “H”, Historic Landmark Overlay
District designation shall be eligible for an exemption of up to 100% of the
assessed improvement value of the structure for a period of ten years for
exterior restorations or repairs that extend the life of the structure
amounting to $5,000 or more.
      (2)   A change in a residential use to a commercial use will result in a
reduction of one-half of the awarded exemption for the remaining years in the
collection period.
   (C)   Level 3. Commercial structures with an “H”, Historic Landmark Overlay
District designation shall be eligible for an exemption of up to 50% of the
assessed improvement value of the structure for a period of ten years for
exterior restorations or repairs that extend the life of the structure
amounting to $5,000 or more.
   (D)   Should a property owner receiving a tax exemption under this
Subchapter remove the “H” Historic Landmark Overlay District designation, the
value received from the exemption must be repaid. No repayment is required if a
historic structure is destroyed by fire, storm, or other natural act not due to
the property owner's action.
(Ord. OR-2146-19, passed 9-9-19)
§ 38.32 APPLICATION.
   (A)   For the assessment year for which the owner of the structure desires
such structure to be tax exempt to the extent provided by this subchapter, the
owner shall file with the Historic Preservation Officer an application no later
than January 1, attesting that the eligibility requirements of this subchapter
are fully satisfied at the time of application submittal.
      (1)   Once an owner has applied and been approved for a tax exemption on
an eligible structure, an annual application shall not be required by the city
during the collection period as long as the same owner retains ownership of the
property.
      (2)   If the property ownership changes on an exempt property, the new
owner may request an extension of the tax exempt status for the remainder of
the calendar year for the year of purchase. A new application will be required
to be filed with the city as set out herein for the following assessment year.
Any outstanding repair or maintenance items identified in the tax exemption
survey of the most recent approved year must be addressed for the following
year's eligibility.
      (3)   If a property owner was previously denied tax exempt status for a
property, a new application must be filed with the city as set out herein. Any
outstanding Zoning Ordinance compliance issues or exterior repair or
maintenance items identified in previous tax exemption surveys must be
addressed to regain eligibility.
   (B)   An application for a tax exemption shall be initiated by the owner of
the subject property or by his or her agent, by completion of forms provided by
the Historic Preservation Officer. For Level 2 and Level 3 exemptions, the
application must include receipts for the cost of a qualifying restoration or
repair project.
   (C)   The application shall affirmatively set forth the owner's
authorization for city staff members to visit and inspect the property and
books and records as necessary to certify whether or not the structure is being
preserved and maintained as required by §
38.33 of this subchapter.
(Ord. OR-2146-19, passed 9-9-19)
§ 38.33 INSPECTION, APPROVAL OR DENIAL CERTIFICATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, the Historic Preservation Officer or
designee shall conduct an inspection survey of the property and review the
books and records as necessary to certify whether or not:
      (1)   The structure is being preserved and maintained in accordance with
the city's applicable regulations and historic design guidelines; and
      (2)   The building and site are in compliance with the city's Zoning
Ordinance; and
      (3)   The building and site are in compliance with the inspection
criteria of this subchapter listed under divisions (B) and (C) below.
   (B)   Building elements with their materials and finishes shall be
maintained in good repair and in operable condition to avoid decay, damage,
structural failure and hazardous or unsafe conditions. Generally:
      (1)   Exterior surfaces of all structures (main structure and accessory
structures) shall be clean, maintained, protected and weathertight.
      (2)   Repainting/paint touch-ups shall closely match the existing paint
colors and applied at reasonable intervals.
      (3)   Damaged, loose, or rotted materials/details shall be reestablished,
repaired or replaced. All joints or cracks shall be weatherproofed
appropriately by proper maintenance.
      (4)   Exterior facades shall be clean from any graffiti, overgrown
vegetation, and left over residues from previous work/installations.
      (5)   Damaged or worn property elements shall be repaired, restored or
replaced and secured properly to remain operable.
      (6)   Vacant structures shall be securely closed and weathertight. Any
unoccupied structure shall be maintained and secured to avoid becoming a
structure that may be considered demolished by neglect.
      (7)   Exterior materials shall be maintained to historic standards as
outlined in the applicable historic landmark design guidelines and the
Secretary of the Interior’s Standards.
      (8)   Exterior plumbing, electrical and mechanical fixtures shall be
secured properly.
      (9)   Grounds shall be maintained free of excessive rubbish, garbage,
junk, refuse or debris.
   (C)   The Historic Preservation Officer or designee shall inspect the
structure, accessory structures, property elements and grounds to ensure
general maintenance has occurred as described immediately above.
   (D)   The Historic Preservation Officer shall present to the Historic
Landmark Commission a list of properties recommended for approval or denial of
the tax exemption based on the findings of the inspection survey. A denial
recommendation may include the following reasons:
      (1)   A structure is not being preserved and maintained in accordance
with the City’s applicable regulations and historic design guidelines or is not
in compliance with the City’s Zoning Ordinance; or
      (2)   Deficiencies from previous inspection surveys were not completed by
January 1 of the subject year; or
      (3)   Exterior work was completed, installed, or is under construction
without a certificate of approval or in deviation of a previously approved
certificate of approval.
   (E)   The Historic Landmark Commission shall hold a public hearing to make a
determination of property eligibility and to certify properties have adequately
addressed the deficiencies in the required time frame from the previous year
and are in compliance. The Historic Landmark Commission may grant an extension
to properties if it is determined that extenuating circumstances exist. Such
circumstances should generally be justified by supportive information such as:
      (1)   Cost estimates or other information indicating the required repair
is more substantial than initially expected;
      (2)   Documentation that the issue(s) was misidentified or didn't exist
in the manner described in the tax exemption survey; or
      (3)   Documentation that the issue is being addressed as part of a larger
series of repairs or improvements and has received approval with a Certificate
of Approval.
   (F)   The Historic Landmark Commission shall certify the facts to the City
Council not later than March 1 of the subject year, along with the Historic
Landmark Commission's determination for approval or denial of applications for
tax exemption.
   (G)   Following adoption by City Council, the Historic Preservation Officer
will notify applicants of any new deficiencies based on the findings of the tax
exemption survey. The applicant shall address deficiencies within the time
frame determined at the time of notification.
(Ord. OR-2146-19, passed 9-9-19)
§ 38.34 APPEAL OF HISTORIC LANDMARK COMMISSION'S DETERMINATION.
   Any owner of a qualified historic resource may appeal denial of the tax
exemption by the Historic Landmark Commission by submitting a notice of appeal
in the form of a signed letter to the Historic Preservation Officer within ten
business days of the date of the Commission's action. The Historic Preservation
Officer shall submit the letter of appeal to the City Council and it shall be
heard as part of Council's consideration of the adopting ordinance noted in §
38.35 of this subchapter. Should the City Council overturn the Historic
Landmark Commission's determination and grant tax exempt status to the
property, the property will be added to the ordinance and list of exempted
properties forwarded to the chief appraiser. If the City Council upholds the
determination of the Historic Landmark Commission, the property will not be
included in the list forwarded to the chief appraiser with the adopting
ordinance and the property owner may resubmit for tax exemption consideration
the following year in accordance with §
38.32 of this subchapter.
(Ord. OR-2146-19, passed 9-9-19)
§ 38.35 ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE BY CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Council shall adopt an ordinance granting exemptions under this
subchapter. The ordinance shall specify the exempt structures and shall provide
that all land shall be assessed for taxation in the same equal and uniform
manner as all other taxable properties in the city. The city shall cause a copy
of the ordinance and certifications from the Historic Landmark Commission to be
forwarded to the chief appraiser not later than April 30 of the subject year.
(Ord. OR-2146-19, passed 9-9-19)
§ 38.36 RENDITION AND ASSESSMENT OF HISTORIC RESOURCES FOR AD VALOREM TAXATION.
   The provisions of this subchapter pertaining to partial exemption of
historic resources do not change the provisions of any other ordinance
provision of the city pertaining to taxation, and the applicant's structures
shall be rendered and assessed in the same manner as any other property if the
City Council elects to disapprove the application for exemption.
(Ord. OR-2146-19, passed 9-9-19)
§ 38.37 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall apply to this subchapter as written unless
context indicates or requires a different meaning:
   COMPATIBLE STRUCTURE. A structure within a Historic Landmark Overlay
District that was substantially constructed after the district's period of
significance, but fits within the existing character of the Historic Landmark
Overlay District to reflect existing buildings in massing, height, scale,
material, roof, color, architectural details, and general appearance, or is
built in accordance with an approved certificate of approval.
   CONTRIBUTING STRUCTURE. A structure within a Historic Landmark Overlay
District that was substantially constructed within the district's period of
significance and retains a significant amount of its physical integrity and
character defining features including location, setting, design, construction,
workmanship, or association with historical persons or events.
   HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT SITE. For the purposes of this subchapter,
structures within the “H”, Historic Landmark Overlay District, except for
structures delineated by the Historic Landmark Commission as non-contributing
or incompatible structures.
   HISTORIC RESOURCE. A structure, site, or landmark of historical, cultural,
archeological, or architectural importance at the national, state, or local
level, and that has received from the Mansfield City Council local historic
landmark designation within the Historic Landmark Overlay District.
   HISTORIC LANDMARK OVERLAY DISTRICT. An area which includes one or more
structures, sites or properties, together with their accessory buildings,
fences, and other appurtenances that are of historical, cultural,
archaeological, or architectural importance, and that has received from the
Mansfield City Council local historic landmark designation in accordance with
Section 5400 of the Zoning Ordinance. A Historic Landmark Overlay District may
have within its boundaries contributing, compatible, non-contributing, and
incompatible structures.
   INCOMPATIBLE STRUCTURE. A structure within a Historic Landmark Overlay
District that is built after the district's designation without an approved
certificate of approval.
   NON-CONTRIBUTING STRUCTURE. A structure within a Historic Landmark Overlay
District that was substantially constructed after the district's period of
significance and is not an integral part of the historic, archaeological and
architectural fabric of the district or the city, or was substantially
constructed within the district's period of significance and does not retain a
significant portion of its architectural or design integrity.
(Ord. OR-2146-19, passed 9-9-19)
CHAPTER 39: PUBLIC ART
Section
   
39.01   Definitions
   
39.02   Public Art Advisory Committee
   
39.03   Public Art Fund
   
39.04   Percent for art
§ 39.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSION. A process for the acceptance of artwork into the city’s public
art collection.
   ANNUAL PUBLIC ART PROGRAM PLAN. An annual plan developed by the Public Art
Manager in conjunction with relevant staff, the Interdepartmental Public Art
Coordination Committee, and the Public Art Advisory Committee that outlines
projects currently in process and those anticipated to be initiated in the
upcoming fiscal year.
   ARTIST. An individual generally recognized by critics and peers as a
professional practitioner of the visual, performing, or literary arts, as
judged by the quality of that professional practitioner’s body of work,
educational background, experience, public performances, past public
commissions, sale of works, exhibition record, publications, and production of
artwork. The members of the architectural, engineering, design or landscaping
firms retained for the design and construction of a development project covered
by this policy shall not be considered ARTISTS for the purposes of this policy.
   ARTWORK. An aesthetic creation of permanent or temporary medium or
combination of media resulting from the skill and creativity of an artist or
artists.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM. Section of the city adopted budget that
outlines the capital project funds and associated capital projects for the
coming fiscal year.
   CAPITAL PROJECTS. Projects outlined in the Capital Improvement Program.
   CITY. The City of Mansfield, Texas.
   DEACCESSION. A process for the permanent removal of artwork from the public
art collection and the determination of its future disposition.
   MURAL. A large-scale artwork, painting, or mosaic applied to or mounted
directly to an exterior surface of a building, fence or other structure, and
that is visible from the public right-of-way. Its primary intent is to be
artistic in nature, rather than purely information, creative signage, or
commercial signage. The emphasis of the MURAL will be on artistic expression.
MURAL proposals shall not include designs that would be considered
inappropriate and/or indecent by community standards. A MURAL shall not
indicate or describe in narrative, the form of commercial activity that happens
inside a building. All MURAL proposals containing any signage elements, as
defined in this code of ordinances, will be redirected to submit an application
through the Planning Division.
   PUBLIC ART. Elements of a public space that are designed by a professional
artist or artist team and include sculpture, statues or monuments in any
material or combination of materials; painting; murals; graphic arts including
printmaking and drawing; photography; crafts in clay, fiber and textiles, wood,
metal, plastics, glass and other materials; mixed-media, any combination of
forms or media, including collage; functional art such as street furniture, as
determined in the city’s sole discretion; environmental art consisting of
landforms and artistic landscape composition. PUBLIC ART can be permanent or
temporary.
   PUBLIC ART COLLECTION. Public art owned by the city that is installed in
public, accessible locations. Public art which is a part of this collection
must be located in a public space with public visibility and impact.
   PUBLIC ART FUND. The Fund created by this chapter which holds funds
designated by the City Council for use on and for public art.
   PUBLIC ART MANAGER. The Manager of Arts and Event Services, or other
designee appointed by the City Manager.
   PUBLIC ART PROGRAM. The program guided by the Public Art Program policy and
this chapter for the city’s public art collection.
   PUBLIC ART PROGRAM POLICY. The policies, recommended by the Public Art
Manager, for the administration of the Public Art Program.
   PUBLIC SPACE. Any area or property (public or private) which is accessible
or visible to the general public.
(Ord. OR-2328-23, passed 11-13-23)
§ 39.02 PUBLIC ART ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Pursuant to Section 6.02 of the City Charter, there is hereby created
a committee known as the Public Art Advisory Committee.
   (B)   The purpose of the Committee shall be to advise city staff and the
City Council on matters related to public art and the public art collection of
the city.
   (C)   The Committee shall be made up of up to seven residents of the city,
appointed by the City Council. The composition of the Committee shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Five members shall have expertise in the field of art or
architecture, and
      (i)   Two members of the community at large.
   (D)   Members of the Committee shall serve two-year terms, with a limit of
three terms, with appointments staggered so they do not all expire at once.
   (E)   Any member serving on the Committee is ineligible for consideration of
a public art project by the city during their membership and for an entire year
following the expiration of their term.
   (F)   Members may be removed at any time by the City Council, whether their
terms have expired or not. Vacancies on the Committee will be filled by the
City Council for the duration of an unexpired term, whether made vacant by
removal, resignation or for any other reason.
   (G)   The Committee shall use the guidelines of the Public Art Program
policy and work with city staff on the following:
      (1)   Establishing criteria and eligibility standards for applicants of
public art projects,
      (2)   Establishing criteria for awarding public art projects,
      (3)   Evaluating proposed donations, accession and deaccession of public
art, and
      (4)   Act principally in an advisory capacity on any matter pertaining to
public art.
(Ord. OR-2328-23, passed 11-13-23)
§ 39.03 PUBLIC ART FUND.
   A fund will be established within the Community Engagement Department of the
city for the Public Art Program. The Public Art Fund will be administered by
the Public Art Manager.
(Ord. OR-2328-23, passed 11-13-23)
§ 39.04 PERCENT FOR ART.
   (A)   A portion of the funding for the Public Art Program shall be
accomplished by designating up to 2% of the total construction cost of
qualifying capital projects scheduled to be completed during that fiscal year
to the Public Art Fund. The allocation shall be calculated based on the total
construction project, excluding all costs for demolition and real property
acquisition for any given capital project.
   (B)   The appropriation for the Public Art Program from capital projects
will be calculated only on the original appropriation, excluding any subsequent
amounts appropriated for amendments and change orders.
   (C)   All capital projects shall qualify for up to the 2% Public Art Program
allocation except the following:
      (1)   Roadway capital projects on roads not within a designated TIRZ,
      (2)   Regular road maintenance, or
      (3)   Underground infrastructure and underground utility projects with no
above-ground components other than roads.
   (D)   Appropriations for artwork shall be made through the approval of the
Annual Public Art Program Plan as submitted during the annual budget process.
Any funds not expended at the conclusion of the fiscal year will rollover into
the following fiscal year.
   (E)   For all grants sought by the city for capital projects, the respective
city department shall include, when allowable by the funding entity, a request
that up to 2% of the grant amount be authorized for art in accordance with this
chapter. All capital projects financed with grants and/or contributions from
private entities are subject to this provision unless art expenditures are not
authorized by the granting or contributing entity. If public art is expressly
excluded, then the public art allocation shall apply only to the city’s portion
of the project cost.
   (F)   If the percentage allocation stated herein would, in the opinion of
the city, negatively affect the overall construction of the capital project,
then such capital project may be subject to an allocation less than the
allowable up to 2%, including an exclusion of the allocation altogether as
deemed appropriate. Such a reduction in allocation or exclusion is subject to
final approval by the City Council.
   (G)   In order to ensure that artwork funded by this section has sufficient
public visibility and impact, funds generated from the various capital
projects, as allowed by law, may be pooled or aggregated together and utilized
for one or more large artwork and/or artwork at public spaces with greater
general public visibility, as recommended by the Public Art Advisory Committee
and upon final approval of the City Council.
(Ord. OR-2328-23, passed 11-13-23)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      Chapter
         
50.   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
         
51.   SEWER AND WATER SERVICE
         
52.   STORMWATER QUALITY PROTECTION
         
53.   DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM
         
54.   WATER DEMAND MANAGEMENT AND DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Unauthorized disposal
   
50.03   Collection required; authority to collect
   
50.04   Pickup schedule
   
50.05   Charges for collection
   
50.06   Tampering with containers
   
50.07   Prevention of scattering
   
50.08   Theft of service
   
50.09   Customer to provide garbage containers
   
50.10   Other disposal prohibited
Residential Garbage and Recycling Collection
   
50.25   Pickup schedule
   
50.26   Specifications for garbage containers; number
   
50.27   Placing of garbage containers for collection
   
50.28   Placement of recycling containers
   
50.29   Return of recycling containers
   
50.30   Recycling containers assigned to property
   
50.31   Recycling container replacement
   
50.32   Mobile home park collection
Commercial Garbage and Recycling Collection
   
50.45   Commercial collection; minimum collection standards
   
50.46   Enclosures required
   
50.47   Proof of service
   
50.48   Small commercial garbage service
   
50.49   Small commercial recycling
   
50.50   Commercial construction waste
License to Regulate Recyclables
   
50.60   License for commercial recyclable collection required
   
50.61   Application
   
50.62   Term
   
50.63   License and application fees
   
50.64   License agreement
   
50.65   Requirement to furnish information
   
50.66   Marking of vehicles and containers
   
50.67   Comingled recyclable products
   
50.68   Issuance or denial of license
   
50.69   Revocation, denial or suspension of license
   
50.70   Appeal
Enforcement
   
50.85   Abatement of nuisance
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BRUSH.  Parts or all of trees and shrubs.
   BULKY WASTE.  Bundled brush, stacked brush, fencing, appliances and other
waste materials with weights or volumes greater than those allowed for
permanent containers, but specifically excluding unacceptable waste.
   BUNDLED BRUSH. Brush securely tied together to form an easily handled
package not exceeding four feet in length or 50 pounds in weight.
   COMMERCIAL CONSTRUCTION WASTE. Waste produced by a commercial customer
resulting from the construction, renovation or remodeling project located in
the city including concrete, rocks, bricks, lumber, plaster, sand, gravel, or
other waste construction materials, and where the contractor employs the use of
a roll-off style waste dumpster. This term does not include construction sites
that are engaged in legitimate recycling efforts where materials are source
separated on site and transported to a recycling processing facility, or
single-family residential construction sites.
   COMMERCIAL CONTAINER. Metal containers supplied by city’s solid waste
contractor for collection of garbage or recycling and affording capacity to
service a customer so as to prevent spillage, unsightly and unsanitary
conditions.
   COMMERCIAL WASTE. Waste produced by a commercial customer that is contained
within a COMMERCIAL CONTAINER including GARBAGE or TRASH resulting from a
commercial customer. COMMERCIAL WASTE does not include UNACCEPTABLE WASTE.
   CURBSIDE SERVICE.  Garbage, trash and recyclable materials to be picked up
by the city’s solid waste contractor which will be located at the curbside of
the street bearing the customer’s address.
   CUSTOMER.  Any owner, occupant, tenant or person otherwise in control of
premises in the city on which garbage and trash are accumulated and from which
the same is removed or required to be removed pursuant to the terms of this
chapter.
   DEBRIS. Automobile frames, loose brush, and dirt, concrete, rocks, bricks,
lumber, plaster, sand, gravel, or other waste construction materials, unless
the amount of these materials is insignificant.
   DISPOSABLE CONTAINERS. Any plastic bag or cardboard box capable of
containing garbage or trash without leaking or emitting odors, and which weighs
when loaded, less than 50 pounds.
   ENCLOSURES. A manmade structure built for the specific purposes of shielding
a commercial container. These ENCLOSURES must be built so that the refuse
collection vehicles have access to the container. ENCLOSURES shall be built
with doors, these shall be opened by the tenants on the day of collection, and
shall remain closed at all other times, except when being used to access the
dumpster for disposal of material. Doors shall be made with anchor devices that
will keep the doors from inadvertently closing on the collection vehicles.
ENCLOSURES shall be at least 12 feet wide and 12 feet deep for ease of
collection. Approaches to containers must be of sufficient strength to support
the weight of collection vehicles. Additional ENCLOSURE or screening
requirements may be contained in the city’s zoning ordinance.
   FENCING. Wooden fence panels cut into four feet by six feet sections. Loose
pickets must be tied and in bundles weighing no more than 50 pounds in weight
per bundle.
   GARBAGE. Refuse animal or vegetable matter (as from a kitchen or food
processing facility), tin cans, bottles, sacks, clothes, extinguished ashes,
paper (not including heavy accumulations of newspapers and magazines), and any
other household waste which is damp or emitting noxious odors, excluding
UNACCEPTABLE WASTE.
   HANDICAPPED/SENIOR CUSTOMER. A residential household in which all members of
the household are physically handicapped, or over the age of 65 and are unable
to place RESIDENTIAL WASTE at curbside. The fact of such condition must be
certified by the City Manager.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE.  All fecal material, oil, sludge, and any radioactive,
pathological, toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible, acidic or volatile
materials, or other hazardous or improper wastes, including solid wastes
regulated as hazardous under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42
U.S.C.A. §§ 1002 et seq., or regulated as toxic under the Toxic Substance
Control Act, 15 U.S.C.A. §§ 2601 et seq., and regulations promulgated
thereunder or other applicable federal or state law concerning the regulations
of hazardous or toxic wastes.
   LANDFILL PROHIBITED WASTE MATERIALS.  Non-hazardous materials prohibited
from disposal at Type I landfills pursuant to TCEQ regulations, Tex. Admin.
Code Title 30, § 330.5. PROHIBITED WASTE MATERIALS  include, but are not
limited to. tires, used oil filters, and PCBs or PCB containing equipment.
   LIQUID WASTE.  Any waste material that is determined to be or contain “free
liquid” by a paint filter test (EPA METHOD 9095).
   LOCAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY.  Any municipal officer or department ofthe city,
designated by the City Manager, to administer this chapter.
   OWNER. The actual fee holder of the title to property and does not include
tenant, lessee or subleases.
   PERMANENT CONTAINERS. Any closed, waterproof, plastic, or metal container or
can which is capable of containing garbage or trash without leaking or emitting
odors, and which weighs, when loaded, less than 50 pounds.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL.  A material that has been recovered or diverted from
the nonhazardous waste stream for the purposes of reuse, recycling or
reclamation, a substantia! portion of which is consistently used in the
manufacture of products that may otherwise be produced using raw or virgin
materials. The following constitute recycled materials:
      (1)   Paper products, such as newspapers, magazines and catalogs, mail,
paper bags and other paper, excluding waxed paper products, such as milk
cartons and similar items;
      (2)   Cardboard products, excluding those contaminated by food products
such as pizza and food boxes or other products that have been saturated by non-
recyclable materials;
      (3)   Clear and colored glass bottles and jars, excluding mirrors,
windows, ceramics, light bulbs and other glass products;
      (4)   Metal cans composed of tin, steel or aluminum (excluding, scrap
metals);
      (5)   Plastic containers of polyethylene terephthalate and high density
polyethylene varieties, also designated as #1, #2, #3, #4, #5 and #7 clear
plastics; and
      (6)   Other items identified as recyclable by the city and any person
having a franchise or license with the city, or as a result of changes in
local, state, or federal laws, ordinances, or regulation.
   RECYCLING.  The legitimate use, reuse or reclamation of solid waste.
   RECYCLING CONTAINER.  A 95 or 65 gallon wheeled cart for use by residential
or small commercial customers for curbside recyclable collection by the city’s
solid waste contractor.
   RESIDENTIAL PREMISE.  A dwelling within the city limits occupied by a person
or group of persons comprising not more than four families. A RESIDENTIAL
PREMISE  may be deemed occupied when either water or domestic light and power
services are being supplied thereto. A condominium dwelling, whether of single
or multi-level construction; consisting of four or fewer units shall be treated
as a RESIDENTIAL PREMISE .
   RESIDENTIAL WASTE.  Garbage and trash generated by a resident and placed
curbside for the regular collection at a residential premise, but does not
include unacceptable waste, debris, or bulky waste.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY.  Shall include any owner, occupant tenant or person
otherwise in control of a residential premise or any owner, occupant, operator
or other person with legal authority to occupy or operate a business or
otherwise has responsibility for activities on a commercial premise.
   SMALL COMMERCIAL GARBAGE CUSTOMER.  Commercial customers that generate less
than two cubic yards of garbage or waste during a normal work week and have
received written approval from the city to operate as a small commercial
garbage customer.
   SMALL COMMERCIAL RECYCLING CUSTOMER.  Commercial customers that generate
less than one cubic yard of recyclable materials during a normal work week.
   SPECIAL WASTE.  Any waste defined as Special Waste by Tex. Admin. Code Title
30, § 330.3 (148).
   STABLE MATTER.  All manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in or
about a stable; or any animal, livestock, or poultry enclosure; and resulting
from the keeping of animals, poultry, or livestock.
   TRASH.  All household refuse other than garbage, debris, loose brush, and
bulky waste; TRASH  shall include grass, yard clippings, weeds, heavy
accumulations of newspaper and magazines, recyclable materials, old clothes,
and other household trash of like kind, but shall not include unacceptable
waste.
   UNACCEPTABLE WASTE. Any and all waste that is either:
      (1)   Waste which is now or in the future becomes prohibited from
disposal at a sanitary landfill by state, federal, and/or local laws and/or
regulations promulgated thereunder;
      (2)   Hazardous waste;
      (3)   Special waste, as defined herein;
      (4)   Waste, including landfill prohibited waste materials, which is
prohibited from disposal at
the landfill by city's solid waste contractor including tires, concrete, and
bulk petroleum or chemical products or by-products;
      (5)   Liquid waste, as defined herein, and septic tank pumping and grease
and grit trap wastes;
      (6)   Sludge waste, including water supply treatment plant sludge and
stabilized and/or unstabilized sludge from municipal or industrial wastewater
treatment plants;
      (7)   Dead animals and/or slaughterhouse waste, except for animal
euthanized under authority and direction of city's solid waste contractor;
      (8)   Any waste, including special waste as defined herein, which because
of its quantity, concentration, frequency of disposal, required disposal
procedures, regulatory status, or physical, chemical, infectious or other
characteristics jeopardizes or may jeopardize the environmentally sound
operation of the disposal site, as determined by the city's solid waste
contractor in its sole discretion;
      (9)   Appliances containing CFC's that do not bear a certification tag
that shows the CFC's have been properly recovered in accordance with federal
law; or
      (10)   Stable matter, as defined herein.
   UNHEALTHY OR UNSANITARY SITE.  A site where conditions represent a threat to
human health and public safety, due to accumulations of waste material or
frequency of service.
   UNSIGHTLY SITE.  A site that represents a visual blight to the surrounding
area.
   YARD WASTE.  Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and brush,
including clean woody vegetative material not greater than six inches in
diameter that result from landscaping maintenance. The term does not include
stumps, roots or shrubs with intact root balls.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14; Am. Ord. OR-2155-2019, passed 11-25-19)
§ 50.02 UNAUTHORIZED DISPOSAL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any garbage or trash
upon or along any alley, sidewalk, street or other public or private premises
except in containers as authorized by the city within the corporate limits of
the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place hazardous wastes, Class I
industrial wastes, radioactive wastes, liquid wastes, used oil, used oil
filters, lead-acid batteries, or other prohibited materials and wastes, as
currently defined by the state environmental regulatory agency for curbside
collection of residential or commercial waste, or in a dumpster for industrial,
commercial, or institutional collection.
   (C)   Rock, concrete, scraps of building materials or other trash resulting
from building or remodeling operations will not be removed by the city or its
solid waste contractor. However, any person may contract with the city’s solid
waste contractor for the disposition of such materials at the rate included in
the current franchise agreement or contract.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a residential customer to place for
collection at a residence, commercial debris or materials generated from some
location other than the collection location.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03 COLLECTION REQUIRED; AUTHORITY TO COLLECT.
   (A)   Every person who owns, occupies or controls any premises in the city
shall have garbage and trash removal.
   (B)   No person shall collect garbage, trash or refuse within the city
except a person, firm or corporation who has a contract or franchise with the
city.
   (C)   No person shall collect recyclable materials from another person’s
commercial property, in exchange for the payment of a fee. within the city
except for a person, firm or corporation who has a contract with the city or
who has been issued a license from the city.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 PICKUP SCHEDULE.
   The pickup schedule for collection of garbage and trash within the city
shall be as specified by the City Council.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.05 CHARGES FOR COLLECTION.
   The charges for the collection and removal of garbage and trash in the city
shall be in an amount as approved by ordinance of the City Council. Payment for
collection is due in accordance with the city’s utility bill or the city’s
solid waste contractor’s billing statement. Failure to render payment for
collection service in a timely manner may result in service termination.
Properties where payment for collection service has not been made for a period
of three months or more may have services terminated. Upon termination of
garbage collection services, properties may not be occupied and the responsible
party becomes subject to collection or other legal actions.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.06 TAMPERING WITH CONTAINERS.
   (A)   A person shall not remove any item from a garbage container, trash
receptacle or recycling container which has been placed on the curbside of any
residence or at the designated collection location of any business.
   (B)   A person shall not tamper with any garbage can, trash receptacle or
recycling container which has been placed on the curbside of a residence or at
the designated collection location of any business.
   (C)   The provisions of divisions (A) and (B) of this section shall not
apply to the following.
      (1)   City employees who may be required to take such action in order to
provide city services;
      (2)   Persons employed by a corporation which has a franchise or contract
with the city to collect garbage, trash or recyclable materials; or
      (3)   To the owner of the real property on which the garbage container or
recycling container is placed.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.07 PREVENTION OF SCATTERING.
   (A)   Every person shall keep all trash containers closed in such a manner
as to prevent the scattering of the contents thereof and to render said
contents inaccessible to rodents, and other pest animals.
   (B)   All food service establishments shall ensure that any privately owned
trash receptacles on their property are maintained to prevent the scattering of
garbage and trash. At a minimum, these facilities should survey their property
daily and remove any scattered materials.
   (C)   The disturbance of any garbage or recycling container or in any way
pilfering, scattering contents or junking in any alley or street, or from a
commercial container within the city limits is prohibited.
   (D)   All recyclables shall be stored in a manner that prevents scattering,
vector breeding or harboring, or other nuisance.
   (E)   The City Manager and the City Attorney are authorized to file such
claims or lawsuits as might be necessary to recover actual cost of the city
cleaning up or removing such waste or material against any person responsible
for the depositing of the same upon public sidewalks, alleys, storm drain
systems or other public property of the city.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.08 THEFT OF SERVICE.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to place waste or other materials not
generated at the site in an industrial, commercial or institutional container,
if a complaint is made and the source of such materials are located and
identified, a citation may be issued to the person or persons placing such
materials in the container. Any location which has continually been found to
contain hazardous materials, and which corrective or preventive actions have
not been taken, shall be determined to be responsible for the proper disposal
of such material.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.09 CUSTOMER TO PROVIDE GARBAGE CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Every customer using or occupying any building, house or structure
within the city for church, school, college, lodge, commercial business and
other purposes shall provide and maintain garbage cans and receptacles of
sufficient number and size, as hereinafter specified, to hold the garbage and
trash that will normally accumulate on the premises. In addition, the garbage
cans and receptacles shall be serviced at a frequency necessary to prevent
overflow.
   (B)   Every customer shall keep all acceptable solid waste, recyclable
materials, bulky waste, and/or acceptable brush securely closed or bundled in
such a manner as to prevent the scattering of the contents thereof and to
render said contents inaccessible to insects, rodents, and other animals.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.10 OTHER DISPOSAL PROHIBITED.
   The disposal of any garbage or trash in the city in any other manner than
specified in this chapter is strictly prohibited and is deemed a violation of
this code.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see §
50.99
RESIDENTIAL GARBAGE AND RECYCLING COLLECTION
§ 50.25 PICKUP SCHEDULE.
   The pickup schedule for collection of garbage and trash within the city
shall be as specified by the City Council.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.26 SPECIFICATIONS FOR GARBAGE CONTAINERS; NUMBER.
   Each customer shall provide a disposable or permanent container for garbage
and trash. The city's solid waste contractor shall not be expected to remove
garbage, trash, debris or stacked brush from any residence that exceeds one
cubic yard per collection day regardless of the type of container.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14; Am. Ord. OR-2155-2019, passed 11-25-19)
Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.27 PLACING OF GARBAGE CONTAINERS FOR COLLECTION.
   (A)   The pickup schedule for collection of garbage and trash within the
city shall be twice a week during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. for
residential customers. To ensure collection of garbage and trash, a person
occupying a residence shall place the disposable or permanent containers at the
curb prior to 7:00 a.m. on the scheduled garbage and trash collection day, but
not earlier than 1:00 p.m. the day before the scheduled collection day or
alternative day if the scheduled collection day falls on a holiday; provided
that if the occupant of the residence is a disabled person, he or she may make
arrangements to place the garbage and trash at the front doorstep or next to
the garage door so as to be visible from the street. Garbage and trash
containers shall be removed from the curb after collection by no later than 12
p.m. the day following collection.
   (B)   If the house, building, or premises from which the garbage or trash is
to be collected and removed is adjacent to an alley, the owner, occupant,
tenant or lessee of the premises shall be required to keep the garbage or trash
container at the entrance from the alley in order that it may be easily
accessible to the person collecting and removing the garbage or trash. In the
event it is not practicable to collect and remove the garbage or trash from the
alley, the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of the premises shall place the
disposable or permanent container at such point as the proper agent of the city
shall find and designate to be the most accessible for collecting and removing.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14; Am. Ord. OR-2155-2019, passed 11-25-19)
§ 50.28 PLACEMENT OF RECYCLING CONTAINERS.
   (A)   To ensure collection of recyclable materials, a person occupying a
residence shall place the recycling container at the curb prior to 7:00 a.m. on
the scheduled recycling collection day. but not earlier than 1:00 p.m. the day
before the scheduled recycling collection day or alternative day if the
scheduled collection day falls on a holiday; provided that if the occupant of
the residence is a disabled person, he or she may place the recycling container
at the front doorstep or next to the garage door so as to be visible from the
street. Recycling containers shall be removed from the curb after collection by
no later than 12:00 p.m. the day following collection.
   (B)   Recycling containers shall be placed at the curb, street or alley such
that no fixed object, for example a parked car. mailbox, tree or other
obstruction, is within two feet of the recycling container on any side and the
container shall be no more than two feet behind the edge or curb, street or
alley; and shall not be placed in a road or alleyway in such a way as to
present a hazard to normal traffic.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.29 RETURN OF RECYCLING CONTAINERS.
   A person who wishes to return the recycling container must contact the city
to request a return of the recycling container. Arrangements will be made by
the customer, the city and the city’s solid waste contractor to have the
recycling container removed from the premises at the earliest convenient time.
A request to withdraw from the city’s recycling program may be made at any
time.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.30 RECYCLING CONTAINERS ASSIGNED TO PROPERTY.
   Recycling containers delivered to a property shall remain with the property
and may not be relocated.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.31 RECYCLING CONTAINER REPLACEMENT.
   Replacement of broken, faulty, or otherwise unserviceable recycling
containers shall be the responsibility of the city’s solid waste contractor.
Customers seeking a replacement recycling container must contact the city’s
solid waste contractor at the customer service number provided by the city’s
solid waste contractor to request the replacement. Excessive replacements may
result in a fee or charge for further replacements, in accordance with the
solid waste contractor’s replacement policy.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.32 MOBILE HOME PARK COLLECTION.
   (A)   The owner of a mobile home park may request curbside service for each
individual housing unit for the collection of garbage, trash, yard waste and
recyclables only. The garbage, trash, yard waste and recyclable materials must
be generated by the tenant of the housing unit.
   (B)   To qualify for individual unit collection, a mobile home park must
meet the following conditions.
      (1)   Maintain adequate pavement to withstand the regular use of trash
and recycling collection vehicles.
      (2)   Maintain commercial waste collection service for its office.
   (C)   The rates for individual unit collection service shall be the
residential rate multiplied by the number of available units in the park. The
mobile home park shall pay the fees with the master meter water bill.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
COMMERCIAL GARBAGE AND RECYCLING COLLECTION
§ 50.45 COMMERCIAL COLLECTION; MINIMUM COLLECTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   The collection and removal of garbage and trash from houses, buildings
and premises used for industrial, commercial, or institutional purposes shall
be made as often as necessary in order to maintain such premises free of
accumulation of garbage and trash. The local regulatory authority shall be
authorized to require industrial, commercial arid institutional customers to
increase collection frequency or size of commercial garbage containers to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. It will be the
responsibility of the owner, occupant or tenant of any business to ensure the
enclosure is accessible by the collection vehicle on the date of service.
Ensuring access may require the gates to be opened and/or unlocked. Failure by
the owner, occupant or tenant to ensure access may result in a fee charged to
the account in accordance with city ordinance. When an enclosure for the
property exists it must be utilized by the occupant for the minimum container
size and frequency necessary to prevent unsightly or unsanitary conditions from
developing.
   (B)   All food service establishments shall maintain garbage and trash
collection at a frequency of not less than two times each week, unless granted
written approval from the local regulatory authority. Such approval may be
revoked, denied or suspended at any time by the local regulatory authority
when, in their opinion, the premises have become unsanitary due to collections
less frequently than two times each week. Food establishments may not request
commercial hand-load service.
   (C)   Garbage and trash collection from multifamily residential complexes
which provide or use mechanical packers or compactors may be made one time each
week upon written approval of the local regulatory authority. Such approval may
be revoked, denied or suspended at any time by the local regulatory authority
when, in their opinion, the premises have become unsanitary due to collections
less frequently than two times each week. Multifamily residential complexes may
not request commercial hand-load service.
   (D)   All small commercial businesses utilizing commercial hand-load garbage
service on the effective date of this chapter shall have a minimum of 90 days
from the effective date of this chapter to begin commercial container service.
Commercial garbage container service may begin prior to the construction of an
appropriate enclosure for the container. However, an enclosure for the
container(s) shall be constructed no more than 12 months from the effective
date of this chapter.
   (E)   Small commercial businesses utilizing commercial hand-load service at
the effective date of this chapter may submit a written request for small
commercial garbage service as provided in this chapter in accordance with this
subchapter. If the request or appeal is denied, the business must begin
commercial container service within 90 days from the date of denial and or loss
of appeal, and must provide an enclosure for the container(s) within 12 months
from the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.46 ENCLOSURES REQUIRED.
   All commercial businesses utilizing commercial container service shall be
required to construct enclosures in compliance with the requirements of this
chapter and the city’s zoning ordinance. A permit for the construction of the
enclosure may be required.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.47 PROOF OF SERVICE.
   All new businesses may be required to provide proof of a valid collection
agreement/contract with the city’s solid waste contractor prior to the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy. Building permit applicants for new construction,
remodeling and demolition projects may be required to provide proof of a valid
collection agreement/contract with the city’s solid waste contractor prior to
the issuance of a building permit.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.48 SMALL COMMERCIAL GARBAGE SERVICE.
   (A)   A customer may request small commercial garbage service only if the
customer will generate no more than three 30-gallon containers percollection
day, or the commercial property is an existing commercial hand-load customer
and there is no room on the property to place a commercial container. The
request must be made in writing to city staff for review and approval or
denial. Requests for small commercial garbage service which are denied may be
appealed to the City Manager. Individual business customers who share a private
drive, parking area, or may otherwise be considered a member of a business/
commercial/industrial park shall be required to utilize commercial garbage
containers and must provide an enclosure in accordance with the zoning
ordinance. All multi-unit commercial buildings shall utilize commercial garbage
containers and must provide an enclosure in accordance with the zoning
ordinance. It is permissible for business/commercial/industrial park members or
tenants of multi-unit commercial buildings to utilize the same commercial
garbage container, provided the size and number of the container(s) and
frequency of sendee are adequate to prevent unsightly or unsanitary conditions
and the enclosure(s) is(are) constructed in compliance with the zoning
ordinance. In the event of multi-phase business/commercial/industrial park
developments, it is possible additional commercial garbage containers will be
needed as development occurs, based on the amount of material generated from
each of the customers. Prior to the issuance of the first certificate of
occupancy any required enclosures shall be constructed and an enclosure built
in compliance with the city’s zoning ordinance.
   (B)   Approved commercial hand-load customers shall be provided garbage
containers for the placement of garbage from the business at the curb for
collection by the city’s solid waste contractor. Containers shall be stored in
a manner that is not visible to the general public. Once delivered, the
containers shall be the only authorized means of placing small commercial
garbage for collection on the appropriate service day.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.49 SMALL COMMERCIAL RECYCLING.
   (A)   Operators of small commercial businesses, as defined by this chapter,
may request recycling services utilizing the 95 gallon recycling carts for
residential recycling collection. Requests for small commercial recycling
service will be evaluated by the city’s solid waste contractor for approval.
Once approved it is the customers responsibility to place the recycling
container at the location determined by the city’s contract hauler on the
appropriate day for collection. Placement and removal of the recycling
container shall be in compliance with the residential recycling requirements of
this chapter. The fee for small commercial recycling shall be in an amount
approved by ordinance of the City Council.
   (B)   A person operating a business shall place the recycling container at
the collection location designated by the city official or representative from
the city’s solid waste contractor in charge of garbage disposal. Commercial
garbage or recycling carts shall be placed at the curb for service no earlier
than 1:00 p.m. the day prior to collection and shall be removed the curb no
later than 1:00 p.m. the day after service.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.50 COMMERCIAL CONSTRUCTION WASTE.
   Operators of commercial construction sites, except for those construction
sites where single-family homes are being constructed, renovated, or remodeled,
and those engaged in legitimate, source-separated recycling of construction
waste materials, shall have any and all commercial construction waste resulting
from construction activities removed and disposed of at their own expense and
in accordance with all applicable regulations. Any container used for the
removal and disposal of commercial construction waste must be provided by a
vendor holding a current franchise agreement with the city for the removal of
commercial construction waste. Service frequency of any commercial construction
waste containers shall be at a frequency necessary to prevent unsightly or
unsanitary conditions.
(Ord. OR-2155-2019, passed 11-25-19)
LICENSE TO REGULATE RECYCLABLES
§ 50.60 LICENSE FOR COMMERCIAL RECYCLABLE COLLECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in the business of
collection of recyclable materials from a commercial, industrial or
institutional property within the city in exchange for a fee without first
having obtained a recyclable license from the city or having a contract or
franchise with the city.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution for a violation of
division (A) of this section that the person is collecting recyclable materials
from the Independent School District.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.61 APPLICATION.
   (A)   To obtain a recyclable collection license a person must submit an
application on a form provided by the Director of Finance. The applicant must
be the person who will own, control or operate the proposed collection service.
   (B)   The applicant for a license shall furnish the city the following
information which shall be subscribed and sworn to before a notary public.
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant.
      (2)   Trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do
business.
      (3)   The number of vehicles the applicant desires to operate.
      (4)   The class, size and design of each vehicle, including the type of
body and accessory equipment designed for automated collection.
      (5)   Whether or not the applicant ora ny person with whom the applicant
has been associated or employed has a claim or judgment against such person for
damages resulting from the negligent operation of a motor vehicle.
      (6)   The nature and character of the service the applicant proposes to
render.
      (7)   The rates or fees the applicant proposes to pay or charge for the
services rendered.
      (8)   Num er and location of commercial customers.
      (9)   Proof of liability insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000
per occurrence issued by a company authorized to do business in the state.
      (10)   Such other information as the local regulatory authority may
require.
   (C)   The Director may make or cause to be made an investigation of the
application for a license.
   (D)   The applicant shall submit with the application for the license a
nonrefundable application fee which shall be in an amount approved by the City
Council.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.62 TERM.
   Each license granted by the local regulatory authority for a recyclable
collection service may be issued for a period of one year. Each license may be
renewable annually and may be renewed by making application as provided herein.
A license shall be nontransferable.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.63 LICENSE AND APPLICATION FEES.
   (A)   Each licensee shall pay to the city an annual fee for the recyclable
collection license in an amount equal to 8% of the base fee charged by the
hauler for materials collected from any source facility within the city.
      (1)   The licensee shall remit the fee to the city quarterly at the
office of the Director of Finance, on or before the thirtieth day of April,
July, October and January, based upon the revenues collected during the
previous calendar quarter.
      (2)   The quarterly payment shall be accompanied by an income statement
certified by the licensee acknowledging compliance with this section.
      (3)   The licensee shall make available to the city notifications of new
commercial customers as well as cancellations of existing commercial customers,
as they occur.
   (B)   Each license applicant shall submit the appropriate non-refundable
application fee with the license application according to the following
application fee schedule:
 
General Recycling (including one vehicle)      $150
   Additional vehicles                      $50
Contracted Transporter (per contracted vendor) §150
Construction and Demolition (per license)      $500
 
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.64 LICENSE AGREEMENT.
   The local regulatory authority may impose all reasonable rules and
regulations and require the licensee to execute a license agreement as a
condition precedent to issuing a license under this subchapter and as a
condition subsequent to continuing validity. The rules and regulations may
include but are not necessarily restricted to the type of vehicle to be used in
collection, number of pickups per week required, method and route for
transporting the collection, appropriate disposal locations and identification
of trucks. They may also include minimum insurance requirements and execution
of an indemnification. All such rules and regulations shall be subject to the
approval of the City Council and shall be contained in the license agreement
issued by the city to any licensee.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.65 REQUIREMENT TO FURNISH INFORMATION.
   The books and records of the licensee shall be open at reasonable times for
inspection by the local regulatory authority.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.66 MARKING OF VEHICLES AND CONTAINERS.
   The licensee shall identify all vehicles and containers with its name in
letters at least two inches tall.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.67 COMINGLED RECYCLABLE PRODUCTS.
   (A)   A licensee collecting recyclables within the city shall not collect
recyclable materials which have been mixed or comingled with garbage, trash or
refuse. Any residential or commercial customer using recycling containers shall
also provide a container(s) at their residence or commercial facility for the
collection of garbage, trash and refuse. At no time shall recyclables mixed
with garbage, trash and refuse be allowed to be collected as recyclables. All
recycling facilities receiving materials generated within city limits shall
meet the minimum criteria set forth in the Texas Health and Safety Code as well
as the Texas Administrative Code.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation collecting industrial, commercial, or
institutional recyclables that are combined with other recyclable material must
have an approved license from the local regulatory authority to do so. The
materials collected from the generating facility-must be the same as the
materials that can be processed by the destination facility, and at no times
are garbage, trash or refuse to be combined with the recyclable materials.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.68 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   The Director of Finance may issue a recyclable collection license to the
applicant if the Director determines that the applicant has complied with all
requirements for issuance of the license.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.69 REVOCATION, DENIAL OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   The Director of Finance may revoke, deny or suspend a recyclable collection
license if the Director determines that the licensee has done any of the
following.
   (A)   Given false or inaccurate information on the application for license
or in a hearing concerning the license.
   (B)   Refused to cooperate in the redress of grievances submitted to the
licensee in writing by the city or licensee’s customers.
   (C)   Maintained unsightly or unsanitary collection receptacles after being
notified of same in writing by a city or a customer.
   (D)   Continued to provide, after written notice from the city, irregular
service which is detrimental to the public health.
   (E)   Failed to pay a fee required by this subchapter at the time it was
due.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.70 APPEAL.
   If the Director denies, revokes, or suspends a license, the city shall give
notice by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the applicant or licensee. The applicant or licensee may appeal the decision to
deny, revoke, or suspend by filing a written notice with the City Manager,
within five days after receipt of notice. A person who is denied a license or
whose license is revoked may appeal the decision to deny a license to the City
Manager and the decision to revoke a license to the Municipal Court. The City
Manager, or designee, shall mail or cause to be personally delivered written
notice of the time and place of the hearing to the person appealing. The notice
shall be mailed to the address specified in the notice of appeal form. The City
Manager, or in an appeal from the revocation of a license, the Municipal Court
shall conduct a hearing and shall make a decision on the basis of a
preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The decision of the
Municipal Court shall be final.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 50.85 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   In the event that a customer shall fail to comply with any part of this
chapter, the local regulatory authority may notify such customer by letter
addressed to such customer at the customer’s residential, commercial or post
office address, if personal service may not be had on the customer or the
customer’s address is not known. The notification shall contain in brief terms
the condition or conditions which exist on such customer’s premises which fail
to comply with any part of this article. After issuance and receipt of the
notification, the city may enter upon such premises and may do such work as
necessary, or cause same to be done, to abate the unlawful condition on the
premises in order that the premises may comply with the requirements of this
chapter. A statement of costs incurred by the city to abate such conditions
shall be mailed to the customer and such statement shall be paid within 30 days
of the date of the mailing of the statement of costs.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be fined not more than $2,000 for each offense. Each day
that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. OR-1924-14, passed 11-10-14)
CHAPTER 51: SEWER AND WATER SERVICE
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Extension of water and sewer lines by private developer
   
51.002   Sewer repair and maintenance standards
Industrial Wastewater Regulations
   
51.010   General provisions
   
51.011   General sewer use requirement
   
51.012   Pretreatment of wastewater
   
51.013   Wastewater discharge permit application
   
51.014   Wastewater discharge permit issuance process
   
51.015   Reporting requirements
   
51.016   Compliance monitoring
   
51.017   Confidential information
   
51.018   Publication of users in significant noncompliance
   
51.019   Administrative enforcement remedies
   
51.020   Judicial enforcement remedies
   
51.021   Reserved
   
51.022   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations
   
51.023   Reserved
   
51.024   Miscellaneous provisions
   51.025 - 51.035   Reserved
Rates and Charges
   
51.050   Water and sewer tap fees; authority to establish
   
51.051   Collection of tap fees before connection
   
51.052   Water service rates
   
51.053   Water disconnection and reconnection charge
   
51.054   Sewer service rates
   
51.055   Abnormal wastewater surcharge
   
51.056   Industrial cost recovery
Liquid Waste Haulers
   
51.070   Definitions
   
51.071   Permit required to transport liquid waste
   
51.072   Fee and display of permit
   
51.073   Maintenance of vehicles transporting liquid waste
   
51.074   Inspection of vehicles
   
51.075   Responsibilities of liquid waste transporter
   
51.076   Responsibilities of liquid waste generator
   
51.077   Responsibilities of liquid waste disposers
   
51.078   Unsanitary accumulation of liquid waste
   
51.079   Improper disposal
   
51.080   Rules and regulations
   
51.081   Denial, suspension, revocation of permit
   
51.082   Appeal
   
51.083   Legal responsibility; violations
Impact Fees
   
51.095   Definitions
   
51.096   Applications and permits
   
51.097   Capital improvement plan for water impact fee
   
51.098   Capital improvement plan for sewer impact fee
   
51.099   Land use assumptions
   
51.100   Impact fees assessed
   
51.101   Impact fees collected
   
51.102   Advisory Committee; duties
   
51.103   Failure to pay impact fee
   
51.104   Offsets against impact fees
   
51.105   Agreement for capital improvements
 
   
51.999   Penalty
Cross reference:
   Sewage sludge application, see
Ch. 115
Statutory reference:
   Public Utility Regulatory Act, see Tex. Util. Code, Title 2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 EXTENSION OF WATER AND SEWER LINES BY PRIVATE DEVELOPER.
   (A)   When a developer shall have been required to provide and shall have
provided necessary offsite water and sanitary sewer lines and shall have
provided a statement to the city certifying the cost of construction of the
improvements and such statement is considered acceptable documentation for
construction costs associated with the improvements, and such improvements will
also benefit other property owners requiring use of the improvements, and such
cost is deemed by the city to be fair and just, property owners benefitting
from the improvements and desiring to connect onto the water or sanitary sewer
line shall share in the cost of such improvements by making repayment to the
city on a "pro rata basis" in the amount determined by the City Engineer for
the costs associated with the construction of the improvements.
   (B)   DEVELOPER, as used herein, shall mean any person seeking extension of
water and/or sanitary sewer service for two or more platted lots in an area in
which water and sewer mains have not been extended. An individual user shall
mean any person who is not a developer as defined herein. The City Engineer
shall determine water pro rata charges on the basis of a front footage formula
or on the length of the water line crossing the individual user's property, lot
or tract. As used in this section, front footage shall mean the width of the
property facing on a public street where the water extension is constructed
along and abutting the individual user's property, lot or tract. A per acre
basis pro rata may be used by the City Engineer to determine the amount of pro
rata charge to be made for sanitary sewer service.
   (C)   In the event a developer is required to construct offsite water and/or
sanitary sewer lines, the city is authorized to enter into a pro rata agreement
with the developer to collect pro rata charges as determined hereby from
property owners making future requests of connections onto the offsite water or
sanitary sewer lines, and to refund to the developer such collected pro rata
charges for any period of time up to ten years from the acceptance of the line
and up to 100% of the cost of the offsite improvements constructed by the
developer.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of a developer to procure, provide and pay for
the necessary easements and rights-of-way along the lines for water and sewer
extensions approved by the city, except to the extent public easements and
rights-of-way are already available for such extensions. All easements, rights-
of-way, lines, mains, valves, hydrants, laterals and appurtenances shall upon
installation and construction become the property of the city, free and clear
of all liens, claims and encumbrances. The pro rata charges set out herein
shall not include payment for any taps, valves, fittings or other appurtenances
necessary to be installed by a property owner connecting to the line after its
completion.
('78 Code, § 17-2.1) (Ord. 949, passed 2-8-93)
§ 51.002 SEWER REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the
meaning herein ascribed to them.
      BUILDING. That structure which contains a drainage system and uses the
public sewer for disposal of sewer.
      BUILDING SEWER. That part of the horizontal piping of a drainage system
which extends from the end of the building and which receives the discharge at
the building and conveys it to the public sewer.
      PUBLIC SEWER. Common sanitary sewer system owned and operated by city.
      USER. That person or business using the sanitary sewer system owned and
operated by the city.
   (B)   There is hereby adopted, established and promulgated those certain
standards and regulations relating to the maintenance and repair of sanitary
sewer systems as are itemized on Exhibit "A" which is located in the office of
the City Secretary and made a part of this section and referred to as "Sewer
Maintenance and Repair Standards" and which may be amended by the city from
time to time after a review and proper determination of additional standards.
('78 Code, § 17-3) (Ord. 376, passed 1-22-79)
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER REGULATIONS
§ 51.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Purpose and policy.
      (1)   These regulations set forth uniform requirements for users of the
Publicly Owned Treatment Works for the city and enables the city to comply with
all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United
States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code
of Federal Regulations Part 403). The objectives of these regulations are:
         (a)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Publicly
Owned Treatment Works that will interfere with its operation;
         (b)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Publicly
Owned Treatment Works that will pass through the Publicly Owned Treatment
Works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be
incompatible with the Publicly Owned Treatment Works;
         (c)   To protect both Publicly Owned Treatment Works personnel who may
be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the
general public;
         (d)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and
sludge from the Publicly Owned Treatment Works;
         (e)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost
of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the Publicly Owned Treatment
Works; and
         (f)   To enable the control authority to comply with its National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and
disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the
Publicly Owned Treatment Works is subject.
      (2)   These regulations shall apply to all users of the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works. This subchapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater
discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement
activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user
reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution
of costs resulting from the program established herein.
   (B)   Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Pretreatment
Coordinator shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of these
regulations. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Pretreatment
Coordinator may be delegated by the City Manager to other city personnel.
   (C)   Abbreviations. The following abbreviations, when used in this
subchapter, shall have the designated meanings:
      BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand
      BMP - Best Management Practice
      CFR - Code of Federal Regulations
      CIU - Categorical Industrial User
      COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand
      CRWS - Central Regional Wastewater System
      EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
      gpd - gallons per day
      IU - Industrial User
      MCRWS - Mountain Creek Regional Wastewater System
      mg/l - milligrams per liter
      NAICS - North American Industrial Classification System
      NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
      NSCIU - Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User
      POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works
      RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
      SIC - Standard Industrial Classification
      SIU - Significant Industrial User
      TCEQ - Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
      TPDES - Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
      TRA - Trinity River Authority
      TSS - Total Suspended Solids
      TTO - Total Toxic Organics
      U.S.C. - United States Code
   (D)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   ACT or "THE ACT." The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
      (2)   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Regional Administrator of EPA or the
director of a state agency delegated to act on EPA's behalf with an approved
pretreatment program (e.g., Director of TCEQ).
      (3)   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER.
         (a)   If the user is a corporation:
            1.   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of
the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person
who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation;
or
            2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having
the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit
requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or
delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
         (b)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general
partner or proprietor, respectively.
         (c)   If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility:
a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their
designee.
         (d)   The individuals described in subsections (a) through (c), above,
may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in
writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for
the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or
having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and
the written authorization is submitted to the City of Mansfield Pretreatment
Coordinator.
      (4)   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). The schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in § 51.011(A) and (B) [40 CFR
403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
      (5)   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures for five days at 20º centigrade, usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g., mg/l).
      (6)   CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER (CIU). An industrial user subject to a
Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard.
      (7)   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in
accordance with §§ 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to
a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter
N, Parts 405-471.
      (8)   CITY. The City of Mansfield or the City Council of Mansfield,
Contracting Party of the Trinity River Authority's Central Regional Wastewater
System and the Trinity River Authority’s Mountain Creek Regional Wastewater
System.
      (9)   CITY MANAGER. The person designated by the City Council of
Mansfield who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this
subchapter or a duly authorized representative.
      (10)   COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A sample that is collected over time, formed
either by continuous sampling or by mixing discrete samples. The sample may be
composited either as a TIME COMPOSITE SAMPLE: composed of discrete sample
aliquots collected at constant time intervals providing a sample irrespective
of stream flow; or as a FLOW PROPORTIONAL COMPOSITE SAMPLE: collected either as
a constant sample volume at time intervals proportional to flow, or collected
by increasing the volume of each aliquot as the flow increases while
maintaining a constant time interval between the aliquots.
      (11)   CONTROL AUTHORITY. Trinity River Authority of Texas as holder of
the TPDES permit.
      (12)   DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT. The maximum allowable discharge limit of a
pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in
units of mass, the daily discharge is the  total mass discharged over the
course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a
concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the
pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
      (13)   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR EPA. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division
Director, or other duly authorized official of said agency.
      (14)   EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if
the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with § 307 of the Act.
      (15)   EXTRAJURISDICTIONAL USER. A user the city has determined requires
a permit to discharge, other than a local government, which is located outside
the jurisdiction of the city, and which discharges or plans to discharge to the
POTW.
      (16)   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample that is taken from a wastestream without
regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed
15 minutes.
      (17)   INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants
into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c), or
(d) of the Act.
      (18)   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT. The maximum
concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined
from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent
of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
      (19)   INTERFERENCE. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its
treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
therefore, is a cause of a violation of the control authority's NPDES or TPDES
permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with
any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued
thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: § 405 of the Act;
the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); 40 CFR 503 sludge regulations;
any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared
pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act and 30 TAC 312; the
Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection,
Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
      (20)   MAY. The meaning of “may” in these regulations is as a permissive,
or optional, command.
      (21)   MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.
      (22)   MONTHLY AVERAGE. The sum of all “daily discharges” measured during
a calendar month divided by the number of “daily discharges” measured during
that month.
      (23)   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake,
or other body of surface or ground water.
      (24)   NPDES (NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM). National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program of the Environmental
Protection Agency, and/or the permit program of the state agency delegated to
act on EPA's behalf with an approved pretreatment program (e.g., TPDES or Texas
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System).
      (25)   NEW SOURCE.
         (a)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which
there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307
(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
            1.   The building, structure, facility, or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
            2.   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
            3.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
         (b)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of (a)2. or 3. of this subsection above but otherwise alters,
replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
         (c)   Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
            1.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite
construction program:
               a.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
               b.   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
            2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment, which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation
under this paragraph.
      (26)   NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling, which does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.
      (27)   NON-SIGNIFICANT CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER (NSCIU).
         (a)   The city may determine that an IU subject to categorical
pretreatment standards is a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User (NSCIU)
rather than a Significant Industrial User (SIU) on a finding of any of the
three criteria below:
            1.   The IU never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of
total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and
boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the Pretreatment
Standard);
            2.   The IU is required by a categorical pretreatment standard to
not discharge categorical wastewater. An IU that meets this criteria shall
continue to be prohibited from discharging categorical wastewater; or
            3.   The IU is subject to numeric categorical pretreatment standard
(s) and does not discharge categorical wastewater.
         (b)   The following conditions must be met for an IU classified as a
NSCIU:
            1.   The IU, prior to city’s finding, has consistently complied
with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements;
            2.   The IU annually submits the certification statement required
in § 51.013(F)(3) [see 40 CFR 403.12(q)], together with any additional
information necessary to support the certification statement; and
            3.   The IU never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater.
      (28)   NORMAL WASTEWATER. Wastewater which the average concentration of
suspended solids and five-day BOD does not exceed 250 mg/l each.
      (29)   NORTH AMERICAN INDUSTRY CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM (NAICS). A system
used by the Federal Government for collecting and organizing industry-related
statistics. The NAICS codes are updated every five years to stay current with
industry developments.
      (30)   PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of
any requirement of the Control Authority's NPDES or TPDES permit, including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
      (31)   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives,
agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local
governmental entities.
      (32)   pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution,
expressed in standard units.
      (33)   POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial
wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
      (34)   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants
into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means,
except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an
applicable pretreatment standard.
      (35)   PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR. The person designated by the city who is
charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this subchapter, or a duly
authorized representative.
      (36)   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a
pretreatment standard.
      (37)   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS. Prohibited discharge
standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
      (38)   PROCESS WASTEWATER. Water that comes into direct contact with or
results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product,
finished product, by- product, waste product, or wastewater, and/or as defined
in a National Pretreatment Standard.
      (39)   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in § 51.011.
      (40)   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW. A "treatment works," as
defined by § 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned by the city and/
or the Control Authority. This definition includes any devices or systems used
in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey
wastewater to a treatment plant.
      (41)   SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
      (42)   SEWAGE. Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, etc.).
      (43)   SHALL. The meaning of “shall” in these regulations is as an
imperative or mandatory command.
      (44)   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.
         (a)   A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
         (b)   A user that:
            1.   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling, and boiler
blow down wastewater);
            2.   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment
plant; or
            3.   Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
         (c)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection
(b) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or
for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any
time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user,
and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR § 403.8(f)(6), determine that such
user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
      (45)   SLUG LOAD OR SLUG. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration,
which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in §
51.011(A).
      (46)   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE. A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United
States Office of Management and Budget.
      (47)   STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.
      (48)   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.
      (49)   TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS. The sum of the masses or concentration of
the toxic organic compounds listed in 40 CFR 122 Appendix D, Table II,
excluding pesticides, found in IUs’ discharge at a concentration greater than
0.01 mg/l. Only those parameters reasonably suspected to be present, at the
discretion of the Pretreatment Coordinator, if any, shall be analyzed for with
noncategorical industries. With categorical industries, TTOs will be sampled
for as stipulated in the particular category or those parameters reasonably
suspected to be present, at the discretion of the Pretreatment Coordinator,
where not stipulated.
      (50)   TPDES. Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program
of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality with federal regulatory
authority to act on an approved pretreatment program.
      (51)   USER. A source of indirect discharge.
      (52)   WASTEWATER. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage
from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
      (53)   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT OR TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of the
POTW, which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial
waste.
(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17; Am. Ord. OR-
2404-25, passed 1-13-25)
§ 51.011 GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Prohibited discharge standards.
      (1)   General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW
whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any
other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. Storm
water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to sewers that are
specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the
Pretreatment Coordinator. No liquid, semi-liquid, ready mixed concrete, mortar,
asphalt material, or chemical waste shall be deposited in any area that will
drain to the storm sewer or natural outlet
      (2)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
         (a)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of
less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
         (b)   Wastewater having corrosive properties capable of causing damage
or injury to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the POTW, as per the
specific prohibition in the applicable local limits in §
51.011(D). In no case shall wastewater containing a pH less than 5.5 (TRA-CRWS)
and less than 6.0 (TRA-MCRWS) be discharged unless the works is specifically
designated to accommodate such discharges;
         (c)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, blockage, or
damage to the POTW;
         (d)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference
with the POTW;
         (e)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65°C), or
which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C);
         (f)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
         (g)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors,
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
         (h)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Pretreatment Coordinator and the control authority in
accordance with §
51.012(D);
         (i)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry
into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
         (j)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's
effluent, thereby violating the applicable NPDES or TPDES permit;
         (k)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except
in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
         (l)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, and unpolluted wastewater, unless
specifically authorized by the Pretreatment Coordinator and the control
authority;
         (m)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
         (n)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
Pretreatment Coordinator and/or the control authority in a wastewater discharge
permit;
         (o)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant's effluent to fail toxicity test;
         (p)   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
         (q)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than that specified in the applicable local limits in §
51.011(D);
         (r)   A discharge of water, normal wastewater, or industrial waste
that which in quantity of flow exceeds, for a duration of longer than 15
minutes, more than four times the average 24-hour flow during normal operations
of the industry;
         (s)   Insecticides and herbicides in concentrations that are not
amenable to treatment;
         (t)   Polychlorinated biphenyls;
         (u)   Garbage that is not properly shredded to such an extent that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing
in wastewater mains, with no particle having greater than one-half inch cross-
sectional dimension;
         (v)   Wastewater or industrial waste generated or produced outside the
city, unless approval in writing from the Pretreatment Coordinator and the
control authority has been given to the person discharging the waste; or
         (w)   Without the approval of the Pretreatment Coordinator and the
control authority, a substance or pollutant other than industrial waste, normal
wastewater, septic tank waste or chemical toilet waste that is of a toxic or
hazardous nature, regardless of whether or not it is amenable to treatment,
including but not limited to bulk or packaged chemical products.
      (3)   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section
shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged
to the POTW.
   (B)   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The categorical
pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471
are hereby incorporated.
      (1)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
Pretreatment Coordinator may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
      (2)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Pretreatment
Coordinator shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream
formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
      (3)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA when developing
the categorical pretreatment standard.
      (4)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard
in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
   (C)   Reserved.
   (D)   Local limits.
      (1)   The following pollutant limits are established to protect against
pass through and interference. No person shall discharge or cause or permit to
be discharged, wastewater containing in excess of the following instantaneous
maximum allowable discharge limits into the following system(s):
                TRA CRWS Instantaneous Maximum  TRA MCRWS Instantaneous Maximum
Toxic Pollutant Allowable Discharge Limits (mg/ Allowable Discharge Limits (mg/
                l)                              l)
                TRA CRWS Instantaneous Maximum  TRA MCRWS Instantaneous Maximum
Toxic Pollutant Allowable Discharge Limits (mg/ Allowable Discharge Limits (mg/
                l)                              l)
Arsenic         0.2                             N/A
Cadmium         0.1                             0.8
Chlorides       N/A                             7,605
Chromium        2.1                             N/A
Copper          1.8                             1.78
Cyanide         0.4                             N/A
Lead            1.2                             1.0
Mercury         0.06                            N/A
Molybdenum      0.5                             N/A
Nickel          3.3                             N/A
Selenium        0.2                             N/A
Silver          0.8                             N/A
Zinc            6.1                             2.8
Oil and Grease  200                             200
pH              5.5 to 11.0 Standard Units      6.0 to 9.0 Standard Units
 
      (2)   The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is
discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for
"total" metal unless indicated otherwise. The Pretreatment Coordinator may
impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based
limitations above.
   (E)   Right of revision. The city reserves the right to establish, by
ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or
requirements on discharges to the POTW.
   (F)   Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in
any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The
Pretreatment Coordinator may impose mass limitations on users who are using
dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other
cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
   (G)   Plant loading.
      (1)   No industry shall discharge wastewater containing a BOD or TSS
loading that causes the city's pro-rata share of the total BOD or TSS loading
to the POTW System to exceed the city's pro-rata share of the total flow to the
POTW System. (Example: If the city contributes 25% of the total wastewater flow
to the system, the city's cumulative BOD or TSS loading to the system, as
measured at the city's points of entry to the system, shall not exceed 25% of
the total BOD or TSS loading to the system.
      (2)   Any industry with a wastewater strength that will cause the city's
cumulative wastewater loading, at the city's points of entry, to exceed the
city's pro-rata share of the total wastewater loading based upon flow, shall be
required to install pretreatment facilities to reduce its wastewater strength
to an acceptable level.
(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-1742-09, passed 5-11-09; Am. Ord. OR-
2047-17, passed 4-24-17; Am. Ord. OR-2404-25, passed 1-13-25)
§ 51.012 PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as
necessary to comply with this subchapter and shall achieve compliance with all
categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out
in §
51.011(A) within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, the Control
Authority, or the Pretreatment Coordinator, whichever is more stringent. Any
facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained
at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the Pretreatment Coordinator for review, and
shall be acceptable to the Pretreatment Coordinator before such facilities are
constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way
relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as
necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of
this subchapter.
   (B)   Additional pretreatment measures.
      (1)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Pretreatment Coordinator may require
users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that
certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial
wastestreams, and require such other conditions as may be necessary to protect
the POTW and determine the user’s compliance with the requirements of this
subchapter.
      (2)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may require any person discharging
into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense,
a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A
wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
      (3)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Pretreatment Coordinator, they are necessary for the proper
handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand;
except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All
interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the Pretreatment
Coordinator and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired
regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense.
      (4)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter,
or other control device as deemed necessary by the Pretreatment Coordinator.
   (C)   Accidental discharge/slug control plans. At least once every two
years, the Pretreatment Coordinator shall evaluate whether each permitted SIU
needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The Pretreatment Coordinator
may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a
plan. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum,
the following:
      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;
      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the Pretreatment Coordinator
and Control Authority of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by §
51.015(F); and
      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
   (D)   Hauled wastewater.
      (1)   Septage waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations
designated by the Pretreatment Coordinator and Control Authority, and at such
times as are established by the Pretreatment Coordinator and Control Authority.
Such waste shall not violate § 51.011 or any other requirements established by
the city. The Pretreatment Coordinator and/or Control Authority may require
septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits.
      (2)   Septage waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every
load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste
hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of
waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the
type of generator, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any
wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
   (E)   Best Management Practices. The Pretreatment Coordinator may develop
BMPs and require users to implement such BMPs if necessary to protect the POTW.
Such BMPs would be supplemental and not used as a replacement for compliance
with local limits listed in §
51.011(D) and prohibited discharge standards in §
51.011(A) and (B).
(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17; Am. Ord. OR-
2404-25, passed 1-13-25)
§ 51.013 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Wastewater analysis. When requested by the Pretreatment Coordinator, a
user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its
wastewater by the deadline stipulated. The Pretreatment Coordinator is
authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require
users to update this information.
   (B)   Wastewater discharge permit requirement.
      (1)   No SIU or NSCIU user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW
without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the Pretreatment
Coordinator, except that an SIU or an NSCIU that has filed a timely application
pursuant to §
51.013(C) may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein.
      (2)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may require other users to obtain
wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of these
regulations. To determine the status of a user in relation to these
regulations, users may be required to perform sampling as specified by the
Pretreatment Coordinator.
      (3)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in §§
51.018 through
51.020. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of
its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or
requirements with any other requirements of federal, state and local law.
   (C)   Wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections. Any user
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater
into the POTW prior to the effective date of this subchapter and who wishes to
continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 90, apply to the
Pretreatment Coordinator for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with §
51.013(E), and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue
after 90 days of the effective date of this subchapter except in accordance
with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the Pretreatment Coordinator. If,
in the Pretreatment Coordinator's judgment, the passing of this subchapter does
not significantly affect the IUs current permit, then the existing permit will
continue through to the expiration date.
   (D)   Wastewater discharge permitting: new connections. Any user required to
obtain a wastewater discharge permit that proposes to begin or recommence
discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or
recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge
permit, in accordance with §
51.013(E), must be filed prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin
or recommence.
   (E)   Wastewater discharge permit application contents. All users required
to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The
Pretreatment Coordinator may require all users to submit as part of an
application the following information:
      (1)   All information required by §
51.015(A)(2);
      (2)   Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the
premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at
the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged
to the POTW;
      (3)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or
actual hours of operation;
      (4)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and
rate of production;
      (5)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per
day);
      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details
to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and
elevation, and all points of discharge;
      (7)   Time and duration of discharges; and
      (8)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
Pretreatment Coordinator to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit
application. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and
will be returned to the user for revision.
   (F)   Application signatories and certification.
      (1)   All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must
be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following
certification statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and civil
penalties for knowing violations."
      (2)   If the designation of an authorized representative of the user is
no longer accurate because a different individual or position has
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new written
authorization satisfying the requirements of this subsection must be submitted
to the Pretreatment Coordinator prior to or together with any reports to be
signed by an authorized representative of the user.
      (3)   A facility determined to be a NSCIC by the Pretreatment Coordinator
must annually submit the signed certification statement signed by an authorized
representative. This certification must accompany an alternative report
required by the Pretreatment Coordinator:
“Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing
compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR § ____, I
certify, to the best of my knowledge and belief, that during the period from
__________, ________ to ________, ________ [months, days, year]:
         (a)   The facility described as                          [facility
name] met the definition of a Non Significant Categorical Industrial; [Note:
See 40 CFR § 403.3(v)(2)]
         (b)   The facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards
and requirements during this reporting period; and the facility never
discharged more than 100 gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given
day during this reporting period.
         (c)   This compliance certification is based on the following
information.
 
                                       ."
   (G)   Wastewater discharge permit decisions. The Pretreatment Coordinator
will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge
permit application; the Pretreatment Coordinator will determine whether or not
to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The Pretreatment Coordinator may deny
any application for a wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17; Am. Ord. OR-
2404-25, passed 1-13-25)
§ 51.014 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS.
   (A)   Wastewater discharge permit duration. A wastewater discharge permit
shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the
effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a
period less than five years, at the discretion of the Pretreatment Coordinator.
Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it
will expire.
   (B)   Wastewater discharge permit contents. A wastewater discharge permit
shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the
Pretreatment Coordinator to prevent pass through or interference, protect the
quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect
worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and
protect against damage to the POTW.
      (1)   Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
         (a)   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration,
which in no event shall exceed five years;
         (b)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with §
51.014(E), and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy
of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
         (c)   Effluent limits including BMPs based on applicable pretreatment
standards;
         (d)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-
keeping requirements including those for BMPs. These requirements shall include
an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling
frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law;
         (e)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law; and
         (f)   Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the
Pretreatment Coordinator to be necessary.
      (2)   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited
to, the following conditions:
         (a)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
         (b)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works;
         (c)   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions including management practices
necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine
discharges;
         (d)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
         (e)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
         (f)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment;
         (g)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit;
         (h)   Requirements to implement BMPs, if determined by the
Pretreatment Coordinator to be necessary; and
         (i)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Pretreatment
Coordinator to ensure compliance with this subchapter, and state and federal
laws, rules and regulations.
   (C)   Reserved.
   (D)   Wastewater discharge permit modification. The Pretreatment Coordinator
may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not
limited to, the following reasons:
      (1)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      (2)   To address significant alterations or additions to the users
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance;
      (3)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
      (4)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to POTW, POTW personnel, or the receiving waters;
      (5)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
      (6)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
      (7)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR § 403.13;
      (8)   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit; or
      (9)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a
new owner or operator.
   (E)   Wastewater discharge permit transfer.
      (1)   Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or
operator only if the permittee gives a minimum of 60 days advance notice to the
Pretreatment Coordinator and the Pretreatment Coordinator approves the
wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the Pretreatment
Coordinator must include a written certification by the new owner or operator
which:
         (a)   States that the new owner and/or operator have no immediate
intent to change the facility's operations and processes;
         (b)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur;
and
         (c)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
      (2)   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the
wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
   (F)   Wastewater discharge permit revocation.
      (1)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may revoke a wastewater discharge
permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
         (a)   Failure to notify the Pretreatment Coordinator of significant
changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
         (b)   Failure to provide prior notification to the Pretreatment
Coordinator of changed conditions pursuant to §
51.015(E);
         (c)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant
facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;
         (d)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
         (e)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
         (f)   Failure to allow the Pretreatment Coordinator timely access to
the facility premises and records;
         (g)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
         (h)   Failure to pay fines;
         (i)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
         (j)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
         (k)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
         (l)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
         (m)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this subchapter.
      (2)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of
operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits
issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater
discharge permit to that user.
   (G)   Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. A user with an expiring
wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit re-
issuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with §
51.013(E), a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing
wastewater discharge permit.
   (H)   Regulation of wastewater received from other jurisdictions.
      (1)   A municipality which contributes wastewater to the POTW, shall
enter into an interlocal agreement with the city prior to contributing such
wastewater.
      (2)   Prior to the city entering into an interlocal agreement as provided
in section (1) above, the city may request the following information from the
contributing municipality:
         (a)   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged
to the POTW by the contributing municipality;
         (b)   An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
         (c)   Such other information as the city may deem necessary.
   (I)   Extraterritorial jurisdictional users.
      (1)   An extraterritorial jurisdictional user shall apply for a permit in
accordance with this section at least 90 days prior to discharging to the POTW.
      (2)   This section does not apply to extraterritorial jurisdictional
users in jurisdictions which have an agreement with the city pursuant to §
51.014(H).
      (3)   A wastewater discharge permit issued to an extraterritorial
jurisdictional user shall be in the form of a contract, and must include, at a
minimum, the components found in 40 CFR § 403.8(f)(1)(iii) and shall require
the approval of the City Council. An extraterritorial jurisdictional user shall
agree to all the terms of these regulations and the terms of its wastewater
discharging contract in accordance with the procedures set forth in §§
51.013(E)-(F),
51.014(B), and
51.014(H) prior to discharging into the POTW.
(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17; Am. Ord. OR-
2404-25, passed 1-13-25)
§ 51.015 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Baseline monitoring reports.
      (1)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the
POTW shall submit to the Pretreatment Coordinator a report which contains the
information listed in section (2), below. At least 90 days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that will become
categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall submit to the Pretreatment Coordinator a report which contains
the information listed in section (2), below. A new source shall report the
method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
      (2)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
         (a)   Identifying information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.
         (b)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility.
         (c)   Description of operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications and/or
NAICS of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should
include a schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the
POTW from the regulated processes.
         (d)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured or estimated
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the
combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(E).
         (e)   Measurement of pollutants.
            1.   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process (and any new categorically regulated process for existing
sources).
            2.   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature
and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the
Pretreatment Coordinator, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be
representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with
procedures set out in §
51.015(J). Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution
prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the
Pretreatment Coordinator or the applicable standards to determine compliance
with the standard.
            3.   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set
out in §
51.015(K).
            4.   If discharge flow conditions are representative of daily
operations, the user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection.
The Pretreatment Coordinator may require additional representative sampling to
be conducted.
            5.   Representative samples should be taken immediately downstream
from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the
regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed
with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the
flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream
formula in 40 CFR § 304.6(e) to evaluate compliance with Pretreatment
Standards.
            6.   The Pretreatment Coordinator may allow the submission of a
baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data
provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial
pretreatment measures.
            7.   The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of
sampling and method of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycle and expected pollutant
discharges to the POTW.
         (f)   Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized
representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
         (g)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will
be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which
the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion
date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established
for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to
this section must meet the requirements set out in §
51.015 (B).
         (h)   Signature and certification. All baseline-monitoring reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with §
51.013(F).
   (B)   Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall
apply to the compliance schedule required by §
51.015 (A)(2)(g).
      (1)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
      (2)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
      (3)   The user shall submit a progress report to the Pretreatment
Coordinator no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the
final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate,
the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and
      (4)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Pretreatment Coordinator.
   (C)   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject
to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
Pretreatment Coordinator a report containing the information described in §
51.015(A)(2)(d) through (f). For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR
403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-
term production rate. In cases where the categorical pretreatment standard
requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user
shall submit documentation as required by the applicable categorical
pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.
For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in
terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure
of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during
the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with §
51.013(F).
   (D)   Periodic compliance reports.
      (1)   All SIUs shall, at a frequency determined by the Pretreatment
Coordinator but in no case less than twice per year, submit a report indicating
the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited
by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum
daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the categorical
pretreatment standard or the Pretreatment Coordinator requires compliance with
a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation
as required by the Pretreatment Coordinator or the applicable categorical
pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.
All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with
§
51.013(F).
      (2)   All NSCIUs shall submit a report annually in the month specified by
the Pretreatment Coordinator. The report shall be completed according to the
city’s current reporting requirements, including the submittal of the
applicable certification statement found in §
51.013(F)(3).
      (3)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
      (4)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the Pretreatment
Coordinator, using the procedures prescribed in §
51.015(J) and (K), the results of this monitoring shall be included in the
report.
   (E)   Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the Pretreatment
Coordinator of any planned significant changes to the users operations or
system, which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater a
minimum of 30 days prior to the change.
      (1)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under §
51.013(E).
      (2)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may issue a wastewater discharge
permit under §
51.013(G) or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under §
51.014(E) in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
      (3)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but
are not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater, and the discharge of any
previously unreported pollutants that are determined to be of concern.
   (F)   Reports of potential problems.
      (1)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-
customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems
for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the city and the
control authority of the incident. This notification shall include the location
of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and
corrective actions taken by the user.
      (2)   Within five days following such discharge, unless waived by the
Director, the user shall submit a detailed written report describing the cause
(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability, which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or
property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties,
or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this subchapter.
      (3)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board
or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
discharge described in subsection (1), above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
      (4)   SIUs are required to notify the Pretreatment Coordinator
immediately of any changes at their facilities affecting the potential for a
slug discharge.
   (G)   Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a
wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the
Pretreatment Coordinator as the Pretreatment Coordinator may require.
   (H)   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling
performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the
Pretreatment Coordinator within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of
the repeat analysis to the Pretreatment Coordinator within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the
Pretreatment Coordinator monitors at the user's facility at least once a month,
or if the Pretreatment Coordinator samples between the user's initial sampling
and when the user receives the results of this sampling.
   (I)   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.
      (1)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall
notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state
hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40
CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as
set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of
discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100
kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also
shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known
and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that
calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the
wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All
notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge
commences. Any notification under this section need be submitted only once for
each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions
must be submitted under § 51.015(E). The notification requirement in this
section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of §
51.015(A), (C) and (D).
      (2)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (1),
above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 CFR § 261.30(d) and § 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15
kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity
of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR § 261.30(d) and § 261.33(e),
requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user
discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
      (3)   In the case of any new regulations under § 3001 of RCRA identifying
additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the Pretreatment
Coordinator, the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division
Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such
substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations.
      (4)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the user
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
      (5)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance
not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this subchapter, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
   (J)   Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling
techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended, unless otherwise specified in an
applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not
contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or
where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques
are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be
performed by using validated analytical methods or any applicable sampling and
analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the Pretreatment
Coordinator, the EPA, TCEQ, or other parties approved by EPA.
   (K)   Sample collection.
      (1)   Except as indicated in subsections (2) and (3), below, the user
must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the
Pretreatment Coordinator/or Control Authority may authorize the use of time
proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user
demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent
being discharged. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation)
specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab
samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the
analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may
be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil
and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples
for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in
approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the Pretreatment Coordinator,
as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be used to show compliance with
instantaneous discharge limits.
      (2)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
      (3)   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90 day
compliance reports required in §
51.015(A) and (C) [40 CFR § 403.12(b) and (d)], a minimum of four grab samples
must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and
volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data
does not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are
available, the Pretreatment Coordinator may authorize a lower minimum. For the
reports required by §
51.015(D) [40 CFR §§ 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)], the IU is required to collect
the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with
applicable Pretreatment Standards and Requirements.
   (L)   Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the
date postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a
mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt
of the report shall govern.
   (M)   Record keeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this
subchapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all
records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required
by this subchapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant
to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements, and documentation associated with BMPs established in these
regulations. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the date's analyses
were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or
methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain
available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user
or the Pretreatment Coordinator, or where the Pretreatment Coordinator and/or
Control Authority have specifically notified the user of a longer retention
period.
(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17; Am. Ord. OR-
2404-25, passed 1-13-25)
§ 51.016 COMPLIANCE MONITORING.
   (A)   Right of entry: inspection and sampling. The Pretreatment Coordinator
and/or the Control Authority, TCEQ, or USEPA or their designated representative
shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the
user is complying with all requirements of this subchapter and any wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow inspecting or
sampling person ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of
any additional duties.
      (1)   Where a user has security measures in force, which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the city, Control Authority, TCEQ or USEPA will be
permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.
      (2)   The Pretreatment Coordinator and/or Control Authority shall have
the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the users
operations. All sampling and analysis performed by the Pretreatment Coordinator
and/or Control Authority to monitor compliance shall be at the expense of the
IU.
      (3)   The Pretreatment Coordinator and/or Control Authority may require
the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling
and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure
wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated, at a minimum, annually to
ensure their accuracy.
      (4)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
user at the written or verbal request of the Pretreatment Coordinator and/or
Control Authority and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access
shall be borne by the user.
      (5)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the inspecting or sampling person
access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this subchapter.
      (6)   In accordance with 40 CFR Part 403, the city shall inspect and
monitor each permitted SIU a minimum of once per year. If the city elects to
perform compliance monitoring for the SIU then the city will monitor the
industry a minimum of semiannually.
      (7)   The city shall inspect each NSCIU a minimum of once per year. If
the Pretreatment Coordinator elects to perform compliance monitoring for the
NSCIU then the city will monitor the industry a minimum of one time each permit
cycle.
   (B)   Search warrants. If the Pretreatment Coordinator and/or Control
Authority has been refused or denied access to a building, structure, or
property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this subchapter, or that there is a
need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program of the Pretreatment Coordinator designed to verify compliance with this
subchapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the Pretreatment
Coordinator and/or Control Authority may seek issuance of a search warrant or
an administrative search warrant from an appropriate court or judicial officer.
(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17; Am. Ord. OR-
2404-25, passed 1-13-25)
§ 51.017 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring
programs, and from inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to
the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city and/or Control Authority,
that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or
methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable
state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the
information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a
report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall only be
made available for inspection by the public pursuant to the Texas Public
Information Act, but shall be made available immediately upon request to
governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES or TPDES program or
pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other
"effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR § 2.302 will not be recognized as
confidential information and will be available to the public without
restriction.
(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17; Am. Ord. OR-
2404-25, passed 1-13-25)
§ 51.018 PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
   The Pretreatment Coordinator shall publish annually, in a newspaper of
general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the
jurisdictions served by the POTW, a list of the users, which at any time during
the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance
shall be applicable to all SIUs (or other IUs that violate subsections (C),
(D), or (H) of this section) and shall mean:
   (A)   CHRONIC VIOLATIONS OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGE LIMITS, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken during a six-month
period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant
parameter by any amount;
   (B)   TECHNICAL REVIEW CRITERIA (TRC) VIOLATIONS, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter
during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum
limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD,
TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
   (C)   Any other discharge violation that the Pretreatment Coordinator
determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference, or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW
personnel or the general public;
   (D)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Pretreatment
Coordinator or Control Authority's exercise of its emergency authority to halt
or prevent such a discharge;
   (E)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement
order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final
compliance;
   (F)   Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports,
and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   (G)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   (H)   Any other violation(s), which may include a violation do BMPs, which
the Pretreatment Coordinator determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program.
(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17; Am. Ord. OR-
2404-25, passed 1-13-25)
§ 51.019 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (A)   Notification of violation. When the Pretreatment Coordinator finds
that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
subchapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Pretreatment Coordinator may
serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within the time frame
specified in the notice, which is usually, but not always, an explanation of
the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention
thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user
to the Pretreatment Coordinator. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the
user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the
notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the
Pretreatment Coordinator to take any action, including emergency actions or any
other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
   (B)   Reserved.
   (C)   Show cause hearing. The Pretreatment Coordinator may order a user
which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this subchapter,
a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the Pretreatment
Coordinator and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the
hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a
request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered
or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the
hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the
user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user.
   (D)   Compliance orders. When the Pretreatment Coordinator finds that a user
has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this subchapter, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Pretreatment Coordinator may issue an
order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come
into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into
compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless
adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are
installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other
requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring
and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants
discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for
compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a
compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any
continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   (E)   Cease and desist orders.
      (1)   When the Pretreatment Coordinator finds that a user has violated,
or continues to violate, any provision of this subchapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the
Pretreatment Coordinator may issue an order to the user directing it to cease
and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
         (a)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
         (b)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
      (2)   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   (F)   Reserved.
   (G)   Emergency suspensions.
      (1)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may immediately suspend a user's
discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably appears
to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. The Pretreatment Coordinator may also immediately suspend a
user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to
interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an
endangerment to the environment.
         (a)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension the Pretreatment
Coordinator may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW,
its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The Pretreatment
Coordinator may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Pretreatment Coordinator that the
period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in §
51.019(H) are initiated against the user.
         (b)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Pretreatment Coordinator prior
to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under §
51.019(C) or (H).
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
   (H)   Termination of discharge.
      (1)   In addition to the provisions in §
51.014(F) of this subchapter, any user who violates the following conditions is
subject to discharge termination:
         (a)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
         (b)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
         (c)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
         (d)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the
purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
         (e)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in §
51.011.
      (2)   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under §
51.019(C) why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option
by the Pretreatment Coordinator shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user.
   (I)   Recovery of costs incurred by the city. Any user violating any of the
provisions of this subchapter, the regulations, or rules of the control
authority, orders issued by the Pretreatment Coordinator, or orders of any
court of competent jurisdiction, or who discharges or causes a discharge
producing a deposit, obstruction, deterioration in effluent quality, or causes
damage to or impairs the POTW(s) shall be liable for any expense, loss, or
damage caused by such violation or discharge. The Pretreatment Coordinator may
order the user to clean up, repair, replace, and pay for any expenses, loss, or
damages caused by the act of commission or omission by the user and bill the
user for the costs incurred by the city for any cleaning, repair, or
replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. Refusal to pay the
assessed cost shall constitute a violation of this subchapter enforceable under
the provisions of this chapter, including the penalty provisions. In addition,
after notice to the user and failure of the user to pay or to perform as
required by the Pretreatment Coordinator, the Pretreatment Coordinator may file
suit in the appropriate court with jurisdiction in the amount of cost paid or
incurred by the city and collect the amount as an itemized sworn account. The
Pretreatment Coordinator may file such cost as a lien against the property.
   (J)   Any violation of the prohibitions or limits of this subchapter,
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder is hereby declared a
public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the
Pretreatment Coordinator. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be
subject to all city ordinances governing nuisances, including reimbursing the
city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance.
The city may file such cost as a lien against the property.
(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17; Am. Ord. OR-
2404-25, passed 1-13-25)
§ 51.020 JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (A)   Injunctive relief. When the Pretreatment Coordinator finds that a user
has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this subchapter, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Pretreatment Coordinator may petition
the appropriate court through the city’s attorney, or designated
representative, for the issuance of a temporary restraining order and temporary
or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the
specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other
requirement imposed by this subchapter on activities of the user. The
Pretreatment Coordinator may also seek such other action as is appropriate for
legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct
environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
   (B)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this subchapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for
a maximum civil penalty of $1,000 per violation, per day. In the case of a
monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for
each day during the period of the violation.
      (2)   The city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and
other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city.
      (3)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective
actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor
as justice requires.
      (4)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
   (C)   Criminal prosecution.
      (1)   A user who violates any provision of this subchapter, a wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable
by a fine of not more than $2,000 per violation, per day.
      (2)   A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into
the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to the same penalties
described in §
51.020(C)(1). This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action
for personal injury or property damage available under state law.
      (3)   A user who makes any false statements, representations, or
certifications in any application, subchapter, wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or renders inaccurate
any monitoring device or method required under this subchapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the same penalties described in §
51.020(C)(1).
      (4)   Criminal responsibility. A culpable mental state is not required to
prove an offense under this subchapter.
         (a)   A person is criminally responsible for a violation of this
subchapter if:
            1.   The person commits or assists in the commission of a
violation, or causes or permits another person to commit a violation; or
            2.   The person owns or manages the property or facilities
determined to be the cause of the illegal discharge under §§
51.011(A), (B), or (D);
51.012(D) or
51.013(B).
         (b)   If conduct constituting an offense is performed by an “agent”
acting on behalf of a corporation, partnership, or association and within the
scope of his or her office or employment, the corporation, association, or
partnership is criminally responsible for the offense. An “agent” means a
director, officer, employee, or other person authorized to act on behalf of a
corporation, association, or partnership.
   (D)   Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this subchapter
are not exclusive. The Pretreatment Coordinator may take any, all, or any
combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of
pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city
enforcement response plan. However, the Pretreatment Coordinator may take other
action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the
Pretreatment Coordinator is empowered to take more than one enforcement action
against any noncompliant user.
   (E)   Applicability of more stringent regulations.
      (1)   If national pretreatment standards, categorical or otherwise, more
stringent than the discharge limits prescribed in this article are promulgated
by the United States Environmental Protection Agency for certain industries,
the more stringent national pretreatment standards will apply to the affected
IU. A violation of the more stringent national pretreatment standards will also
be considered a violation of this subchapter.
      (2)   Applicability of more stringent discharge limits. An IU within the
city who discharges industrial waste ultimately received and treated by another
governmental entity pursuant to a wholesale wastewater contract or a reciprocal
agreement with the city is subject to the following additional rules:
         (a)   If the governmental entity has more stringent discharge limits
than those prescribed by this subchapter, or by a discharge permit issued
hereunder, because the United States Environmental Protection Agency requires
the more stringent discharge limits as part of the governmental entity's
wastewater pretreatment program, the more stringent discharge limits shall
prevail.
         (b)   The Pretreatment Coordinator is authorized to issue a discharge
permit to an IU affected by subsection (a) above, to insure notice of and
compliance with the more stringent discharge limits. If the IU already has a
discharge permit, the Pretreatment Coordinator may amend the permit to apply
and enforce the more stringent discharge limits. An IU shall submit to the
Pretreatment Coordinator an expected compliance date and an installation
schedule if the more stringent discharge limits necessitate technological or
mechanical adjustments to discharge facilities or plant processes.
         (c)   If the Pretreatment Coordinator chooses not to issue or amend a
permit under subsection (b) above, the Pretreatment Coordinator shall notify
the affected IU in writing of the more stringent discharge limits and their
effective date. Regardless of whether or not a permit is issued or amended, an
IU shall be given a reasonable opportunity to comply with the more stringent
discharge limits.
         (d)   The more stringent discharge limits cease to apply upon
termination of the city's wholesale wastewater contract or reciprocal agreement
with the governmental entity, or upon modification or elimination of the limits
by the government entity or the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
The Pretreatment Coordinator shall take the appropriate action to notify the
affected IU of an occurrence under this subsection.
      (3)   Variances in compliance dates. The Pretreatment Coordinator may
grant a variance in compliance dates to an industry when, in the Pretreatment
Coordinator's opinion, such action is necessary to achieve pretreatment or
corrective measures. In no case shall the Pretreatment Coordinator grant a
variance in compliance dates to an industry affected by national categorical
pretreatment standards beyond the compliance dates established by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency.
      (4)   Authority to regulate. The Pretreatment Coordinator may establish
regulations, not in conflict with this subchapter other laws, to control the
disposal and discharge of industrial waste into the wastewater system and to
insure compliance with the city's pretreatment enforcement program with all
applicable pretreatment regulations promulgated by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency. The regulations established shall, where
applicable, be made part of any discharge permit issued to an IU by the
Pretreatment Coordinator.
(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17; Am. Ord. OR-
2404-25, passed 1-13-25)
§ 51.021 RESERVED.
§ 51.022 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   In an action brought in federal court only: upset provision.
      (1)   For the purposes of this section UPSET, means an exceptional
incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable
control of the user. An UPSET does not include noncompliance to the extent
caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or
improper operation.
      (2)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of subsection (3), below, are met.
      (3)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset
shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or
other relevant evidence that:
         (a)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
         (b)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
         (c)   The user has submitted the following information to the
Pretreatment Coordinator within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset, if
this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided
within five days:
            1.   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
            2.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
            3.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
      (4)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
      (5)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
      (6)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
   (B)   In an action brought in municipal or state court only: act of God
provision.
      (1)   An event that would otherwise be a violation that is caused solely
by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe is not a violation.
      (2)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe shall have
the burden of proof.
      (3)   In the event that subsections (B)(1) and (2) above have been
demonstrated the user shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with pretreatment standards upon reduction,
loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an
alternative method of treatment is provided.
   (C)   Bypass.
      (1)   For the purposes of this section:
         (a)   BYPASS. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any
portion of a user's treatment facility.
         (b)   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property,
damage to the treatment facilities, which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources, which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
      (2)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not
subject to the provision of subsections (C)(3) and (4) of this section.
      (3)   (a)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the Pretreatment Coordinator, at least ten days before
the date of the bypass, if possible.
         (b)   A user shall submit oral notice to the Pretreatment Coordinator
of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards
within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written
submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes
aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the
bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and
times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Pretreatment Coordinator may waive the
written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received
within 24 hours.
      (4)   (a)   Bypass is prohibited, and the Pretreatment Coordinator may
take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
            1.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage;
            2.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
            3.   The user submitted notices as required under subsection (C)(3)
of this section.
         (b)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may approve an anticipated bypass,
after considering its adverse effects, if the Pretreatment Coordinator
determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (C)(4)
(a)1. of this section.
(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17; Am. Ord. OR-
2404-25, passed 1-13-25)
§ 51.023 RESERVED.
§ 51.024 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Pretreatment charges and fees.
      (1)   The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of
setting up and operating the City of Mansfield's Pretreatment Program, which
may include:
         (a)   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the
cost of processing such applications;
         (b)   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures
including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and
reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users;
         (c)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge
procedures and construction;
         (d)   Fees for filing appeals;
         (e)   Recovery of administrative and legal costs associated with
enforcement activity taken by the city to address IUs noncompliance.
         (f)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered
by this subchapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties
chargeable the city;
         (g)   Fees for treating abnormal strength wastes; and
         (h)   Fees incurred from an upset, bypass or unauthorized discharge.
      (2)   Surcharge.
         (a)   The city may surcharge IUs for the treating of abnormal strength
wastes. Water or wastes having: (1) a five day biochemical oxygen demand
greater than 250 parts per million (ppm) by weight; or (2) containing more than
250 parts per million by weight of total suspended solids shall be subject to
the review and approval of the Pretreatment Coordinator. Where the Pretreatment
Coordinator has approved the admission of §
51.024(A)(2)(a)1. and 2. above into the POTW, that discharge may be subject to
a surcharge as determined by the Pretreatment Coordinator. In no case shall a
discharge be accepted that will prevent the POTW from meeting its limits.
         (b)   The surcharge will be assessed according to the following
formula each month using the most current pollutant concentration data and the
current month’s wastewater flow:
Surcharge =    Q , x [a(BOD - x) + b(TSS - y)][8.34]
      1,000,000
Where:
   Q       =   flow in gallons
   8.34       =   weight in pounds of one gallon water
   x       =   normal limits of BOD in domestic wastewater expressed in
milligrams per liter
   y       =   normal limits of TSS in domestic wastewater expressed in
milligrams per liter
   a      =   unit cost of treatment per pound of BOD
   b      =   unit cost of treatment per pound of TSS
   BOD      =   measured amount of BOD, in mg/l
   TSS      =   measured amount of TSS, in mg/l
         (c)   A surcharge is an additional charge by the POTW for the
increased cost of handling discharge of unusual strength and character and
shall not serve as a variance to the requirements of this subchapter. Exercise
of this provision shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user.
(Ord. 1424, passed 4-28-03; Am. Ord. OR-2047-17, passed 4-24-17; Am. Ord. OR-
2404-25, passed 1-13-25)
§§ 51.025 - 51.035 RESERVED.
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 51.050 WATER AND SEWER TAP FEES; AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH.
   In all instances of water tap or connections for water lines and taps for
sewer service, it is deemed and found to be reasonable and just that the rates
charged for same shall be calculated by the City Manager or a representative
designated by him/her. Such charge shall be calculated at the time of such
request or within a reasonable period of time thereafter and shall take into
consideration the prevailing charges for labor and materials necessary to
perform the requested services. Such charge for labor, materials and service
shall, insofar as practicable, be maintained on an appropriate schedule which
shall be prepared by and shall be available from the City Manager. The City
Manager is hereby directed and authorized to prepare the schedule and to revise
the schedule to reflect appropriate increases or decreases no less often than
once each year.
('78 Code, § 17-1) (Ord. 353, passed 4-24-78)
§ 51.051 COLLECTION OF TAP FEES BEFORE CONNECTION.
   The tap charges and rates for which provision is hereby made above shall be
paid to and collected by the city prior to the connection of the utility
service.
('78 Code, § 17-2) (Ord. 305, passed 7-22-75; Ord. 353, passed 4-24-78)
§ 51.052 WATER SERVICE RATES.
   The water service rates to be charged to users of the city’s water system
shall be as established by the City Council from time to time. Said rates are
on file in the City Secretary’s Office.
(‘78 Code, § 17-4) (Ord. 323, passed 2-28-77; Ord. 361, passed 9-19-78; Ord.
426, passed 9-15-80; Ord. 435, passed 1-12-80; Ord. 473, passed 9-15-82; Ord.
568, passed 10-8-84; Ord. 629, passed 9-9-85; Ord. 685, passed 7-28-86; Ord.
791, passed 9-12-88; Ord. 851, passed 9-25-89; Ord. 952, passed 2-8-93; Am.
Ord. 1559, passed 2-13-06; Am. Ord. OR-1735-09, passed 2-9-09; Am. Ord. OR-
1758-09, passed 12-14-09; Am. Ord. OR-1781-10, passed 8-30-10; Am. Ord. OR-
1839-12, passed 9-10-12; Am. Ord. OR-2378-24, passed 9-9-24)
§ 51.053 WATER DISCONNECTION AND RECONNECTION CHARGE.
   The city hereby assess a disconnection charge and a charge to reconnect
water service to any of its customers to whom such service has previously been
disconnected as established in the City’s Master Fee Schedule adopted by the
City Council, amended from time to time. Said Master Fee Schedule is on file in
the City Secretary’s Office.
(‘78 Code, § 17-5) (Ord. 280, passed 7-9-74; Am. Ord. OR-2378-24, passed 9-9-
24)
§ 51.054 SEWER SERVICE RATES.
   The sewer service rates to be charged to users of the city’s sewer system
shall be as established by the City Council from time to time. Said rates are
on file in the City Secretary’s Office.
(‘78 Code, § 17-6 (part)) (Ord. 324, passed 2-28-77; Ord. 362, passed 9-19-78;
Ord. 427, passed 9-15-80; Ord. 474, passed 9-15-82; Ord. 571, passed 10-22-84;
Ord. 630, passed 9-9-85; Ord. 686, passed 7-28-86; Ord. 852, passed 9-25-89;
Ord. 938, passed 8-10-92; Ord. 953, passed 2-8-93; Am. Ord. 1560, passed 2-13-
06; Am. Ord. OR-1734-09, passed 2-9-09; Am. Ord. OR-1759-09, passed 12-14-09;
Am. Ord. OR-1782-10, passed 8-30-10; Am. Ord. OR-1840-12, passed 9-10-12; Am.
Ord. OR-2378-24, passed 9-9-24)
§ 51.055 ABNORMAL WASTEWATER SURCHARGE.
   When discharges of abnormal wastewaters are approved by the approving
authority, the persons generating such waste shall be excised a monthly
surcharge for excess B.O.D. and/or S.S. calculated in accordance with the
following formula.
   SC   =   (Q) (8.34) [a (B.O.D. - 250) + b (SS - 250)]
         where:
   SC   =   surcharge based on excessive concentrations of B.O.D. and/or S.S.
(dollars per month)
   Q   =   flow (million gallons per month)
   a   =   annually adjusted unit cost of treatment, chargeable to B.O.D.
(dollars per pound of B.O.D. introduced to system)
   b   =   annually adjusted unit cost of treatment, chargeable to S.S.
(dollars per pound of S.S. introduced to system)
   The value of B.O.D. and/or S.S. concentrations will be the average of values
determined by testing procedures as defined in §
51.027. The value of a and b will be determined by the approving authority
based on the current adjusted surcharge rate determined by the Trinity River
Authority.
('78 Code, § 17-38) (Ord. 328, passed 6-13-77)
§ 51.056 INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY.
   (A)   In providing a waste treatment system, the city shall have the
authority to collect from such industrial users all or any part of the
construction costs of the waste treatment system reasonably attributed to the
industrial wastes. The apportionment of the costs shall be equitable as among
industrial users, and the costs may be collected by assessment, connection fee,
periodic charges or in other manners or combinations thereof as in the judgment
of the City Manager, or his/her designee, of the city is equitable and will
assure such industrial cost recovery.
   (B)   (1)   An industrial user is any nongovernmental user of the city's
waste treatment system, identified in the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented,
under the following divisions.
      Division A:      Agriculture, forestry and fishing
      Division B:      Mining
      Division D:      Manufacturing
      Division E:      Transportation, communications, electric, gas and
sanitary services
      Division I:      Services
      (2)   Any industrial user may be excluded if it is determined that it
will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary
conveniences.
   (C)   The annual amount to be recovered from each industrial user shall be
predicated on the following formula.
   $A      $B   $C
1   (D x G) + (E x H) + (F x X) 1 ÷ J = Annual payments ($/year)
where:
      A:   Eligible federal grant allocable to flow (Q) in dollars.
      B:   Eligible federal grant allocable to B.O.D., in dollars.
      C:   Eligible federal grant allocable to S. S., in dollars.
      D:   Total design flow (q), in Ccf/day.
      E:   Total design B.O.D., in lbs/day.
      F:   Total design S.S., in lbs/day.
      G:   Industrial users' flow discharge to system, in Ccf.
      H:   Industrial users' B.O.D. discharge to system, in lbs/day.
      I:   Industrial users' S.S. discharge to system, in lbs/day.
      J:   Amortization period equals 30 years.
   (D)   For the purpose of computing the industrial users' annual payment, a
cost recovery period of 30 years is hereby established.
   (E)   The industrial user shall be billed monthly on the basis of his/her
computed annual industrial cost recovery payment divided by 12.
   (F)   Funds collected under industrial costs recovery shall be deposited
into a special fund entitled "Industrial Cost Recovery Fund," which is hereby
established.
   (G)   Pending use, retained amounts shall be invested in the following.
      (1)   Obligations of the U. S. government.
      (2)   Obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by the U. S.
government or any agency thereof.
      (3)   Shall be deposited in accounts fully collateralized by obligations
of the U. S. government or by obligations fully guaranteed as to principal and
interest by the U. S. government or any agency thereof.
   (H)   Industrial users shall be reviewed annually by the city for quantity
and strength of waste, and the industrial cost recovery rate adjusted
accordingly.
   (I)   The city shall maintain records and submit reports and financial
statements to the appropriate authorities.
('78 Code, § 17-38.1) (Ord. 356, passed 6-12-78)
LIQUID WASTE HAULERS
§ 51.070 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED. Accepted as satisfactory under the terms of this subchapter and
given formal and official sanction by the approving authority.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Director, or any other official designated by the
City Manager of any city party to this subchapter, or his/her duly authorized
deputy, agent or representative.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the department designated by the City Manager to
enforce and administer this subchapter.
   DISPOSAL. The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or
placing of any solid or semi-solid grease trap waste, grit trap waste and/or
septage into or on any land or water so that such waste or any constituent
thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into
any waters, including ground waters.
   DISPOSAL SITE. A permitted site or part of a site at which grease trap
waste, grit trap waste or septage is processed, treated and/or intentionally
placed into or on any land and at which the waste will remain after closure.
   DISPOSER. A person which receives, stores, retains, processes or disposes of
liquid waste.
   GENERATOR. A person who causes, creates, generates or otherwise produces
liquid waste.
   GREASE TRAP. A watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept
and prevent the passage of greasy, fatty liquid, semi-liquid and/or solid
wastes generated from commercial operations into the sanitary sewer system to
which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected.
   GREASE TRAP WASTE. Greasy, fatty liquid, semi-liquid and/or solid wastes
removed from commercial operations by a grease trap.
   GRIT TRAP. A watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and
prevent the passage of petroleum based oil, grease wastes and solids into the
sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly
connected.
   GRIT TRAP WASTE. Petroleum based oil, grease wastes and solids from
commercial automotive or heavy machinery repair and/or washing facilities.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any liquid, semi-liquid or solid waste (or combination of
wastes), which because of its quantity, concentration, physical, chemical or
infectious characteristics may meet the following conditions.
      (1)   Have any of the following characteristics: toxic, corrosive, an
irritant, a strong sensitizer, flammable or combustible, explosive or otherwise
capable of causing substantial personal injury or illness.
      (2)   Pose a substantial hazard to human health or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of or otherwise improperly
managed, and is identified or listed as a hazardous waste as defined by the
Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act or the Administrator, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Federal "Solid Waste Disposal Act," as
amended by the "Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976" and as may be
amended in the future.
   LIQUID WASTE. Water-borne solids, liquids and gaseous substances derived
from a grease trap, grit trap, chemical/portable toilet and/or septic tank and
described as grease trap waste, grit trap waste or septage.
   MANAGER. The person conducting, supervising, managing or representing the
activities of a generator, transporter or disposer.
   MANIFEST SYSTEM. A system consisting of a four-part trip ticket used to
document the generation, transportation and disposal of liquid waste.
   OWNER. The person who owns a facility or part of a facility.
   PERMIT. The formal written document issued to a person by the approving
authority authorizing collection of grease trap waste, grit trap waste and
septage.
   PERMITTEE. A person granted a permit under this subchapter.
   POTW. Publicly owned treatment works.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and
ground waters are not normally admitted.
   SEPTAGE. Wastes removed from a portable toilet, chemical toilet or septic
tank.
   SPECIAL WASTES. Solid waste or combination of solid wastes that, because of
its quantity, concentration, physical or chemical characteristics or biological
properties, requires special handling and disposal to protect the human health
or the environment.
   SPILL. The accidental or intentional loss or unauthorized discharge of
grease trap waste, grit trap waste and septage.
   TANK. A device designated to contain an accumulation of grease trap waste,
grit trap waste and septage which is constructed primarily of non-earthen
materials (for example, concrete, steel, plastic) to provide structural support
for the containment.
   TDH. Texas Department of Health.
   TWC. Texas Water Commission.
   TOXIC WASTE. Any liquid, semi-liquid or solid waste material which has the
ability to chemically produce injury, once it reaches a susceptible site in or
on the body.
   TRANSPORTER. A person who operates a vehicle for the purpose of transporting
liquid waste.
   TRIP TICKET. The shipping document originated and signed by the transporter
which contains the information required by the approving authority.
   VEHICLE. A permitted mobile device in which or by which liquid waste may be
transported upon a public street or highway.
('78 Code, § 17-71) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87)
§ 51.071 PERMIT REQUIRED TO TRANSPORT LIQUID WASTE.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if he/she operates or causes to be
operated a vehicle for the purpose of transporting liquid waste without an
applicable permit. A permit shall be issued for transportation of liquid waste
and the approving authority shall designate on the permit the liquid waste
authorized for transportation in the vehicle. A separate vehicle permit number
is issued for each vehicle operated.
   (B)   A person who desires to obtain a permit application must purchase the
permit application from the city.
   (C)   A person who desires to obtain a permit must submit to the approving
authority at the time of application a photocopy of the Manager's drivers
license. The approving authority shall be notified of Manager employment
changes during the permit period and shall be provided a copy of the new
Manager's drivers license.
   (D)   The approving authority shall not issue a permit unless the applicant
submits for inspection by the approving authority the vehicle the applicant
proposes to use to transport liquid waste and such vehicle is found by the
approving authority to be constructed and equipped in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (E)   A permit is not transferable.
   (F)   A permit issued by the city excludes the hauling of materials that are
hazardous in nature.
   (G)   Transporters transporting hazardous wastes must have the applicable
Texas Water Commission and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
registration number and use the appropriate EPA manifest system.
   (H)   Each applicant must specify the disposal site or sites to be used for
the authorized disposal of liquid wastes. The approving authority shall be
immediately notified of additional disposal sites used during the permit
period.
('78 Code, § 17-72) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.072 FEE AND DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The approving authority shall not issue a permit application until the
appropriate established fee is paid. Each permit must be renewed annually.
   (B)   The approving authority shall number permits consecutively, and each
permit holder shall cause to be displayed on each side of each vehicle in a
color contrasting with the background in three-inch letters or larger the
business name, TDH registration number and the following.
   Example: MAN
   The first three letters (MAN) shall represent the city issuing the permit.
The blank space shall contain the permit number. The permit holder shall place
business name, TDH registration number and the vehicle permit number on each
vehicle before the vehicle is operated. The permit holder shall keep the permit
receipt, or a copy, in the vehicle at all times.
('78 Code, § 17-73) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.073 MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES TRANSPORTING LIQUID WASTE.
   (A)   A liquid waste transporter shall do the following.
      (1)   Maintain hoses, tanks, valves, pumps, cylinders, diaphragms, pipes,
connections and other appurtenances on a vehicle in good repair and free from
leaks.
      (2)   Provide a safety plug or cap for each valve of a tank.
      (3)   Cause a vehicle exterior to be clean and the vehicle odor-free at
the beginning of each workday.
      (4)   Maintain current vehicle registration and state inspection.
   (B)   The approving authority may cause to be impounded a vehicle which is
being operated in violation of this subchapter, and he/she may authorize the
holding of the vehicle until the violation is corrected. The approving
authority may also revoke the permit for the improperly operated vehicle. If a
vehicle is impounded or if a permit is revoked an appeal may be filed by the
transporter pursuant to §
51.082.
(’78 Code, § 17-74) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87; Am. Ord. OR-1760-09, passed 12-
14-09)
§ 51.074 INSPECTION OF VEHICLES.
   A liquid waste transporter's vehicle shall be inspected by the approving
authority prior to the issuance of a vehicle permit with qualifications as
follows.
   (A)   Use a vehicle with a single tank as an integral portion of vehicle to
transport liquid wastes portable tanks or other containers temporarily
installed in vehicles are prohibited.
   (B)   Piping, valves and connectors shall be permanently attached to tank
and/or vehicle.
   (C)   Tank to be liquid-tight.
   (D)   Tank to be constructed so that every interior and exterior portion can
be easily cleaned.
   (E)   Piping, valves and connections shall be accessible and easy to clean.
   (F)   Inlet or opening of tank to be constructed so that collected waste
will not spill during filling, transfer or during transport.
   (G)   Outlet connections to be constructed so that no liquid waste will
leak, run or spill out from the vehicle.
   (H)   Outlets to be of a design and type suitable for the liquid waste
handled and capable of controlling flow or discharge without spillage or undue
spray on or flooding of immediate surroundings while in use.
   (I)   Pumps, valves, cylinders, diaphragms and other appurtenances to be of
a design and type suitable for the type of waste handled, capable of operation
without spillage, spray or leakage, and capable of being easily disassembled
for cleaning.
('78 Code, § 17-75) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87)
§ 51.075 RESPONSIBILITIES OF LIQUID WASTE TRANSPORTER.
   (A)   Before accepting a load of liquid waste for transportation, a liquid
waste transporter shall determine the nature of the material to be transported
and that his/her equipment is sufficient to properly handle the job without
spillage, leaks or release of toxic or harmful gases, fumes, liquids or other
substances. Upon delivery of the waste to the disposer, the transporter shall
inform the disposer of the nature of the waste.
   (B)   A transporter with a city liquid waste transporter permit shall not
transport materials that are hazardous as defined in §
51.070 in vehicles permitted by the city for transporting liquid waste.
   (C)   A transporter holding a city permit must use a disposal site permitted
and approved by the city or the state or the federal government.
   (D)   Manifest requirements:
      (1)   Manifest books shall be purchased at the City of Mansfield Utility
Field Operations Department.
      (2)   Each pump-out of a grease trap or interceptor must be accompanied
by a manifest to be used for record keeping purposes.
      (3)   Persons who generate, collect and transport grease waste shall
maintain a record of each individual collection and deposit. Such records shall
be in the form of a manifest. The manifest shall include:
         (a)   Name, address, telephone, and commission registration number of
transporter;
         (b)   Name, signature, address, and phone number of the person who
generated the waste and the date collected;
         (c)   Type and amount(s) of waste collected or transported;
         (d)   Name and signature(s) of responsible person(s) collecting,
transporting, and depositing the waste;
         (e)   Date and place where the waste was deposited;
         (f)   Identification (permit or site registration number, location,
and operator) of the facility where the waste was deposited;
         (g)   Name and signature of facility on-site representative
acknowledging receipt of the waste and the amount of waste received;
         (h)   The volume of the grease waste received; and
         (i)   A consecutive numerical tracking number to assist transporters,
waste generators, and regulating authorities in tracking the volume of grease
transported.
      (4)   Manifests shall be divided into five parts and records shall be
maintained as follows:
         (a)   One part of the manifest (green copy) shall have the generator
and transporter information completed and is given to the generator at the time
of waste pickup.
         (b)   The remaining four parts of the manifest shall have all required
information completely filled out and signed by the appropriate party before
distribution of the manifest.
         (c)   One part of the manifest (yellow copy) shall go to the receiving
facility/disposal site.
         (d)   One part of the manifest (pink copy) shall go to the
transporter, who shall retain a copy of all manifests showing the collection
and disposition of waste.
         (e)   One copy of the manifest (gold copy) shall be returned by the
transporter to the person who generated the wastes within 15 days after the
waste is received at the disposal or processing facility.
         (f)   One part of the manifest (white copy) shall go to the City of
Mansfield Utility Field Operation Department.
      (5)   Copies of manifests returned to the waste generator shall be
retained for five years and be readily available for review by the POTW.
   (E)   Alternative treatment.
      (1)   A person commits an offense if the person introduces, or causes,
permits, or suffers the introduction of any surfactant, solvent, or emulsifier
into a grease trap. Surfactants, solvents, and emulsifiers are materials which
allow grease to pass from the trap into the collection system, and include but
are not limited to enzymes, soap, diesel, kerosene, terpene, and solvents.
      (2)   The use of surfactants or soaps which are incidental to normal
kitchen hygiene operations is an affirmative defense to enforcement of this
section.
(’78 Code, § 17-76) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87; Am. Ord. OR-1760-09, passed 12-
14-09)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.076 RESPONSIBILITIES OF LIQUID WASTE GENERATOR.
   (A)   A generator of liquid waste shall have all liquid waste material
picked up from his/her premises by a liquid waste transporter who holds a valid
permit from the city, and the liquid waste shall be transported to an approved
site for disposal. This shall include residential sewage.
   (B)   A generator of liquid wastes shall not have hazardous wastes or liquid
waste in combination with hazardous waste removed from his/her premises by a
liquid waste hauler operating under a city permit.
   (C)   A generator shall sign the trip ticket from the transporter when a
load is picked up by the transporter and shall keep a copy of all trip tickets
for a period of five years. The approving authority may inspect these records
during normal business hours.
   (D)   A generator shall do the following.
      (1)   Install or provide a collection device of size and type specified
by approving authority.
      (2)   Maintain the collection device in continuous, proper operation.
      (3)   Supervise proper cleaning of the collection device.
      (4)   Report spills and accidents involving the collection device to
approving authority within 24-hours.
      (5)   Clean up all spills and accidents immediately and have material
disposed of by permitted transporter by proper means.
      (6)   Commit an offense if he/she allows accumulation of liquid waste on
his/her premises so that rainfall could carry the material to storm sewers or
adjacent property or create a noxious odor or health hazard.
      (7)   Each grease trap pumped shall be fully evacuated unless the trap
volume is greater than the tank capacity on the vacuum truck in which case the
transporter shall arrange for additional transportation capacity so that the
trap is fully evacuated within a 24-hour period, in accordance with 30 Texas
Administrative Code § 312.143.
   (E)   Cleaning schedules.
      (1)   Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be cleaned as often as
necessary to ensure that sediment and floating materials do not accumulate to
impair the efficiency of the grease trap/interceptor; to ensure the discharge
is in compliance with local discharge limits; and to ensure no visible grease
is observed in discharge.
      (2)   Grease traps and grease interceptors subject to these standards
shall be completely evacuated a minimum of every 180 days, or more frequently
when:
         (a)   Twenty-five percent or more of the wetted height of the grease
trap or grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the
invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or
greases; or
         (b)   The discharge exceeds BOD, COD, TSS, O&G, pH, or other pollutant
levels established by the POTW; or
         (c)   If there is a history of non-compliance.
      (3)   In any event, a grease trap and grease interceptor shall be fully
evacuated, cleaned and inspected at least once every 180 days.
(’78 Code, § 17-79) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87; Am. Ord. OR-1760-09, passed 12-
14-09)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.077 RESPONSIBILITIES OF LIQUID WASTE DISPOSERS.
   (A)   A liquid waste disposer commits an offense if he/she allows
accumulation of liquid waste on his/her premises so that rainfall could carry
the material to storm sewers or adjacent property or create a noxious odor or
health hazard.
   (B)   A liquid waste disposer shall do the following.
      (1)   Obtain and maintain compliance with all licenses and/or permits
required by local, state or federal law.
      (2)   Accept waste only from a permitted transporter.
      (3)   Maintain trip ticket copies for a period of two years.
      (4)   Accept only those classes of wastes authorized by license or
permit.
      (5)   Make available all records required to be kept for inspection by
the approving authority during normal business hours.
('78 Code, § 17-80) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.078 UNSANITARY ACCUMULATION OF LIQUID WASTE.
   A person commits an offense if he/she allows liquid waste that emits noxious
or offensive odors or is unsanitary or injurious to public health to accumulate
upon property under his/her control.
('78 Code, § 17-77) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.079 IMPROPER DISPOSAL.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if he/she unloads or offers for sale or
exchanges liquid waste, except at a place permitted by the city, the state or
the federal government.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if he/she deposits or discharges liquid
waste onto a street or into a storm or sanitary sewer or an area that drains
into the storm sewer system.
   (C)   A person commits an offense if he/she fails to have a grease, sand/
grit trap cleaned a minimum of once every six months, or more frequently as
determined by the City of Mansfield Utility Field Operations Department.
(’78 Code, § 17-78) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87; Am. Ord. OR-1760-09, passed 12-
14-09)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.080 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The approving authority may promulgate rules and regulations as may be
necessary to carry out the provisions of this subchapter and protect the public
from health and safety hazards. The approving authority may undertake such
immediate actions as may be necessary to protect the public from health and
safety hazards. The approving authority may amend any permit issued hereunder
to ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
('78 Code, § 17-81) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.081 DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The approving authority may deny a permit if it is determined that any
applicant is not qualified under §§
51.071 through
51.076 and may suspend or revoke a permit if it is determined that a permittee
meets any of the following conditions.
      (1)   Is not qualified under §§
51.071 through
51.076 of this subchapter.
      (2)   Has violated a provision of this subchapter.
      (3)   Has failed to pay a required fee.
      (4)   Has failed to comply with maintenance or inspection requirements.
      (5)   Has failed to deliver trip tickets to the approving authority.
   (B)   After suspension under this section, a permittee may file a request
for reinstatement of the permit. When the approving authority determines that
the permittee is again qualified, all violations have been corrected,
precautions have been taken to prevent future violations and all required fees
have been paid, he/she shall reinstate the permit.
   (C)   The approving authority may revoke for a period of one year or less
all permits held by a liquid waste transporter if the transporter or an
employee of the transporter violates any of the provisions of this subchapter,
any rule or regulation promulgated by the approving authority, or applicable
provisions of this code or state law.
   (D)   A permittee whose permit is suspended or revoked shall not collect,
transport or dispose of any waste materials within the jurisdiction of the
approving authority.
('78 Code, § 17-82) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.082 APPEAL.
   If the approving authority denies the issuance of a permit or revokes a
permit, he/she shall send the applicant, or permit holder, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, written notice of his/her action and the right to an
appeal. The applicant, or permit holder, may appeal the decision of the
approving authority in accordance with the code of appeal in the city.
('78 Code, § 17-83) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87)
§ 51.083 LEGAL RESPONSIBILITIES; VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   In addition to prohibiting certain conduct by natural persons, it is
the intent of this subchapter to hold a corporation or association legally
responsible for prohibited conduct performed by an agent acting in behalf of a
corporation or association and within the scope of his/her office of
employment.
   (B)   Any person or establishment found to be in violation of any provisions
of this subchapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned by the city for reason of appropriate cleanup and proper
disposal of the waste materials. Additionally, an administrative fee equal to
one-half of assessed cleanup costs shall be levied by the city against the
guilty person.
(’78 Code, § 17-84 (a) and (c)) (Ord. 763, passed 12-28-87; Am. Ord. OR-1760-
09, passed 12-14-09)
IMPACT FEES
§ 51.095 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADVISORY COMMITTEE. The City Planning and Zoning Commission.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT. Any water supply, treatment and distribution facility;
or wastewater collection and treatment facilities having a life expectancy of
three or more years and which are owned and operated by or on behalf of the
city.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN. The plans adopted by this subchapter that
identify water and sewer capital improvements or facility expansions for which
impact fees are assessed.
   EQUIVALENT SERVICE UNIT (ESU). A unit that consumes the amount of water or
discharges the amount of wastewater that a standard residential unit would
(1.00 ESU per connection).
   IMPACT FEE. The charge or assessment imposed by this subchapter against new
development in order to generate revenue for funding or recouping the costs of
capital improvements or facility expansions necessitated by and attributable to
the new development.
   LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS. The description of the service area and projections of
changes in land uses, densities, intensities and population in the service area
over a ten-year a period.
   NEW DEVELOPMENT. The subdivision of land; the construction, reconstruction,
redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of
any structure; or any use or extension of the use of land; any of which
increases the number of service units.
   OFFSET.  The amount of the reduction of a captial recovery fee designed to
fairly reflect the value of system-related facilities, pursuant to rules herein
established or administrative guidelines, provided and funded by a developer
pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations or requirements.
   SERVICE AREA. The area within the corporate boundaries or extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city to be served by the capital improvements or facilities
expansions specified in the capital improvements plan, such area being
specified by this subchapter by a map attached to and included within the land
use assumptions and capital improvements plan being approved hereby.
   SERVICE UNIT. The standardized measure of consumption, use, generation or
discharge attributable to an individual unit of development.
   SITE-RELATED FACILITY.  Improvement or facility which is for the primary use
or benefit of a new development and/or which is for the primary purpose of safe
and adequate provision of water or wastewater to serve the new development, and
which is not included in the Capital Improvements Plans for Water and Sewer
Impact Fees, and for which the developer or property owner is solely
responsible under subdivision and other applicable regulations.
   SYSTEM-RELATED FACILITY.  A capital improvement or facility expansion which
is designated in the Capital Improvements Plans for Water and Sewer Impact Fees
and which is not a site-related facility. A SYSTEM-RELATED FACILITY  may
include a capital improvement which is located offsite, within or on the
perimeter of the development site.
   TAP PURCHASE.  The filing with the city of a written application for a water
or wastewater tap and the acceptace of applicable fees by the city. The term
TAP PURCHASE shall not be applicable to a meter purchased for and exclusively
dedicated to fire protection.
('78 Code, § 17-85) (Ord. 869, passed 6-13-90; Am. Ord. 1587, passed 8-29-06)
§ 51.096 APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS.
   No application for new development shall be approved within the city without
assessment of an impact fee pursuant to this subchapter, and no building permit
shall be issued unless the applicant has paid the impact fee imposed by and
calculated under this subchapter.
('78 Code, § 17-86) (Ord. 869, passed 6-13-90)
§ 51.097 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN FOR WATER IMPACT FEE.
   The Capital Improvement Plan in the Water and Wastewater Impact Fee Report,
dated May 2019, is adopted and incorporated herein by reference for all
purposes.
(‘78 Code, § 17-87) (Ord. 869, passed 6-13-90; Ord. 1078, passed 6-12-95; Am.
Ord. 1213, passed 7-13-98; Am. Ord. 1365, passed 8-27-01; Am. Ord. 1587, passed
8-29-06; Am. Ord. OR-1811-11, passed 8-8-11; Am. Ord. OR-2142-19, passed 8-12-
19)
§ 51.098 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN FOR SEWER IMPACT FEE.
   The Capital Improvement Plan in the Water and Wastewater Impact Fee Report,
dated May 2019, is adopted and incorporated herein by reference for all
purposes.
(‘78 Code, § 17-88) (Ord. 869, passed 6-13-90; Ord. 1078, passed 6-12-95; Am.
Ord. 1213, passed 7-13-98; Am. Ord. 1365, passed 8-27-01; Am. Ord. 1587, passed
8-29-06; Am. Ord. OR-1811-11, passed 8-8-11; Am. Ord. OR-2142-19, passed 8-12-
19)
§ 51.099 LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS.
   The Land Use Assumptions in the Water and Wastewater Impact Fee Report,
dated May 2019, is adopted and incorporated herein by reference for all
purposes.
(‘78 Code, § 17-89) (Ord. 869, passed 6-13-90; Ord. 1078, passed 6-12-95; Am.
Ord. 1213, passed 7-13-98; Am. Ord. 1365, passed 8-27-01; Am. Ord. 1587, passed
8-29-06; Am. Ord. OR-1811-11, passed 8-8-11; Am. Ord. OR-2142-19, passed 8-12-
19)
§ 51.100 IMPACT FEES ASSESSED.
   (A)   The impact fee per equivalent service unit or ESU which is to paid by
each new development within the service area shall be as established herein and
may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   The impact fees due for a new development shall be assessed prior to
or at the time of platting in the case of a new subdivision or, if new
development occurs or is proposed to occur without platting, such fees shall be
assessed at the time of connection to the city's water or sewer system, and all
such fees shall be collected at the time of issuance of a building permit.
Where service is connected without the necessity of a building permit, all such
fees shall be collected at the time of connection to the city's water or sewer
system.
   (C)   For new development platted prior to the adoption of this subchapter
for which no impact fee was charged or assessed prior to June 20, 1987, an
impact fee may not be collected under this subchapter for a period of one year
from the date of adoption hereof, provided, however, any other ordinance of the
city requiring dedication of land for public parks or payment in lieu of the
dedication to serve park needs, requiring dedication of right-of-way or
easements, or construction or dedication of on-site water distribution,
wastewater collection or drainage facilities or streets, sidewalks or curbs
necessitated by and attributable to new development; or fees to be placed in
trust for the purpose of reimbursing the city or developers for oversizing or
constructing water or sewer mains or lines shall remain in full force and
effect and not be repealed by the terms of this subchapter.
   (D)   The maximum assessable impact fee for water supply treatment and
distribution facilities shall be $3,070 per equivalent service unit or ESU. The
amount of the water impact fee to be collected hereunder shall be $3,000 per
equivalent service unit or ESU. The maximum assessable impact fee for
wastewater collection and treatment facilities shall be $1,509 per equivalent
service unit or ESU. The amount of the wastewater impact fee to be collected
hereunder shall be $1,500 per equivalent service unit or ESU. The amount of
each impact fee due shall be determined by multiplying the impact fee to be
collected hereunder by the number of ESU generated by the new development.
   (E)   For new development that is part of a valid preliminary or final plat
approved prior to the adoption or revision of any impact fees, the new or
revised impact fees shall not be collected on any lot for which a valid
building permit is issued within one year after the date of adoption of the new
or revised impact fee; provided, however, lots in such development shall
continue to be subject to any previously assessed impact fees.
(‘78 Code, § 17-90) (Ord. 869, passed 6-13-90; Ord. 1078, passed 6-12-95; Am.
Ord. 1213, passed 7-13-98; Am. Ord. 1365, passed 8-27-01; Am. Ord. 1587, passed
8-29-06; Am. Ord. OR-1811-11, passed 8-8-11; Am. Ord. OR-2142-19, passed 8-12-
19)
§ 51.101 IMPACT FEES COLLECTED.
   (A)   All funds collected through the adoption of this subchapter shall be
deposited in interest bearing accounts clearly identifying the category of
capital improvements or facility expansions within the service area for which
these fees were adopted. Interest earned on such fees is considered funds of
the account on which it is earned and is subject to all restrictions placed on
the use of these fees.
   (B)   Impact fee funds may be spent only for the purposes for which the fee
was imposed.
   (C)   The records of account into which impact fees are deposited shall be
open for public inspection and copying during ordinary business hours of the
city.
   (D)   Impact fees may be assessed to areas where services are not currently
available, but impact fees may not be collected under this subchapter as
follows.
      (1)   Unless the collection is made to pay for a capital improvement or
facility expansion that has been identified, and the city commits to commence
construction within two years of such capital improvement or facility
expansion, and commits to have the service available within a reasonable period
of time not to exceed five years.
      (2)   Unless the city agrees that an owner of a new development may
construct or finance the capital improvements or facility expansions and agrees
that the costs incurred or funds advanced will be credited against the impact
fees otherwise due from the new development or the city agrees to reimburse the
owner for such costs from impact fees paid from other new developments that
will use such capital improvements or facility expansions.
      (3)   Unless the owner voluntarily requests the city to reserve capacity
to serve future development and the city and the owner enter into a valid
written agreement.
('78 Code, § 17-91) (Ord. 869, passed 6-13-90)
§ 51.102 ADVISORY COMMITTEE; DUTIES.
   The Advisory Committee shall file semi-annual reports with respect to the
progress of the capital improvements plan and report to the City Council any
perceived inquisites in implementing the plan or imposing the impact fees. The
committee shall advise the City Council of the need to update or revise the
land use assumptions, capital improvements plan and impact fees. The procedural
rules of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be applicable to the Advisory
Committee in carrying out these functions.
('78 Code, § 17-92) (Ord. 869, passed 6-13-90)
§ 51.103 FAILURE TO PAY IMPACT FEE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct any
building or structure on any lot or land on which an impact fee is due under
this subchapter or prior ordinances without first paying the impact fee to the
city.
('78 Code, § 17-93) (Ord. 1078, passed 6-12-95)
Penalty, see § 51.999
§ 51.104 OFFSETS AGAINST IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   The city may offset the present value of any system-related
facilities, pursuant to rules established in this section, which have been
dedicated to and have been received by the city, including the value of capital
improvements constructed pursuant to an agreement with the city as set forth in
§
51.105, against the value of the impact fee due for that category of capital
improvement.
   (B)   All offsets against impact fees shall be subject to the following
limitations and shall be granted based on this chapter and additional standards
promulgated by the city, which may be adopted as administrative guidelines.
      (1)   No offset shall be given for the dedication or construction of
site-related facilities.
      (2)   The unit costs used to calculate the offsets shall not exceed those
assumed for the capital improvements included in the Capital Improvements Plans
for the category of facility for which the impact fee is imposed.
      (3)   If an offset applicable to a plat has not been exhausted within ten
years from the date of the acquisition of the first tap purchase made after the
effective date of this chapter or within such period as may be otherwise
designated by contract, such offset shall lapse.
      (4)   In no event will the city reimburse the property owner or developer
for an offset when no impact fees for the new development can be collected
pursuant to this chapter or for any value exceeding the total impact fees due
for the development for that category of capital improvement, unless otherwise
agreed to by the city.
   (C)   An applicant for new development must apply for an offset against
impact fees due for the development either at or before the time of fee
payment, unless the city agrees to a different time. The applicant shall file a
petition for offsets with the city on a form provided for such purpose. The
contents of the petition shall be established by administrative guidelines. The
city must provide the applicant, in writing, with a decision on the offset
request, including the reasons for the decision. The decision shall specify the
maximum value of the offset which may be applied against an impact fee, which
value and the date of the determination shall be associated with the plat for
the new development.
   (D)   The available offset associated with the plat shall be applied against
an impact fee in the following manner:
      (1)   Such offset shall be prorated equally among all equivalent service
units (ESU's) associated with the plat and remain applicable to such ESU's, to
be applied at time of filing and acceptance of an application for a building
permit or tap purchase, as appropriate, against impact fees due.
      (2)   If the total number of ESU's used by the city in the original
offset calculation described in division (D)(1) is eventually exceeded by the
number of total ESU's realized by the actual development, the city may, at its
sole discretion, collect the full impact fee exclusive of any associated offset
for the excess ESU's.
      (3)   At its sole discretion, the city may authorize alternative offset
agreements upon petition by the owner in accordance with guidelines promulgated
by the city.
(Ord. 1587, passed 8-29-06)
§ 51.105 AGREEMENT FOR CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS.
   The City Council may authorize the owner of a new development to construct
or finance some of the public improvements identified in the Capital
Improvement Plans for Water and Sewer Impact Fees. In the case of such
approval, the property owner must enter into an agreement with the city prior
to fee collection. The agreement shall be on a form approved by the city, and
shall establish the estimated cost of improvement, the schedule for initiation
and completion of the improvement, a requirement that the improvement shall be
completed to city standards, and any other terms and conditions the city deems
necessary. The Director of Public Works shall review the improvement plan,
verify costs and time schedules, determine if the improvement is contained in
the Capital Improvement Plans for Water and Sewer Impact Fees, and determine
the method and timing of reimbursing the owner for construction costs from
impact fee or other revenues.
(Ord. 1587, passed 8-29-06)
§ 51.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is set forth shall be punished as set forth in §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   A person who continues a prohibited discharge or otherwise
violates the provisions of §§
51.010 et seq. is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by
a fine not to exceed $2,000 for each act of violation and for each day of
violation.
      (2)   In addition to proceeding under authority of division (A)(1) of
this section, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil
remedies, including injunctive relief, to which it is entitled under authority
of statutes or ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges.
('78 Code, § 17-44)
   (C)   Any person, operator or owner who shall violate any provision of §§
51.070 et seq., shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000, and each violation and each day a
violation continues, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished
accordingly.
('78 Code, § 17-84(b))
(Ord. 328, passed 6-13-77; Ord. 519, passed 11-28-83; Ord. 763, passed 12-28-
87; Ord. 773, passed 4-11-88)
CHAPTER 52: STORMWATER QUALITY PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Adoption and title
   
52.02   Findings of fact
   
52.03   Statement of purpose
   
52.04   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
52.05   Related ordinances
   
52.06   Incorporation of federal and state statutes, rules, and regulations
Discharges to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
   
52.15   Applicability
   
52.16   Administration
   
52.17   Acronyms
   
52.18   Definitions
   
52.19   General prohibition
   
52.20   General prohibition exemptions
   
52.21   Specific prohibitions and requirements
   
52.22   Acts adversely affecting water quality
   
52.23   Notification of release and cleanup
   
52.24   Watercourse protection
   
52.25   Topsoil requirements
Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction Activity
   
52.35   Applicability
   
52.36   Access to facilities
   
52.37   Non-permitted discharges prohibited
   
52.38   Submission of notice of intent, construction site notice, and notice of
termination to the city
   
52.39   Damage to stormwater control measures
   
52.40   Discharges associated with construction activity
   
52.41   Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans
   52.42   Privately owned stormwater facility requirements
Nuisances, Right of Entry, Enforcement, and Appeals
   
52.50   Nuisances
   
52.51   Right of entry
   
52.52   Citizen reports of violations
   
52.53   Administrative enforcement remedies
   
52.54   Right to reconsideration, hearing, and appeal
   
52.55   Remedies nonexclusive
 
   
52.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 ADOPTION AND TITLE.
   This chapter is hereby adopted and shall be known as the "Stormwater Quality
Protection Ordinance" of the City of Mansfield, Texas.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
§ 52.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   Reports from the United States Environmental Protection Agency's Nation
Water Quality Inventory to Congress and the public indicate polluted urban
runoff as one of the primary reasons for impaired water bodies throughout the
nation. Most of the city is located within the Dallas/Fort Worth Urbanized
Area. In order to protect the quality of water resources, preserve the quality
of life for residents, and protect the health and safety of residents and the
environment it is necessary to establish permissible discharges, including
discharges from construction activity, to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) and waterways within the city.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
§ 52.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   This chapter sets forth the minimum performance standards necessary to
protect water quality within the city and to establish the various public and
private responsibilities for providing this protection. Further, it is the
purpose of this chapter to:
   (A)   To maintain and improve the quality of surface water and groundwater
within the city;
   (B)   To prohibit the illicit connections and discharges of pollutants from
any user into the MS4 and natural waters within the city;
   (C)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   (D)   To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper
discharge of hazardous substances, petroleum products, household hazardous
waste, industrial waste, sediment from construction sites, pesticides,
herbicides, fertilizers, and other contaminants into the storm sewers and
natural waters of the city;
   (E)   To facilitate compliance with state and federal standards and permits
by owners and operators of industrial and construction sites within the city;
   (F)   To enable the city to comply with all federal and state laws and
regulations applicable to stormwater discharges.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
§ 52.04 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   All lands within the City of Mansfield, Texas are subject to the provisions
of this chapter.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
§ 52.05 RELATED ORDINANCES.
   In addition to this chapter, the city has other ordinances, regulations and
specifications possibly affecting water quality. In the event of an
irreconcilable conflict between this chapter and any other ordinances of the
city, the most restrictive ordinance shall govern.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
§ 52.06 INCORPORATION OF FEDERAL AND STATE STATUTES, RULES, AND REGULATIONS.
   A reference within this chapter to a federal or state statute, rule, or
regulation includes all amendments to such statute, rule, or regulation made
after the adoption of the chapter.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
DISCHARGES TO THE MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM
§ 52.15 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter shall apply to all water entering the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) generated on any developed or undeveloped lands unless
explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
§ 52.16 ADMINISTRATION.
   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works or his or her
authorized representatives to administer, implement and enforce the provisions
of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
§ 52.17 ACRONYMS.
   The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
   (A)   BMP - Best management practices;
   (B)   BTEX - Benzene, Toluene, Ethylbenzene, and Xylene;
   (C)   CFR - Code of Federal Regulations;
   (D)   EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency;
   (E)   HHW - Hazardous household waste;
   (F)   mg/l - Milligrams per liter;
   (G)   MS4 - Municipal separate storm sewer system;
   (H)   NOI - Notice of intent;
   (I)   NOT - Notice of termination;
   (J)   NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System;
   (K)   ppb - Parts per billion;
   (L)   PST - Petroleum storage tank;
   (M)   RPE - Registered professional engineer;
   (N)   RQ - Reportable quantity;
   (O)   SWPPP - Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan;
   (P)   TPDES - Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System;
   (Q)   TPH - Total petroleum hydrocarbons;
   (R)   USC - United States Code.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
§ 52.18 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL STORMWATER RUNOFF. Any stormwater runoff from orchards,
cultivated crops, pastures, range lands, and other non-point source
agricultural activities, but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding
operations as defined in 40 CFR 122.23 or discharges from concentrated aquatic
animal production facilities as defined in 40 CFR 122.24.
   AQUATIC MONITORING ORGANISM. The Fathead minnow Pimephales promelas, the
bacterium Vibrio ficheri, or the daphnid Ceriodaphnia dubia, or suitable
equivalent species.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or
reduce the pollution of the MS4. BMPs also include treatment requirements,
operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or
leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
   CELLAR DIRT. Construction site waste materials, such as natural rock and
soil overburden.
   CFR. The Code of Federal Regulations.
   CITY. The City of Mansfield, Texas.
   CLASSIFIED SEGMENT. Refers to a water body that is listed and described in
Appendix A or Appendix C of the Texas Surface Water Quality Standards, at 30
TAC § 307.10.
   COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE. A construction activity that is
completed in separate stages, separate phases, or in combination with other
construction activities. A common plan of development or sale is identified by
the documentation for the construction project that identifies the scope of the
project, and may include plats, blueprints, marketing plans, contracts,
building permits, a public notice or hearing, zoning requests, or other similar
documentation and activities.
   CONTAMINATED. Containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
   CONTAMINATION. The presence of or entry into a public water supply system,
the MS4, of any substance which may be deleterious to the public health and/or
the quality of the water.
   COSMETIC CLEANING. Cleaning done for cosmetic purposes. It does not include
industrial cleaning, cleaning associated with manufacturing activities,
hazardous or toxic waste cleaning, or any cleaning otherwise regulated under
federal, state, or local laws.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Public Works or the Director's
authorized representatives.
   DISCHARGE. Any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stonnwater, or any
other substance whatsoever into the municipal separate storm sewer system
(MS4).
   DISCHARGER. Any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise
responsible for a discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a
construction-site or industrial facility.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR EPA. The United States Environmental
Protection Agency, or any duly authorized official of said agency.
   FACILITY. Any facility, including construction sites, required by the
Federal Clean Water Act to have a permit to discharge stonnwater associated
with industrial activity.
   FINAL STABILIZATION. A construction site status where any of the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and
a uniform (that is, evenly distributed, without large bare areas) perennial
vegetative cover with a density of at least 70% of the native background cover
for the area has been established on all unpaved areas and areas not covered by
permanent structures, or equivalent permanent measures (such as use of riprap,
gabions, or other measures) have been employed.
      (2)   For individual lots in a residential construction site by either:
         (a)   The homebuilder completing final stabilization as specified in
condition (1) above; or
         (b)   Only after prior approval from the Public Works Director, or the
Public Works Director's authorized representative, the homebuilder establishing
temporary stabilization for an individual lot prior to the time of transfer of
the ownership of the home to the buyer and after informing the homeowner of the
need for, and benefits of, FINAL STABILIZATION.
      (3)   For construction activities on land used for agricultural purposes,
FINAL STABILIZATION may be accomplished by returning the disturbed land to its
preconstruction agricultural use. Areas disturbed that were not previously used
for agricultural activities, such as buffer strips immediately adjacent to
surface water and areas that are not being returned to their preconstruction
agricultural use must meet the FINAL STABILIZATION conditions of condition (1)
above.
   FIRE CODE. The "Fire Prevention and Protection" chapter of the city code.
   FIRE DEPARTMENT. The Fire Department of the city, or any duly authorized
representative thereof.
   FIRE PROTECTION WATER. Any water, and any substances or materials contained
therein, used by any person other than the Fire Department to control or
extinguish a fire.
   HARMFUL QUANTITY. The amount of any substance that will cause pollution of
the MS4, or that will cause lethal or sub-lethal adverse effects on
representative, sensitive aquatic monitoring organisms belonging to the city,
upon their exposure to samples of any discharge into waters in the MS4.
   MOBILE COMMERCIAL COSMETIC CLEANING. Power washing, steam cleaning, and any
other mobile cosmetic cleaning operation, of vehicles and/or exterior surfaces,
engaged in for commercial purposes.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). The system of conveyances
(including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) owned and
operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying
stormwater, and which is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES). The national
program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring
and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements,
under sections 307, 402, 318, and 405 of the federal Clean Water Act.
   NOI. Notice of intent.
   NON-POINT SOURCE. Any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a
"point source,"  Notice of intent means the notice of intent that is required
by the NPDES Stormwater Multi-Sector General Permit, the EPA Region 6 NPDES
Stormwater Construction general permit, or any similar general permit to
discharge stormwater associated with industrial or construction activity that
is issued by the EPA or the TCEQ.
   NPDES. The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
   NPDES PERMIT. A permit issued by EPA (or by the state under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on
an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
   OPERATE. Drive, conduct, work, run, manage, or control.
   OPERATOR. The party or parties that either individually or taken together
meet the following two criteria:
      (1)   They have operational control over the site specifications
(including the ability to make modifications in specifications); and
      (2)   They have the day-to-day operational control of those activities at
the site necessary to ensure compliance with SWPPP requirements and any permit
conditions.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental
entities.
   pH. The logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of the concentration in
grams per liter of hydrogen ions; a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a
solution, expressed in standard units.
   POINT SOURCE. Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including
but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete
fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation,
landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from which
pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include return flows
from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff.
   POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil; solid waste; incinerator residue; sewage; garbage;
sewage sludge; filter backwash; munitions; chemical wastes; biological
materials; toxic materials; radioactive materials; heat; wrecked or discarded
equipment; rock; sand; cellar dirt; and industrial, municipal, recreational,
and agricultural waste discharged into water or into the municipal separate
storm sewer system.
   POLLUTION. The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological
quality of, or the contamination of, any water of the state or water of the
United States, that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to
humans, animal life, vegetation, or property, or to the public health, safety,
or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for
any lawful or reasonable purpose.
   RELEASE. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying,
discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into ground-
water, subsurface soils, surface soils, the MS4.
Stare means the State of Texas.
   STORMWATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snow melt.
   SWPPP. Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan.
   TAC. The Texas Administrative Code.
   TEXAS POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM. The program delegated to the
State of Texas by the EPA pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b).
   TPDES. The Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
   TSS (TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS). Solids that either float on the surface, or
are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which are
generally removable by a laboratory filtration device. TSS is expressed in
milligrams per liter.
   UNCONTAMINATED. Not containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
   USC. United States Code.
   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from a facility.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. Ground-water, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, wetlands,
marshes, inlets, canals inside the territorial limits of the state, and all
other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, navigable or non-
navigable, and including the bed and banks of all watercourses and bodies of
surface water that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or
inside the jurisdiction of the state.
   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES. All waters which are currently used, were used
in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce;
all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use,
degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or
foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the
United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in
this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition;
and any waters within the federal definition of WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES at
40 CFR § 122.2; but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment ponds,
or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the federal Clean Water Act.
   WETLAND. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or ground-water
at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for
life in saturated soil conditions. WETLANDS generally include swamps, marshes,
bogs, and similar areas.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord. OR-2156-2019, passed 11-25-19)
§ 52.19 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   A person commits an offense if the person introduces or causes to be
introduced into the MS4 any discharge that is not composed entirely of
stormwater.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.20 GENERAL PROHIBITION EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   It is an affirmative defense to any enforcement action for a violation
of §
52.03 of this chapter that the discharge was composed entirely of one or more
of the following categories of discharges:
      (1)   A discharge authorized by, and in full compliance with, an NPDES
and/or TPDES permit (other than the NPDES and/or TPDES permit for discharges
from the MS4);
      (2)   A discharge or flow resulting from firefighting by the Fire
Department:
      (3)   A discharge or flow of fire protection water that does not contain
oil or hazardous substances or materials that the Fire Code requires to be
contained and treated prior to discharge, in which case treatment adequate to
remove harmful quantities of pollutants must have occurred prior to discharge;
      (4)   A discharge from a fire hydrant flushing;
      (5)   Incidental discharges from water line pressure release valves;
      (6)   Uncontaminated runoff or return flow from landscape irrigation,
lawn irrigation, and other irrigation utilizing potable water, groundwater, or
surface water sources;
      (7)   Uncontaminated water used for dust control purposes;
      (8)   A discharge or flow from a diverted stream flow or natural spring;
      (9)   A discharge or flow from uncontaminated pumped groundwater or
rising groundwater;
      (10)   Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined as 40 C.P.A.
35.2005(20)) to the MS4;
      (11)   Uncontaminated discharge or flow from a foundation drain, crawl
space footing drain, or sump;
      (12)   A discharge or flow from a potable water source not containing any
harmful substance or material from the cleaning or draining of a storage tank
or other container;
      (13)   A discharge or flow from air conditioning condensation that is
unmixed with water from a cooling tower, emissions scrubber, emissions filter,
or any other source of pollutant;
      (14)   A discharge or flow from a riparian habitat or wetland;
      (15)   A discharge or flow from water used in street washing that is not
contaminated with any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, surfactant,
emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance;
      (16)   Stormwater runoff from a roof that is not contaminated by any
runoff or discharge from an emissions scrubber, filter, or any other source of
pollutant;
      (17)   Swimming pool water that contains no harmful quantity of free
chlorine (less than 0.5ppm), muriatic acid or other chemical (less than 20ppm
cyanuric acid) used in the treatment or disinfection of the swimming pool water
or in pool cleaning;
      (18)   A discharge of flow from a temporary car wash sponsored by a civic
group, school, religious, and/or nonprofit organization;
      (19)   A discharge of flow from individual residential car washing
activities;
      (20)   Other allowable non-stormwater discharges listed in 40 CFR §
122.26(d)(2)(iv)(B)(1);
      (21)   Non-stormwater discharges that are specifically listed in the
TPDES multi-sector general permit (MSGP) or the TPDES construction general
permit; and
      (22)   Other similar occasional incidental non-stormwater discharges,
unless the TCEQ develops permits or regulation addressing these discharges.
   (B)   No affirmative defense is available under this section if the
discharge or flow in question has been determined by the Director to be a
source of a pollutant or pollutants to the MS4, written notice of that
determination has been provided to the discharger, and the discharge has
occurred more than 15 days beyond the notice. The correctness of the Director's
determination that a discharge is a source of a pollutant or pollutants may be
reviewed in any administrative or judicial enforcement proceeding.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
§ 52.21 SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The specific prohibitions and requirements in this section are not
inclusive of all the discharges prohibited by this chapter.
   (B)   No person shall recklessly introduce or cause to be introduced into
the MS4 any discharge that causes or contributes to causing the city to violate
a water quality standard, the city's TPDES permit, or any other discharge
permit for discharges from its MS4.
   (C)   No person shall dump, spill, pump, pour, empty, discharge, dispose,
recklessly leak, leach or emit, or otherwise introduce or cause to be
introduced any of the following substances into the MS4:
      (1)   Any used motor oil, antifreeze, or any other motor vehicle fluid.
      (2)   Any industrial waste.
      (3)   Any hazardous waste, including hazardous household waste.
      (4)   Any domestic sewage or septic tank waste, grease trap waste, or
grit trap waste.
      (5)   Any garbage, rubbish, or yard waste, to include leaves from
locations not directly in front of an inlet or natural drainage channel.
      (6)   Any wastewater from a commercial carwash facility; from any vehicle
washing, cleaning, or maintenance at any new or used automobile or other
vehicle dealership, rental agency, body shop, repair shop, maintenance
facility, or automotive related facility; or from any washing, cleaning, or
maintenance of any business or commercial or public service vehicle, including
a truck, bus or heavy equipment, by a business that operates more than two such
vehicles.
      (7)   Any wastewater from washing, cleaning, de-icing, or other
maintenance of aircraft.
      (8)   Any wastewater from a commercial mobile power washer or from the
washing or other cleaning of a building exterior that contains any soap,
detergent, degreaser, solvent, or any other harmful cleaning substance.
      (9)   Any wastewater from commercial floor, rug, or carpet cleaning.
      (10)   Any wastewater from the washdown or other cleaning of pavement
that contains any harmful quantity of soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser,
emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance; or any
wastewater from the washdown or other cleaning of any pavement where any spill,
leak, or other release of oil, motor fuel, or other petroleum or hazardous
substance has occurred, unless all harmful quantities of the released material
have been previously removed.
      (11)   Any effluent from a cooling tower condenser, compressor, emissions
scrubber, emissions filter or the blowdown from a boiler.
      (12)   Any commercial runoff or washdown water from any animal pen,
kennel or fowl or livestock containment area.
      (13)   Any filter backwash from a swimming pool or fountain, without the
backwash first being filtered through a vegetated area to remove any suspended
solids.
      (14)   Any discharge from water line disinfection by superchlorination,
or other means, if the total residual chlorine exceeds 75 mg/l of chlorine or
any other chemical used in line disinfection.
      (15)   Any fire protection water containing oil or hazardous substances
or materials that the Fire Code in this code requires to be contained and
treated prior to discharge, unless treatment adequate to remove pollutants
occurs prior to discharge (this prohibition does not apply to discharges or
flow from firefighting by the Fire Department).
      (16)   Any water from a water curtain in a spray room used for painting
vehicles or equipment.
      (17)   Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle wrecking yard.
      (18)   Any substance or material that will damage, block, or clog the
MS4.
      (19)   Any release from a petroleum storage tank (PST); any leachate or
runoff from soil contaminated by a leaking PST; or any discharge of pumped,
confined, or treated wastewater from the remediation of any such PST release
unless the discharge.
         (a)   Is in compliance with all state and federal standards and
requirements; and
         (b)   Does not contain a harmful quantity of any pollutant.
      (20)   No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4
any harmful quantity of sediment, silt, earth, soil or other material
associated with clearing, grading, excavation, or other construction activities
in excess of what could be retained on site or captured by employing sediment
and erosion control measures to the maximum extent practicable.
      (21)   No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic
or industrial, to the MS4, or allow such a connection to continue.
      (22)   No person shall cause or allow any pavement washwater from a
service station to be discharged into the MS4 unless such washwater has passed
through a properly functioning and maintained, grease, oil, and sand
interceptor before discharge into the MS4.
      (23)   Regulation of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers.
         (a)   Any sale, distribution, application, labeling, manufacture,
transportation, storage, or disposal of a pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer
must comply fully with all state and federal statutes and regulations
including, without limitation, the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and
Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) and all federal regulations promulgated pursuant to
FIFRA; Chapters 63, 75, and 76 of the Tex. Agric. Code and all state
regulations promulgated pursuant to it; and any other state or federal
requirement.
         (b)   Any license, permit, registration certification, or evidence of
financial responsibility required by state or federal law for sale,
distribution, application, manufacturer transportation, storage, or disposal of
a pesticide herbicide or fertilizer must be presented to the Director or his or
her delegate and any city law enforcement officer for examination upon request.
         (c)   No person shall use or cause to be used any pesticide or
herbicide contrary to any directions for use on any labeling required by state
or federal statute or regulation.
         (d)   No person shall use or cause to he used any pesticide,
herbicide, or fertilizer in any manner that the person knows or reasonably
should know, is likely to cause, or does cause, a harmful quantity of the
pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer to enter the MS4.
         (e)   No person shall dispose of, discard, store, or transport a
pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer or a pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer
container in a manner that the person knows or reasonably should know is likely
to cause or does cause a harmful quantity of the pesticide, herbicide or
fertilizer to enter the MS4.
      (24)   Used-oil regulation.
         (a)   No person shall:
            1.   Discharge used oil into the MS4 or a sewer, drainage system,
septic tank, surface water, groundwater, or water course;
            2.   Knowingly mix or commingle used oil with solid waste that is
to be disposed of in a landfill or knowingly directly dispose of used oil on
land or in a landfill;
            3.   Apply used oil to a road or land for dust suppression, weed
abatement, or other similar use that introduces used oil into the environment.
         (b)   All businesses that change motor oil for the public, municipal
waste landfills are encouraged to serve as public used oil collection centers
as provided by state statute in § 371.024 of the Tex. Health & Safety Code.
      (25)   Erosion control. It is unlawful for any person having control of
real property in the city to suffer or permit soil, rock, mud, or debris to
wash, slide, or otherwise be moved from the real property onto any adjacent
property, street, alley, utility facility, right-of-way, or easement through
erosion. Any person in control of real property shall:
         (a)   Prevent soil, mud, rock, or debris from being deposited on or
transported through erosion to any adjacent property, street, alley, utility
facility, right-of-way, or easement;
         (b)   Inspect the property and acquaint himself or herself with the
conditions existing; and
         (c)   Remedy any condition that might allow soil, mud, rock, or debris
to wash, slide, or otherwise be transported to any adjacent property, street,
alley, utility facility, right-of-way, or easement through erosion.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.22 ACTS ADVERSELY AFFECTING WATER QUALITY.
   It is unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Maintain grease and sand traps in any automotive center, service
station, vehicle maintenance center or vehicle wash operation which is not
connected to the sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Dump excessive grass clippings, leaves, brush or any rubbish or debris
to the curb, gutter, storm inlet, storm drain or water course.
   (C)   Permit crankcase draining, drainage from engine oil filters, vehicle
engine wash, or other oils or oily substances, greases, or like material to go
to or remain in or on any area that may drain to the storm system or
watercourses.
   (D)   Deposit liquid waste, semi-liquid waste, or chemical waste in any area
that may drain to the storm system or watercourses or dispose of them at any
site other than one approved for that purpose.
   (E)   Permit cooling tower, compressor, or boiler blowdown water that is not
clean, untreated water to flow to the storm system or watercourses.
   (F)   Permit water from nurseries which is used to water plants to flow to
streets and alleys to the extent that a nuisance may be created by standing
water, damage may result to streets or alleys, or the free passage of foot
traffic may be affected.
   (G)   Permit waste water resulting from floor cleaning, rug and carpet
cleaning, and laundering processes to flow to streets and alleys or into any
storm drain or water course or to any place that could threaten water quality
within the MS4.
   (H)   Permit filter backwash from swimming pools and fountains to drain to
the MS4 without the backwash first being filtered through a vegetated area to
remove any suspended solids.
   (I)   Permit liquid wastes from animal pens used for kennels, animal
hospitals, packinghouses, poultry processing plants and dairies to flow to any
area other than the sanitary sewer.
   (J)   Permit unused materials from ready-mix concrete mortar, and asphalt
base delivery trucks to be dumped to any area that may drain to any stream,
watercourse, storm sewer, or sanitary sewer.
   (K)   Permit any commercial vehicle to be washed down at any site not
approved for that purpose, except as authorized within this chapter.
   (L)   Permit waste oil storage drums or any other containers which are
filled or partially filled with waste oil, solvents, or chemicals to remain in
the open or under the eave of a building or structure in such a manner that the
storage vessels may overflow as the result of precipitation or leak as a result
of corrosion or damage.
   (M)   Permit old motors, transmissions, automobile parts, or any other
machinery parts which are coated or partially coated with grease, oil, or
solvents to remain uncovered in the open where portions of the coating
materials may be washed to the storm sewers or water courses from
precipitation.
   (N)   Permit sewage wastes, whether domestic or industrial, to flow to any
area other than a sanitary sewer or approved septic tank.
   (O)   Permit any sanitary sewer pipe to be open. It is an affirmative
defense to this section that the sewer pipe is open while being actively
constructed, cleaned, repaired, or inspected.
   (P)   On any premises he or she manages, owns, leases, or otherwise has
control over, fail to complete repair of all malfunctioning sewer systems
within 72 hours, unless prevented by demonstrable extraneous circumstances, and
complete removal of all residue, and complete treatment of affected areas with
a suitable disinfectant within 24 hours after written notice. Such notice shall
be effective upon the earliest of any of the following:
      (1)   Upon personal service;
      (2)   Upon delivery to the person's office during normal working hours;
      (3)   Upon posting such notice on the door to the person's residence or
office; or
      (4)   Seventy-two hours after depositing the notice, enclosed in a
postpaid, properly addressed wrapper, in a post office or official depository
under the care and custody of the United States Postal Service.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.23 NOTIFICATION OF RELEASE AND CLEANUP.
   (A)   The person in charge of any vehicle, facility, or other source of any
spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, escaping,
leaching, dumping, disposing, or any other release of any of the following
quantities of any of the following substances that may flow, leach, enter, or
otherwise be introduced into the MS4, shall telephone and notify the city as
soon as practicable concerning the incident:
      (1)   An amount equal to or in excess of a reportable quantity of any
hazardous substance, as established under 40 CFR Part 302;
      (2)   An amount equal to or in excess of a reportable quantity of any
extremely hazardous substance, as established under 40 CFR Part 355;
      (3)   An amount of oil that either:
         (a)   Violates applicable water quality standards; or
         (b)   Causes a film or discoloration of the surface of the water or an
adjoining shoreline or causes a sludge or emulsion to be deposited beneath the
surface of the water or upon an adjoining shoreline; or
      (4)   Any harmful quantity of any pollutant.
   (B)   The immediate notification shall include the following information:
      (1)   The identity or chemical name of the substance released, and
whether the substance is an extremely hazardous substance, as established under
40 CFR Part 355;
      (2)   The exact location of the release, including any known name of the
waters involved or threatened and any other environmental media affected;
      (3)   The time and duration (thus far) of the release;
      (4)   An estimate of the quantity and concentration (if known) of the
substance released;
      (5)   The source of the release;
      (6)   Any known or anticipated health risks associated with the release
and, where appropriate, advice regarding medical attention that may be
necessary for exposed individuals;
      (7)   Any precautions that should be taken as a result of the release;
      (8)   Any steps that have been taken to contain and clean up the released
material and minimize its impacts; and
      (9)   The names and telephone numbers of the person or persons to be
contacted for further information.
   (C)   Within 14 days following such release, the responsible person in
charge of the vehicle, facility, or other source of the release shall, unless
waived by the city, submit a written report containing each of the items of
information specified above, as well as the following additional information:
      (1)   The ultimate duration, concentration, and quantity of the release;
      (2)   All actions taken to respond to, contain, and clean up the released
substances, and all precautions taken to minimize the impacts;
      (3)   Any known or anticipated acute or chronic health risks associated
with the release;
      (4)   Where appropriate, advice regarding medical attention necessary for
exposed individuals;
      (5)   The identity of any governmental/private sector representatives
responding to the release; and
      (6)   The measures taken or to be taken by the responsible person(s) to
prevent similar future occurrences.
   (D)   Any release report required by a state or federal authority containing
the information described above shall be adequate to meet the reporting
requirements for submittal to the city.
   (E)   The notifications required above shall not relieve the responsible
person of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred
as a result of the release, including any liability for damage to the city, to
natural resources, or to any other person or property; nor shall such
notification relieve the responsible person of any fine, penalty, or other
liability which may be imposed pursuant to this subchapter or to state or
federal law.
   (F)   Any person responsible for any release as described above shall comply
with all state, federal, and any other local law requiring reporting, cleanup,
containment, and any other appropriate remedial action in response to the
release.
   (G)   Any person responsible for a release described in above shall
reimburse the city for any cost incurred by the city in responding to the
release.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
§ 52.24 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   Any person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, and other obstacles that would pollute,
contaminate, or retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition,
the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within
or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard
to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. The property
owner, or such person's lessee, shall provide protection against stream bank
erosion by maintaining existing vegetation adjacent to watercourses.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.25 TOPSOIL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall place fill on a site without:
      (1)   Leveling the fill and providing for vigorous plant growth
immediately following the completion of filling operations;
      (2)   Leveling and covering the area intermittently within 30 days for
filling operations that exceed 30 days in duration.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense of this section that the Director of
Public Works, or an authorized representative, has approved substitution of an
alternative cover that is resistant to erosion.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
Penalty, see § 52.99
STORMWATER DISCHARGES ASSOCIATED WITH CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY
§ 52.35 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter applies to all sites located within the city that have
stormwater discharges associated with regulated construction activity by TPDES
or NPDES permit requirements, and/or other construction activities determined
by the city to pose a hazard to the quality of water flowing through the MS4.
This includes the construction of an entry/exit location, drill pad site, and
other construction activities as required for exploration and/or extraction of
natural gas, other petroleum products, or any other minerals within city
limits.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
§ 52.36 ACCESS TO FACILITIES.
   (A)   The Director, or an authorized representative, is authorized by §
52.51 of this chapter to enter and inspect construction sites subject to
regulation under this subchapter.
   (B)   Site owners and/or operators shall allow the Director of Public Works,
or an authorized representative, ready access to all parts of the premises for
the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that
must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge
stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state
and federal law.
   (C)   The Director, or authorized representative, shall have the right to
set up on any permitted construction site such devices as are necessary in the
opinion of the Director to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
construction site's stormwater discharge.
   (D)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
site to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator
at the written or oral request of the Director, or authorized representative,
and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by
the operator.
   (E)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Director, or authorized
representative, access to a permitted construction site are a violation of a
stormwater discharge permit and of this subchapter. A person who is the owner
and/or operator of a construction site with an NPDES or TPDES permit, or site
qualified to be covered by an NPDES or TPDES permit, to discharge stormwater
associated with construction activity commits an offense if the person denies
the Director reasonable access to the permitted construction site for the
purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter.
   (F)   If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from
which stormwater is discharged, and the Director is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter or any
state or federal discharge permit, limitation, or requirement, or that there is
a need to inspect or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program of the city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any
order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and
welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
§ 52.37 NON-PERMITTED DISCHARGES PROHIBITED.
   A person who is the owner and/or operator of a construction site commits an
offense if the person discharges, or causes to be discharged, stormwater
associated with construction activity without first having obtained a NPDES or
TPDES permit to do so, unless a permit is not required by a state or federal
requirement.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.38 SUBMISSION OF NOTICE OF INTENT, CONSTRUCTION SITE NOTICE, AND NOTICE OF
TERMINATION TO THE CITY.
   (A)   The owner and/or operator of a large construction site, greater than
five acres or part of a common plan of development greater than five acres,
required to have an NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated
with construction activity shall submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) to
the city at least 48 hours prior to construction activity commencing. The owner
and/or operator of a small construction site, greater than one acre but less
than five acres and not part of a larger common plan of development greater
than five acres, shall submit a copy of the construction site notice to the
city a minimum of 48 hours before construction activities begin.
   (B)   These documents may be delivered to the Public Works Director either
in person or by mailing to:
Public Works, Stormwater
City of Mansfield
1200 E. Broad St
Mansfield, TX 76063
Or email:
stormwater@mansfieldtexas.gov
   (C)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or operates a
construction site that is discharging stormwater associated with a regulated
construction activity without having submitted a copy of the notice of intent
to do so to the city.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord. OR-2156-2019, passed 11-25-19)
Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.39 DAMAGE TO STORMWATER CONTROL MEASURES.
   It is a violation of this chapter for any person to damage, or allow to be
damaged, any temporary or permanent stormwater control measures, through his or
her actions or inaction without promptly restoring the control measure to an
effective and efficient state.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.40 DISCHARGES ASSOCIATED WITH CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY.
   (A)   All operators of construction sites shall use the methodology on best
management practices from the most current North Central Texas Council of
Government best management practices for construction activities manual, or
similar approved and accepted best management practices, to control and reduce
the discharge to the MS4 of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other material
associated with the clearing, grading, excavation, and other construction
activities to the maximum extent practicable. Such best management practices
may include, but not be limited to, the following measures:
      (1)   To the extent possible and where feasible preserve existing
vegetation. Stabilization measures for all disturbed areas associated with the
construction project, regardless of physical location within or without the
site, shall be implemented in compliance with the Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan prepared for the construction site and in accordance with any
additional requirements contained within the effective Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality Construction General Permit TXR 150000;
      (2)   Use of appropriate erosion and sediment control measures installed
according to standard or product approved details and properly maintained and
repaired to ensure effective performance at reducing sedimentation offsite;
      (3)   Use of structural practices to divert flows from exposed soils,
store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from the
site to the extent feasible;
      (4)   Minimization of the tracking of sediments off-site by vehicles, the
generation of dust, and the escape of other windblown waste from the site;
      (5)   Prevention of the discharge of building materials, including
cement, lime, concrete and stucco operations, mortar, sand, or similar
materials used in such activities, to the MS4;
      (6)   Providing general good housekeeping measures to prevent and contain
spills of paints, solvents, fuels, septic waste, and other hazardous chemicals
and pollutants associated with construction, and to assure proper cleanup and
disposal of any such spills in compliance with state, federal, and local
requirements;
      (7)   Provide a location on site, or near site, for personal and
construction waste so as to prevent littering;
      (8)   Implementation of proper waste disposal and waste management
techniques, including covering waste materials, minimizing ground contact with
hazardous chemicals and trash, and keeping trash receptacles off of paved
surfaces, or other locations that drain directly to a storm drain system or
local waterway;
      (9)   Sanitary waste facilities shall be maintained so that they do not
create a hazard to the environment. Sanitary facilities should not be placed
over any paved surfaces;
      (10)   Discharges from dewatering activities, including discharges from
dewatering of trenches and excavations, must be treated to the extent
practicable and so that sediments are filtered or settled prior to ultimate
discharge from site or into an underground storm sewer system; and
      (11)   Installation of structural measures during the construction
process to control pollutants in stormwater discharges that will occur after
construction operations have been completed. Structural measures should be
placed on upland soils to the degree attainable. Such installed structural
measures may include, but are not limited to, the following: stormwater
detention structures (including wet ponds); stormwater retention structures;
flow attenuation by use of open vegetative swales and natural depressions;
other velocity dissipation devices; infiltration of runoff on site; and
sequential systems which combine several practices. Operators of construction
sites are responsible for the installation and maintenance of stormwater
management measures prior to final stabilization of the site, and are not
responsible for maintenance after stormwater discharges associated with
construction activity have terminated.
   (B)   It is a violation of this chapter if a discharge occurs from a
construction site containing materials other than stormwater and such discharge
and/or materials are allowed to accumulate within the MS4 and such accumulation
persists for a period beyond three days unless greater time is allowed by the
Director of Public Works for removal. This includes discharges of sediment, to
include off-site tracking be vehicles entering and exiting the site, paints,
solvents, cleaners, wind blown debris, or other materials associated with the
construction activity at the site.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord. OR-2156-2019, passed 11-25-19)
Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.41 STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLANS.
   (A)   The city may require any plans and specifications that are prepared
for the construction of site improvements to illustrate and describe the best
management practices required within this section that will be implemented at
the construction site. The city may deny approval of any building permit,
grading permit, subdivision plat, site development plan, or any other city
approval necessary to commence or continue construction, or to assume
occupancy, on the grounds that the management practices described in the plans
or observed upon a site inspection by the city are determined not to control
and reduce the discharge of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other materials
associated with clearing, grading, excavation, and other construction
activities to the maximum extent practicable.
   (B)   Qualified personnel (provided by the operator of the construction
site) shall inspect disturbed areas of any construction site that have not been
finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to
precipitation, structural control measures, and locations where vehicles enter
or exit the site, in accordance with the inspection schedule included in the
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) for the site. All erosion and
sediment control measures and other identified best management practices shall
be observed in order to ensure that they are operating correctly and are
effective in preventing significant impacts to receiving waters and the MS4.
Based on the results of the inspection, best management practices shall be
maintained, repaired, or revised as appropriate, and as soon as is practicable
and maintenance, repair or revision activities noted in the SWPPP for the site.
   (C)   The city may require changes be made to an owner and/or operator's
SWPPP if, in the best professional judgment of the Director, or authorized
representative, the SWPPP does not comply with the requirements of the owner
and/or operator's NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with
construction activities.
   (D)   The deficiencies in an owner and/or operator's SWPPP will be provided
in writing, and the Director, or an authorized representative, will give the
owner and/or operator a reasonable amount time, not to exceed 14 days, to make
the necessary changes in the SWPPP.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
§ 52.42 PRIVATELY OWNED STORMWATER FACILITY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Owners, operators, or other benefitted users of property with a
privately-owned stormwater facility, control device, measure, structure, or
other component, regardless of whether inside a public drainage easement or
not, shall be responsible for maintenance in accordance with the maintenance
plan or recommendations as described by the manufacturer, design engineer, or
other party responsible for determining maintenance needs. Maintenance records
or other evidence of maintenance activities that have taken place shall be
retained by the owners, operators, or other benefitted users and shall be made
available to the Public Works Director, or the Public Works Director's
authorized representative, as needed to provide proof of maintenance and/or
inspections.
   (B)   Owners, operators, or other benefitted users of newly developed, or
redeveloped properties with a privately owned stormwater facility after the
effective date of this section shall have a maintenance plan or recommendations
for the facility, control device, measure, structure or other component,
regardless of whether inside a public drainage easement or not, filed with the
real property records of the county in which the property is located. The
Public Works Director, or the Public Works Director's authorized
representative, may request a copy or copies of the maintenance plan or
recommendations prior to submission to the county of record.
   (C)   Owners, operators, or other benefitted users of a property with a
stormwater facility, control device, measure, structure, or other component,
regardless of whether inside a public drainage easement or not, commits an
offense if maintenance is not conducted in accordance with the maintenance plan
or recommendations causing failure of the stormwater facility, control device,
measure, structure, or other component to function as intended/designed.
   (D)   Owners, operators, or other benefitted users of a property with a
stormwater facility, control device, measure, structure, or other component,
regardless of whether inside a public drainage easement or not, commits an
offense if the stormwater facility, control device, measure, structure, or
other component is disabled, removed, or otherwise intentionally caused to fail
without the prior approval of the Public Works Director, or the Public Works
Director's authorized representative.
(Ord. OR-2156-2019, passed 11-25-19)
NUISANCES, RIGHT OF ENTRY, ENFORCEMENT, AND APPEALS
§ 52.50 NUISANCES.
   (A)   An actual or threatened discharge to the MS4, that violates or would
violate this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (B)   A line conveying sewage or designed to convey sewage that is connected
to the MS4 is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (C)   Allowing accumulation of litter, yard waste or other solid waste to
enter the MS4 is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (D)   Intentional acts causing damage to a temporary or permanent stormwater
control measure is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.51 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   The Director of Public Works, or an authorized representative, may
enter premises or vehicles regulated by this chapter at all reasonable times,
whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions
of this chapter, to inspect permits and records required by this chapter, to
collect air, water, waste, or wastewater samples, or whenever probable cause
exists to believe that a violation of this chapter or other environmental laws
exists on such premises.
   (B)   The Director of Public Works, or an authorized representative, shall
first present credentials and demand entry if the premises are occupied. If the
premises are unoccupied, a reasonable attempt to locate the owner or person in
control of the premises and demand entry shall be made.
   (C)   Where premises have security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the person in
control of the premises shall make necessary arrangements with its security
guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the Director, or
authorized representative, will be permitted to enter without delay for the
purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
   (D)   If entry is denied or if a person in control cannot be located, the
Director, or authorized representative, shall have every recourse provided by
law to secure entry. Such recourse shall include the right to obtain a search
warrant under the guidelines of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure; and for
the purposes of same, any person with enforcement authority under this chapter
is hereby declared to be a "health officer."
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
§ 52.52 CITIZEN REPORTS OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   All citizens are encouraged to report to the city any spills,
releases, illicit connections, other instances of anyone discharging pollutants
into the MS4, and any other violation of this chapter of which they become
aware.
   (B)   The city will designate an individual or office within the Division of
Public Works to receive all such citizen reports by telephone, in writing, and
in person. A written record of each citizen report will be prepared and kept on
file for a period of three years, and a copy of the city's record of the report
will be furnished to the reporting citizen upon request. Also upon request, the
city will inform the reporting citizen of any action undertaken by the city in
response to the citizen's report.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
§ 52.53 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (A)   Notification of violation. When the Director of Public Works, or an
authorized representative, finds that any person has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, the city
may serve upon that person a written notice of violation. Within ten days of
the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction and prevention of reoccurrence thereof, to include
specific required actions, shall be submitted by the alleged violator to the
city. If the alleged violator denies that any violation occurred or contends
that no corrective action is necessary, an explanation of the basis of any such
denial or contention shall be submitted to the city within ten days of receipt
of the notice. Submission of an explanation or plan in no way relieves the
alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after
receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the
authority of the city to take any action, including emergency action or any
other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
   (B)   Emergency cease and desist orders.
      (1)   When the Director of Public Works, or an authorized representative,
finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past
violations are likely to recur, and that the person's violation(s) have caused
or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4, waters of the
state, or waters of the United States which reasonably appears to present an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to
the environment, the Director of Public Works, or an authorized representative,
may issue an order to the violator directing it immediately to cease and desist
all such violations and directing the violator to:
         (a)   Immediately comply with all subchapter requirements; and
         (b)   Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately
halting operations and terminating the discharge.
      (2)   Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under this
section shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering
discharge. In the event of a discharger's failure to immediately comply
voluntarily with the emergency order, the Director of Public Works, or an
authorized representative, may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent
or minimize harm to the MS4, waters of the State of Texas, or waters of the
United States, or endangerment to persons or to the environment; including
immediate termination of a facility's water supply, sewer connection, or other
municipal utility services. The city may allow the person to recommence its
discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Director of
Public Works, or an authorized representative, that the period of endangerment
has passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated against the
discharger under this chapter. A person that is responsible, in whole or in
part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a
detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and
the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the city within five
days of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an emergency cease and
desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the violator.
   (C)   Stop work orders.
      (1)   Whenever the Director of Public Works, or an authorized
representative, finds that any operator of a facility, to include a
construction site, has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, or any permit or order issued thereunder, the Director, or an
authorized representative, may order that a stop work order be issued to the
operator, posted at the facility, and distributed to all city departments and
divisions whose decisions affect any activity at the site.
      (2)   Unless express written exception is at issuance, the stop work
order shall prohibit any further construction activity at the entire site and
shall bar any further inspection or approval by the city associated with a
building permit, grading permit, subdivision plat approval, site development
plan approval, or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue
construction or to assume occupancy at the site.
      (3)   A person receiving an order under this section may file a written
notice of appeal with the Director of Public Works, no later than the tenth day
after receipt of the order. Such notice shall include an explanation as to why
the person believes the enforcement action should not be taken.
      (4)   Issuance of a stop work order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator.
   (D)   Nuisance abatement.
      (1)   Unless specifically stated otherwise, any nuisance as defined
within this chapter is hereby declared a nuisance if it exists within the
corporate limits of the city or within 5,000 feet of such limits. The Director
of Public Works, or an authorized representative, may give notice to cease,
abate, remove or otherwise remedy a nuisance immediately to:
         (a)   The owner of property upon which a nuisance is located or from
which a nuisance originated or is emanating. If the person creating, allowing,
or maintaining the nuisance is not the owner of the property, notice shall also
be given to such person.
         (b)   Any person creating, allowing, or maintaining a nuisance.
      (2)   The notice must be given:
         (a)   Personally to the owner/person in writing; or
         (b)   By letter addressed to the owner/person at the owner's/person's
post office address and sent certified mail, return receipt requested. However,
if personal or certified mail service cannot be obtained or the owner's/
person's post office address is unknown, notice may be given:
            1.   By publication in the official newspaper of the city at least
twice within ten consecutive days;
            2.   By posting the notice on or near the front door of each
building on the property to which the nuisance relates; or
            3.   By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven
into the ground on the property to which the nuisance relates, if the property
contains no buildings.
      (3)   The notice may order the owner/person to undertake and implement
any appropriate action:
         (a)   To remediate and/or abate any adverse effects of the nuisance
upon the MS4, the waters of the state, the waters of the United States, or any
other aspect of the environment; and/or
         (b)   To restore any part of the MS4, the waters of the state, the
waters of the United States, or any other aspect of the environment that has
been harmed.
      (4)   Such remedial, abatement, and restoration action may include, but
not be limited to:
         (a)   Monitoring, assessment, and evaluation of the adverse effects
and determination of the appropriate remedial, abatement, and/or restoration
action;
         (b)   Confinement, removal, cleanup, treatment, and disposal of any
discharged or released pollution or contamination;
         (c)   Prevention, minimization, and/or mitigation of any damage to the
public health, welfare, or the environment that may result from the nuisance;
and
         (d)   Restoration or replacement of city property or natural resources
damaged by the nuisance.
   (E)   The notice may direct that the remediation, abatement, and/or
restoration be accomplished on a specified compliance schedule and/or be
completed within a specified period of time. An order issued under this section
does not relieve the violator of liability for any violation, including any
continuing violation.
   (F)   If the owner/person does not comply with the notice within ten days of
service, the Director may enter any public or private property containing the
nuisance and do any work necessary to abate the nuisance, except the demolition
of buildings.
   (G)   If the immediate abatement of the nuisance is deemed necessary by a
Director to protect the environment or the public health, safety, or welfare
from an imminent and substantial endangerment, such Director may, without
complying with the notice provisions of this section or without waiting the
ten-day period, enter the subject property and do or cause to be done any work
necessary to abate the nuisance and remediate and restore the environment.
   (H)   After abating the nuisance, the Director may inform the owner/person
in a notice sent certified mail, return receipt requested, that if the owner/
person commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger
to the environment or to the public health and safety on or before the first
anniversary date of the original notice, the city may without further notice
correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the
owner's property.
   (I)   All costs incurred by the city to abate a nuisance and remediate and
restore the environment, including the cost of giving notice as required, shall
be initially paid by the city and charged to the owner of the property.
   (J)   To obtain a lien against the property, the Director causing the
abatement shall file a statement of expenses with the County Clerk for the
county in which the property is located. The lien statement shall state the
name of the owner, if known, and the legal description of the property. The
lien shall be security for the costs incurred and interest accruing at the rate
of 10% on the amount due from the date of payment by the city.
   (K)   The lien is inferior only to:
      (1)   Tax liens; and
      (2)   Liens for street improvements.
   (L)   A lien may not be filed against real estate protected by the homestead
provisions of the Texas Constitution.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
§ 52.54 RIGHT TO RECONSIDERATION, HEARING, AND APPEAL.
   (A)   Reconsideration and hearing.
      (1)   Any person subject to an emergency cease and desist order under §
52.53(B) above, or a stop work order under §
52.53(C) above may petition the city to reconsider the basis for the order
within ten days of the affected person's notice of issuance of such an order.
      (2)   Failure to submit a timely written petition for reconsideration
shall be deemed to be a waiver of any further right to administrative
reconsideration or review of the order.
      (3)   In its petition, the petitioning party must indicate the provisions
of the order objected to, the reasons for the objection(s), any facts that are
contested, the evidence that supports the petitioner's view of the facts, any
alternative terms of an order that the petitioner would accept, and whether the
petitioning party requests a hearing on its petition.
      (4)   The effect of any stop work order shall be stayed pending the
city's reconsideration of the petition, and any hearing thereon, unless the
city expressly makes a written determination to the contrary. The effectiveness
of any emergency cease and desist order under §
52.53(B), shall not be stayed pending the city's reconsideration, or any
hearing thereon, unless the city expressly and in writing stays the emergency
order.
      (5)   Within 15 days of the submittal of a petition for reconsideration,
the city shall either;
         (a)   Grant the petition and withdraw or modify the order accordingly;
         (b)   Deny the petition, without hearing if no material issue of fact
is raised; or
         (c)   If a hearing has been requested and a material issue of fact has
been raised, set a hearing on the petition.
      (6)   Written notice of any hearing set by the city pursuant to the 15-
day reconsideration period above shall be served on the petitioning party
personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at
least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any
authorized representative of the petitioning party.
      (7)   An authorized Director of the city may conduct the hearing and take
evidence, or the Director may designate any employee of the city or any
specially-designated attorney or engineer to:
         (a)   Issue in the name of the city notices of hearing requesting the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant
to any matter involved in the hearing;
         (b)   Take evidence; and
         (c)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the city for
action thereon.
      (8)   At any hearing held, testimony taken shall be under oath and
recorded. Any party is entitled to present the party's case or defense by oral
or documentary evidence and to conduct such cross-examination as may be
required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. A transcript will be made
available to any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges
thereof.
      (9)   (a)   After the Director of Public Works has reviewed the evidence,
the Director shall either
            1.   Grant the petition;
            2.   Deny the petition; or
            3.   Grant the petition in part and deny it in part.
         (b)   The city may modify the order as is appropriate based upon the
evidence and arguments presented at the hearing and the action of the Director
on the petition. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate
may be issued.
   (B)   Appeal.
      (1)   Any person whose petition for reconsideration by the city has not
been granted in its entirety and who remains adversely affected by the city's
order may appeal the action to the City Council by filing a written appeal with
the City Council within ten days of the person's notice of the city's adverse
action on the petition for reconsideration.
      (2)   Failure to submit a timely written appeal to the City Council shall
be deemed to be a waiver of further administrative review.
      (3)   In its written appeal to the City Council, the appealing party
shall indicate the particular provisions of the order objected to, the
particular determinations of the city that are contested, the reasons that the
city's order or determinations are contested, and any alternative order that
the appealing party would accept.
      (4)   The effect of the city's order, as issued or modified, shall not be
stayed pending the appeal to the City Council, unless the City Council
expressly so states.
      (5)   Within 30 days of the submittal of a written appeal to the City
Council, the City Council shall hear and consider the appeal in open meeting.
The appellant shall be notified at least 15 days in advance of the date and
time of the City Council meeting at which the appeal will be heard and
considered.
      (6)   The appellant shall have the right to public appearance before the
City Council to present oral and written statements in support of the appeal.
If the City Council wishes to consider testimony of witnesses or other evidence
beyond that in the record of any hearing before the authorized Director, the
City Council may remand the matter to that Director for the taking of
additional testimony or other evidence.
      (7)   Upon consideration of any written and oral statements made to the
City Council, as well as the record made before the city, the City Council
shall act on the appeal by affirming, vacating, or modifying the order of the
city, or by remanding the matter to the city for further action.
      (8)   Following final action by the City Council on the appeal, any
adversely affected party may challenge such action by the City Council in an
appropriate court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
§ 52.55 REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive of any other
remedies that the city may have under state or federal law or other city
ordinances. The city may take any, all, or any combination of these actions
against a violator at any time, regardless of timelines identified in this
subchapter in an attempt to gain compliance with this chapter and any state or
federal regulations. The city is empowered to take more than one enforcement
action against any violator. These actions may be taken concurrently.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Civil remedies. Pursuant to § 54.012(5) of the Tex. Loc. Gov't. Code,
the provisions of subchapter B of Ch. 54 of the Tex. Loc. Gov't. Code are
hereby implemented for any violation of this chapter, any such violation being
classified by the Texas Penal Code as a Class C misdemeanor, so that the city
may seek civil penalties and injunctive relief under the provisions of
subchapter B of Ch. 54.
   (B)   Criminal penalties.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who has
violated any provision of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, shall be
strictly liable for such violation regardless of the presence or absence of a
culpable mental state and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not
more than $2,000 per violation, per day, or any greater fine authorized by
state statute. Each day, or portion of a day, for which a violation occurs
shall constitute a separate violation.
      (2)   Any person who has knowingly made any false statement,
representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or
other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this
chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or who has falsified, tampered with, or
knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than
$2,000 per violation, per day, or any greater fine authorized by state statute.
Each day, or portion of a day, for which a violation occurs shall constitute a
separate violation.
      (3)   In determining the amount of any fine imposed hereunder, the court
shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited
to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of
the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation, corrective
actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, the knowledge,
intent, negligence, or other state of mind of the violator, and any other
factor as justice requires.
   (C)   Civil suit under the Texas Water Code. Whenever it appears that a
violation or threat of violation of any provision of § 26.121 of the Tex. Water
Code, or any rule, permit, or order of the Texas Water Commission, has occurred
or is occurring within the jurisdiction of the city, exclusive of its
extraterritorial jurisdiction, the city, in the same manner as the Texas Water
Commission, may have a suit instituted in a state district court through its
City Attorney for the injunctive relief or civil penalties or both authorized
in subsection (a) of § 26.123 of the Tex. Water Code, against the person who
committed or is committing or threatening to commit the violation. This power
is exercised pursuant to § 26.124 of the Tex. Water Code. In any suit brought
by the city under this subsection, the Texas Water Commission is a necessary
and indispensable party.
(Ord. 1680, passed 3-10-08)
CHAPTER 53: DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM
Section
   
53.01   Purpose
   
53.02   Establishment
   
53.03   Definitions
   
53.04   Public hearing
   
53.05   Drainage charges
   
53.06   Drainage problems; city representation; duty of private land owners and
developers
   
53.07   Rules for operation and conduct of system
   
53.08   Billings, penalties, interest and collection procedures
   
53.09   Appeals
   
53.10   Interpretation of references to state statutes
§ 53.01 PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds it to be in the public interest to protect the public
health and safety from loss of life and property caused by surface water
overflows and surface water stagnation within the boundaries of the city and
further finds that to protect such public interests:
   (A)   The city will establish a schedule of drainage charges against all
real property in the city subject to charges under Tex. Loc. Gov't Code Ch.
402, subchapter C;
   (B)   The city will provide drainage for all real property in the city on
payment of drainage charges, except such real property which may be exempted
therefrom as authorized by law;
   (C)   The city will offer such drainage service on non-discriminatory,
reasonable and equitable terms.
(Ord. 1103, passed 10-27-95)
§ 53.02 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The municipal drainage utility system is herewith and hereby
established and declared to be a public utility. The city shall have full
authority to operate such system pursuant to the authority given and contained
under Texas Constitution Art. XI, § 5, the Mansfield City Charter and Tex. Loc.
Gov't Code Ch. 402, subchapter C, §§ 402.041 et seq.
   (B)   Tex. Loc. Gov't Code Ch. 402, subchapter C, §§ 402.041 et seq., as now
existing or as hereafter amended are herewith adopted.
(Ord. 1103, passed 10-27-95)
§ 53.03 DEFINITIONS.
   Drainage charges shall be levied in accordance with the following
definitions.
   BENEFITTED PROPERTY. Any residential or commercial property within the city
to which drainage service is made available and which discharges into a street,
creek, river, slough, bayou, culvert, conduit, inlet, or other channel that
forms part of the drainage utility system.
   COMMERCIAL PROPERTY. Benefitted property that is non-residential parcels,
including commercial, industrial, C1, C2, multi-family and governmental
property.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any benefitted property platted, zoned or used for
residential development including single-family, duplex, manufactured home,
mobile home, camper, recreational vehicle, or other improved parcel upon which
buildings contain less than five dwelling units.
   USER. The person or entity who owns or occupies a benefitted property,
including a commercial tenant. The city may deem the owner of property to be an
"officially-designated user" under certain circumstances.
(Ord. OR-1829-12, passed 1-9-12)
§ 53.04 PUBLIC HEARING.
   Prior to levying any drainage charges for the funding of the drainage
utility system, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on such charges
pursuant to state law.
(Ord. 1103, passed 10-27-95)
§ 53.05 DRAINAGE CHARGES.
   (A)   The following schedule of drainage charges is hereby levied beginning
January 1, 2016, against all real properties within the city, subject to
drainage charges under Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code Ch. 552, subchapter C, subject to
the exceptions set forth in the divisions below.
 
Land Use Description                       Monthly Charge
Single-family home                         $6.50 per dwelling unit per month
Duplex                                     $6.50 per dwelling unit per month
Manufactured home, mobile home, camper and $5.00 per dwelling unit per month
recreation vehicle
School/Church                              $6.50 per acre per month
All other benefitted properties            $53.70 per acre per month
 
   (B)   The City Council may change, adjust, and readjust the rates and
charges established herein for drainage services from time to time
   (C)   The following properties are exempted from drainage charges:
      (1)   Properties owned by the city and other governmental entities;
      (2)   Properties with proper construction and maintenance of a wholly
sufficient and privately owned drainage system; and no potential impact on any
city-owned or maintained property;
      (3)   Properties held and maintained in its natural state, until such
time that the property is developed and all of the public infrastructures
constructed has been accepted by the city;
      (4)   Any subdivided lot, until a structure has been built on the lot and
the city has approved a final inspection for the structure;
      (5)   Vacant or agricultural properties without any structures, pavement,
or improvements that create an impervious surface: and
      (6)   The primary residences of persons who qualify for the "Over 65
Property Tax Exemption".
   (D)   (1)   Where there is more than one user of a benefitted property
because there are multiple occupants or multiple tenants, the officially-
designated user, or party responsible for payment of the drainage charges,
shall be:
         (a)   The common owner of the subject property or properties on a
benefitted property if multiple utility accounts exist within a single
benefitted property belonging to the same owner;
         (b)   The owner of the property if a benefitted property has changed
occupants or tenants two or more times within a 12-month period.
      (2)   Such designation shall have no effect on responsibility for payment
of water, sewer or solid waste charges.
   (E)   The City Council may change, adjust, and readjust the rates and
charges established herein for drainage services from time to time.
(Ord. 1429, passed 6-9-03; Ord. OR-1799-11, passed 3-21-11; Ord. OR-1829-12,
passed 1-9-12; Ord. O-1973-15, passed 10-26-15)
§ 53.06 DRAINAGE PROBLEMS; CITY REPRESENTATION; DUTY OF PRIVATE LAND OWNERS AND
DEVELOPERS.
   By the creation of the municipal drainage utility system via Ordinance No.
1103, the establishment and levying of drainage charges via Ordinance No. 1429,
and as amended via Ordinance No. OR-1799-11, and the passage of Ordinance No.
1829-12, the city makes no representation that all of the city drainage
problems will be immediately solved and the City Council is given full
discretion in establishing time and quantitative priorities in expending funds
as they become available to meet the drainage needs of the city on a reasonable
basis. Nor shall the passage of Ordinance Nos. 1103, 1429, OR-11-1799-11 and
OR-1829- 12 be construed to relieve private land owners, developers, and others
from providing drainage improvements pursuant to the subdivision control
ordinance, Chapter 154 of this code, as well as any other ordinance of the city
and the laws of the state which relate to drainage or drainage improvements.
(Ord. 1429, passed 6-9-03; Ord. OR-1799-11, passed 3-21-11; Ord. OR-1829-12,
passed 1-9-12)
§ 53.07 RULES FOR OPERATION AND CONDUCT OF SYSTEM.
   The City Council may, by subsequent ordinance, adopt rules for the operation
and conduct of the drainage utility system consistent with its authority and
state law.
(Ord. 1429, passed 6-9-03; Ord. OR-1799-11, passed 3-21-11; Ord. OR-1829-12,
passed 1-9-12)
§ 53.08 BILLINGS, PENALTIES, INTEREST AND COLLECTION PROCEDURES.
   Except as may be otherwise provided herein or under a subsequent amendment
to this chapter; billing penalties, interest, and collection procedures shall
be consistent with that of the city's water and sewer services. Drainage
charges, when billed through utility bills, shall be identified separately on
such bills. Delinquent charges shall be collected in a manner consistent with §
552.050 of the Tex. Loc. Gov't Code. A user of a benefitted property is
responsible for payment of drainage charges. For users billed by the city for
other utility charges, such as water and/or sewer service, the city may bill
the user for drainage charges in the same bill. Otherwise, the city shall
establish a new drainage billing account and the bill shall be sent to the
address provided for the new account. Failure of a user to pay such charges may
result in the discontinuance of city drainage, water or sewer service.
(Ord. 1429, passed 6-9-03; Ord. OR-1799-11, passed 3-21-11; Ord. OR-1829-12,
passed 1-9-12)
§ 53.09 APPEALS.
   An owner of non-residential property may appeal once per year the drainage
charges by filing a written application with the city's Finance Department. A
calculation will then be made by totaling the impervious area of the property
in question. That total area will be multiplied by the charge per acre to
determine the drainage charges. Any additional improvement would necessitate a
recalculation of the drainage charge.
(Ord. 1429, passed 6-9-03; Ord. OR-1799-11, passed 3-21-11)
§ 53.10 INTERPRETATION OF REFERENCES TO STATE STATUTES.
   Any reference to Tex. Loc. Gov't Code Ch. 402 or any section of the
Municipal Drainage Utility Systems Act shall be interpreted to reference Tex.
Loc. Gov't Code Ch. 552 or any section therein.
(Ord. OR-1829-12, passed 1-9-12)
CHAPTER 54: WATER DEMAND MANAGEMENT AND DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN
Section
General Provisions
   
54.001   Introduction and objectives
   
54.002   Texas Commission on Environmental Quality rules
   
54.003   Water utility profile
   
54.004   Specification of water conservation goals
Metering, Water Use Records, Control of Unaccounted Water, and Leak Detection
and Repair
   
54.020   Tracking of water usage
   
54.021   Accurate metering of treated water deliveries
   
54.022   Metering of customer and public uses and meter testing, repair, and
replacement
   
54.023   Record management system
   
54.024   Determination and control of unaccounted water
   
54.025   Leak detection and repair
   
54.026   Monitoring of effectiveness and efficiency - annual water conservation
report
Continuing Public Education and Information Campaign
   
54.040   Public communication and education campaign
Non-Promotional Water Rate Structure
   
54.055   Non-promotional water rate structure
Other Water Conservation Measures
   
54.070   Reservoir system operation plan
   
54.071   Reuse and recycling of wastewater
   
54.072   Ordinances, plumbing codes, or rules on water-conserving fixtures
   
54.073   Water waste prohibition
   
54.074   Requirement for water conservation plans by wholesale customers
   
54.075   Coordination with Regional Water Planning Group and TRWD
   
54.076   Requests for variance
Implementation and Enforcement of the Water Conservation Plan
   
54.090   Mandatory water conservation measures
   
54.091   Enforcement
   
54.092   Other violations of water conservation measures
   
54.093   Locking devices
   
54.094   Compliance
   
54.095   Failure to pay
   
Appendix A:   Texas Commission on Environmental Quality Rules on Municipal
Water Conservation Plans
   
Appendix B:   Form for Water Utility Profile and Water Conservation Report
   
Appendix C:   Letter to Region C Water Planning Group
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 54.001 INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   Having a dependable water supply has always been a key issue in the
development of Texas. The growing population and economic expansion occurring
in North Central Texas are placing increased demands on our water supplies. In
order to meet the challenge of providing for our current and future needs we
must learn to use the water we already have more efficiently. By stretching our
existing supplies we can delay the need for new supplies, minimize the
environmental impacts associated with developing new water resources, and
postpone the high cost of building the infrastructure (dams, treatment
facilities, and pipelines) necessary to capture, treat, and transport the
additional water into our homes and businesses.
   (B)   Recognizing the need for efficient use of existing water supplies, the
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) has developed guidelines and
requirements governing the development of water conservation plans for public
water suppliers. TCEQ guidelines and requirements are included in Appendix A.
The city has developed this water conservation plan in response to TCEQ
guidelines and requirements.
   (C)   The objectives of this water conservation plan are as follows:
      (1)   To reduce water consumption from the levels that would prevail
without conservation efforts.
      (2)   To reduce the loss and waste of water.
      (3)   To improve efficiency in the use of water.
      (4)   To extend the life of current water supplies by reducing the rate
of growth in demand.
      (5)   To educate the citizens of Mansfield about the need for water
conservation and the benefits of conserving our most valued natural resource.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
§ 54.002 TEXAS COMMISSION ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY RULES.
   The TCEQ rules governing development of water conservation plans for public
water suppliers are contained in Tex. Admin. Code Title 30, Part 1, Chapter
288, Subchapter A, Rule 288.2, which is included in
Appendix B. For the purpose of these rules, a WATER CONSERVATION PLAN is
defined as “A strategy or combination of strategies for reducing the volume of
water withdrawn from a water supply source, for reducing the loss or waste of
water, for maintaining or improving the efficiency in the use of water, for
increasing the recycling and reuse of water, and for preventing the pollution
of water.” The elements in the TCEQ water conservation rules covered in this
conservation plan are listed below.
   (A)   Minimum conservation plan requirements. The minimum requirements in
the Tex. Admin. Code for water conservation plans for public water suppliers
are covered in this report as follows:
      (1)   288.2(a)(1)(A) - Utility Profile - §
54.003 and
Appendix B.
      (2)   288.2(a)(1)(C) - Specification of Goals - §
54.004.
      (3)   288.2(a)(1)(D) - Accurate Metering - §§
54.021 and
54.022.
      (4)   288.2(a)(1)(E) - Universal Metering - §
54.022.
      (5)   288.2(a)(1)(F) - Determination and Control of Unaccounted Water - §
54.024.
      (6)   288.2(a)(1)(G) - Public Education and Information Program - §
54.040.
      (7)   288.2(a)(1)(H) - Non-Promotional Water Rate Structure - §
54.055.
      (8)   288.2(a)(1)(I) - Reservoir System Operation Plan - §
54.070.
      (9)   288.2(a)(1)(J) - Means of Implementation and Enforcement - §
54.090 through
54.095.
      (10)   288.2(a)(1)(K) - Coordination with Regional Water Planning Group -
§
54.075 and
Appendix C.
   (B)   Conservation additional requirements (population over 5,000). The Tex.
Admin. Code includes additional requirements for water conservation plans for
cities with a population over 5,000:
      (1)   288.2(a)(2)(A) - Leak Detection, Repair, and Water Loss Accounting
- §§
54.024 through
54.026.
      (2)   288.2(a)(2)(B) - Record Management System - §
54.023.
      (3)   288.2(a)(2)(C) - Requirement for Water Conservation Plans by
Wholesale Customers - §
54.074.
   (C)   Additional conservation strategies. TCEQ rules also list additional
optional but not required conservation strategies, which may be adopted by
suppliers. The following optional strategies are included in this plan:
      (1)   288.2(a)(3)(A) - Conservation Oriented Water Rates - §
54.055.
      (2)   288.2(a)(3)(B) - Ordinances, Plumbing Codes or Rules on Water-
Conserving Fixtures - §
54.072.
      (3)   288.2(a)(3)(D) - Reuse and Recycling of Wastewater - §
54.071.
      (4)   288.2(a)(3)(F) - Considerations for Landscape Water Management
Regulations - §
54.073.
      (5)   288.2(a)(3)(G) - Monitoring Method - §
54.026.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
§ 54.003 WATER UTILITY PROFILE.
   
Appendix B to this water conservation plan is a modified water utility profile
based on the format recommended by the TCEQ. Some additional sections were
added in order to gather the information necessary to assess the effectiveness
of the water conservation plan.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
§ 54.004 SPECIFICATION OF WATER CONSERVATION GOALS.
   Current TCEQ rules require the adoption of specific water conservation goals
for a water conservation plan. As part of plan adoption, each customer will
develop five-year and ten-year goals for per capita municipal use, following
TCEQ procedures described in the water utility profile (
Appendix B). The goals for this water conservation plan include the following:
   (A)   Maintain a per capita municipal water use below 150 gallons per capita
per day in 2029 (five-year goal) and 145 gallons per capita per day in 2034
(ten-year goal).
   (B)   Maintain the level of unaccounted water in the system below 10%
annually in 2024 and subsequent years, as discussed in §
54.023.
   (C)   Maintain a program of universal metering and meter replacement and
repair, as discussed in §
54.021.
   (D)   Decrease waste in lawn irrigation by enforcement of landscape water
management regulations, as discussed in §
54.073.
   (E)   Raise public awareness of water conservation and encourage responsible
public behavior through public communication and education programs, as
discussed in §
54.040.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
METERING, WATER USE RECORDS, CONTROL OF UNACCOUNTED WATER, AND LEAK DETECTION
AND REPAIR
§ 54.020 TRACKING OF WATER USAGE.
   One of the key elements in water conservation is careful tracking of water
use and control of losses through illegal diversions and leaks. Careful
metering of water deliveries and water use, detection and repair of leaks in
the distribution system, and regular monitoring of unaccounted water are
important in controlling losses.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
§ 54.021 ACCURATE METERING OF RAW WATER DELIVERIES.
   The metering devices that measure raw water delivered to the city will be
maintained within a minimum of +/– 5% accuracy.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
§ 54.022 METERING OF CUSTOMER AND PUBLIC USES AND METER TESTING, REPAIR, AND
REPLACEMENT.
   (A)   All connections to the water system are metered connections. All
meters will be maintained within an acceptable operating accuracy range as
defined by the manufacturer or the American Water Works Association (AWWA)
standard for meter accuracy, whichever is more stringent. Dead meters and
meters that indicate reduced usage will be flagged during the computerized
billing process. These meters will be checked, field tested, and replaced when
found to be out of manufacturer specifications or not meeting AWWA standards.
   (B)   All new meters installed as a new meter set or a meter replacement due
to age and inaccuracy will be installed with an Advanced Metering
Infrastructure (AMI) meter. The city will maintain a meter data management
system for all AMI meters.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
§ 54.023 RECORD MANAGEMENT SYSTEM.
   (A)   As required by Tex. Admin. Code Title 30, Part 1, Chapter 288,
Subchapter A, Rule 288.2(a)(2)(B), the record management system allows for the
separation of water sales and uses into residential, commercial, public/
institutional, and industrial categories. This information will be included in
an annual water conservation report, as described in §
54.026 below.
   (B)   The city will continue to maintain a record management system that
accounts for raw water received, drinking water treated, drinking water pumped,
water delivered, water sold, and water system loss. This record management
system will continue to separate and account for monthly usage in the following
customer categories: residential domestic, residential irrigation, commercial
usage, commercial/industrial irrigation, builders / construction,
institutional, and industrial.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
§ 54.024 DETERMINATION AND CONTROL OF UNACCOUNTED WATER.
   (A)   Unaccounted water is the difference between raw water purchased from
the Tarrant Regional Water District (TRWD) and metered deliveries to customers.
Authorized but unmetered uses would include use for fire fighting, releases for
flushing of lines, and uses associated with new construction. Unaccounted water
can include several categories:
      (1)   Inaccuracies in customer meters (customer meters tend to run more
slowly as they age and under-report actual use).
      (2)   Losses due to water main breaks and leaks in the water distribution
system.
      (3)   Losses due to illegal connections and theft.
      (4)   Other.
   (B)   The city will continue to monitor and minimize unaccounted water use
by periodic visual field inspection of all water facilities, use of fire
hydrant meters to quantify the volume of water lost during flushing, review of
property occupancy, and monthly comparisons of historical metered usage.
Additional measures will be taken at the water treatment plant to quantify
process water.
   (C)   Unaccounted water has varied from 7.48% to 9.89% in the last five
years. With the measures described in this plan, the city intends to maintain
the unaccounted water below 10% in 2024 and subsequent years.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
§ 54.025 LEAK DETECTION AND REPAIR.
   (A)   The city will continue to vigilantly monitor the water distribution
system and customer service connections for water leaks, and address the repair
of any leaks found in a manner that expeditiously stops water loss. All leaks
will be isolated and repaired as soon as possible.
   (B)   Meter readers watch for and report signs of illegal connections so
they can be addressed. Maintenance crews respond quickly to repair leaks
reported by the public and city personnel. Areas of the water distribution
system in which numerous leaks and line breaks occur are targeted for
replacement as funds are available.
   (C)   While it is impossible for the city staff alone to identify all leaks,
residents are provided an online water waste reporting tool through the city
website. All water waste reports are distributed via email to the Operations
Manager and Supervisor for prioritization and repair. Daily leak detection
reports are generated daily from the meter data management system, and staff
addresses potential leak concerns accordingly. Leak detection alerts are also
generated via the city’s online customer portal, and both residents and staff
are alerted to potential leak concerns.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
§ 54.026 MONITORING OF EFFECTIVENESS AND EFFICIENCY - ANNUAL WATER CONSERVATION
REPORT.
   
Appendix B is a modified water utility profile form that will be used in the
development of an annual water conservation report for the city. This form will
be completed by May 1 of the following year and will be used to monitor the
effectiveness and efficiency of the water conservation program and to plan
conservation-related activities for the next year. The form records the water
use by category, per capita municipal use, and unaccounted water for the
current year and compares them to historical values. The modified water utility
profile and annual water conservation report will also be sent to TRWD, which
will monitor regional water conservation trends.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
CONTINUING PUBLIC EDUCATION AND INFORMATION CAMPAIGN
§ 54.040 PUBLIC COMMUNICATION AND EDUCATION CAMPAIGN.
   The city will continue to promote conservation through public communication
and education by:
   (A)   Participating in various conservation programs with TRWD, such as
staff training and education, and public education partnerships.
   (B)   Promoting conservation awareness in schools.
   (C)   Creating a curriculum/program for students/kids with the goal of
educating our future water conservationists.
   (D)   Communicating conservation information via the following:
      (1)   City buildings: public library, City Hall, Mansfield Activities
Center and Chris W. Burkett Service Center.
      (2)   City of Mansfield website.
      (3)   Local businesses and other public places.
      (4)   E-newsletters.
      (5)   Social media.
      (6)   Annual consumer confidence report.
      (7)   Annual Earth Day Mansfield event.
      (8)   Public/student tours of the Bud Ervin Water Treatment Plant.
   (E)   Promoting the online customer water portal:
      (1)   Communicate conservation messages, news, and promote upcoming
classes and events.
      (2)   Encourage residents to monitor daily water use and to sign up for
leak detection alerts.
   (F)   Creating and executing educational campaigns about the value of water
and how usage affects everyone.
   (G)   Keeping staff educated by attending industry and local conferences,
trainings, and meetings to stay informed on current topics and trends.
   (H)   Participating in city and special events to communicate the value of
water.
   (I)   Highlighting water utilities employees and educate residents about
what we do.
   (J)   Identifying and maintaining relationships with residents, city
employees, Keep Mansfield Beautiful Commission, Mansfield ISD, industry
partners, local organizations, and businesses.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
NON-PROMOTIONAL WATER RATE STRUCTURE
§ 54.055 NON-PROMOTIONAL WATER RATE STRUCTURE.
   With the intent of encouraging water conservation and discouraging waste and
excessive use of water, the city has adopted an increasing block rate
structure. The unit price for water increases with increasing water usage.
Current water rates are shown in Tables 7.1 and 7.2.
 
Table 7.1 Monthly Meter Charges
Meter Size  Total Charge Meter Size  Total Charge Meter Size  Total Charge
(inches)                 (inches)                 (inches)
5/8 or 3/4  $22.57       2           $180.76      6           $1,264.12
1           $56.43       3           $361.32
1 1/2       $113.05      4           $620.88
 
Table 7.2 Volume Unit Charges
Table 7.2 Volume Unit Charges
Water User                           Type/Volume             Volume Unit Charge
                                                             ($ per 1,000 gal.)
                                     0 to 2,000 gallons      Included in base
Residential and Commercial Customers 2,000 to 32,000 gallons $3.29
                                     32,000 gallons or above $4.21
                                     0 to 2,000 gallons      Included in base
Industrial Customers                 2,000 to 32,000 gallons $2.71
                                     32,000 gallons or above $3.36
 
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
OTHER WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES
§ 54.070 RESERVOIR SYSTEM OPERATION PLAN.
   TRWD is responsible for all reservoir operation. The city will continue to
provide elected official representation on the Advisory Board and staff
representation on the Technical Advisory Committee of TRWD.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
§ 54.071 REUSE AND RECYCLING OF WASTEWATER.
   The city does not own and operate its own wastewater treatment plant. The
city’s wastewater is treated by the Trinity River Authority.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
§ 54.072 ORDINANCES, PLUMBING CODES, OR RULES ON WATER-CONSERVING FIXTURES.
   The State of Texas has required water-conserving fixtures in new
construction and renovations since 1992. The city has adopted and enforced
variations of plumbing codes since 1972, and most recently the 2018
International Residential Code (OR-2130-19), and the 2018 International
Plumbing Code (OR-2136-19).
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
§ 54.073 WATER WASTE PROHIBITION.
   (A)   Landscape irrigation and outdoor watering are responsible for a large
portion of the water wasted in the State of Texas. The city will enforce the
following conservation measures in an effort to reduce the amount of water
wasted:
      (1)   Prohibition of outdoor watering with sprinklers from 10:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m. every day, year-round. Watering with hand-held hoses (provided that
they are equipped with positive shut-off devices), soaker hoses, or hand-held
dispensers is allowed.
      (2)   Requirement that all irrigation systems installed or receiving
major repair work on or after May 1, 2008, be equipped with operational rain
and freeze sensors. Existing residential irrigation systems are encouraged to
be retrofitted with similar rain and freeze sensors.
      (3)   Requirement that all commercial and home owners association (HOA)
irrigation systems be equipped with operational rain and freeze sensors.
      (4)   Requirement that all irrigation systems installed or receiving
major repair work on or after May 1, 2008, be equipped with controllers capable
of multiple programs.
      (5)   Requirement that all irrigation systems installed or receiving
major repair work on or after May 1, 2008, be equipped with an approved manual
shut-off valve with lockout capabilities. City personnel must be able to lock
out the valve with a standard padlock.
      (6)   Requirement that all irrigation systems be in compliance with
current state design and installation regulations (Tex. Admin. Code Title 30,
Part 1, Ch. 344).
      (7)   Prohibition of designs and installations that spray directly onto
impervious surfaces such as sidewalks and roads or onto other non-irrigated
areas.
      (8)   Prohibition of poorly maintained sprinkler systems that waste
water.
      (9)   Prohibition of outdoor watering during any form of precipitation.
      (10)   Prohibition of outdoor watering during a freeze or when the
temperature has the potential of reaching 32° Fahrenheit.
   (B)   Failure to comply with any portion of this section will constitute a
violation and may be subject to enforcement.
   (C)   Any of the following shall constitute major repair work:
      (1)   Any repair or maintenance that exposes the main line to the
atmosphere.
      (2)   Any repair or maintenance that has an associated cost equal to or
greater than $500.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
§ 54.074 REQUIREMENT FOR WATER CONSERVATION PLANS BY WHOLESALE CUSTOMERS.
   The city is a wholesale water supplier. Every contract for the wholesale
sale of water that is entered into, renewed, or extended after the adoption of
this water conservation plan will include a requirement that the wholesale
customer, and any wholesale customers of that wholesale customer, develop and
implement a water conservation plan meeting the requirements of Tex. Admin.
Code Title 30, Part 1, Ch. 288, Subch. A, Rule 288.2. The requirement will also
extend to each successive wholesale customer in the resale of the water.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
§ 54.075 COORDINATION WITH REGIONAL WATER PLANNING GROUP AND TRWD.
   
Appendix C includes a letter sent to the Chair of the Region C Water Planning
Group with this water conservation plan. A copy of this plan has also been sent
to TRWD.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
§ 54.076 REQUESTS FOR VARIANCE.
   (A)   The Executive Director of Public Works or his or her designee may
grant temporary variance for water use prohibited by this plan if it is
determined that an emergency condition resulting in an adverse effect to
health, sanitation, or fire protection of a customer, person, or entity would
result if a variance is not granted. Temporary variance may also be granted if
it is determined that a customer, person, or entity is caused undue hardship or
financial burden if a variance is not granted.
   (B)   Outdoor watering at a service address with large multi-station
irrigation systems may take place in accordance with a variance granted by the
Executive Director of Public Works or his or her designee if it is determined
that the property cannot be adequately irrigated in a single day.
   (C)   Temporary variance may also be granted to playing fields which require
watering to maintain league standards.
   (D)   Skinned areas of sports fields may be watered as needed for dust
control without applying for temporary variance.
   (E)   In order to receive a written variance from the Executive Director of
Public Works or his or her designee the customer, person, or entity must
provide a written request including:
      (1)   Name and address of the person requesting the variance.
      (2)   Location of the proposed water use.
      (3)   Detailed statement of potential damage and reason for the variance.
      (4)   The volume of water needed and specific purpose of water use.
      (5)   Period of time the variance is needed.
      (6)   Detailed statement of water conservation measures that are being
used.
      (7)   Any diagram or other explanation that demonstrates the need for a
variance.
   (F)   Variances not retroactive and do not justify violations of the plan.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
IMPLEMENTATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF THE WATER CONSERVATION PLAN
§ 54.090 MANDATORY WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES.
   Mandatory water conservation measures will be enforced by warnings and
penalties as follows:
   (A)   On the first violation, customers will be given a verbal warning that
they have violated the mandatory water conservation measures. City staff will
provide the customer with the information and educational materials needed to
comply with the plan.
   (B)   On the second violation, customers will be issued a written warning
that they have violated the mandatory water conservation measures.
   (C)   On the third and subsequent violations, a violation notice will be
issued to customers, with minimum and maximum fines established by ordinance.
   (D)   (1)   After four violations have occurred, in a 12-month timeframe,
the utility may cut off water service to the customer.
      (2)   In order to restore water service, a customer must sign a statement
of intent to comply with all applicable water conservation measures established
or adopted by ordinance and pay a restore service fee.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
§ 54.091 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Executive Director of Public Works or his or her designee may assess an
administrative fee approved by the City Manager, or designee, in addition to
any criminal penalty assessed for a violation of this plan as described below.
Administrative fees will not be assessed for verbal or written warnings. The
administrative fee shall be assessed on the third and subsequent violations in
order to recover costs associated with enforcement. Each day that a violation
occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
§ 54.092 OTHER VIOLATIONS OF WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES.
   (A)   Violations involving irrigation systems with lock-out capabilities.
      (1)   The Executive Director of Public Works or his or her designee may
install a lock on an irrigation system found to be operating in violation of
this plan on more than three occasions and shall assess an administrative fee
as approved by the City Manager, or designee (if applicable).
      (2)   Notice shall be left on the premise to advise the owner/operator
that the irrigation system has been locked; and
      (3)   Notice shall be sent by United States Postal Service to the person
recorded as the city’s water customer notifying that person that a violation
has been found and that the irrigation system has been locked. The notice shall
also state the amount of the assessed administrative fee and shall advise the
person of the procedures for payment of the fees and the procedure to request
removal of the lock.
   (B)   Violations involving irrigation systems without lock-out capabilities.
      (1)   The Executive Director of Public Works or his or her designee shall
leave notice on the premise to advise the owner/operator that the person was in
violation of this plan and has been assessed an administrative fee as approved
by the City Manager, or designee (if applicable).
      (2)   Notice shall be sent by United States Postal Service to the person
recorded as the city’s water customer notifying that person that a violation
has been found. The notice shall also state the amount of the assessed
administrative fee and shall advise the person of the procedures for payment of
the fees.
   (C)   Violations of mandatory water conservation measures not involving an
underground irrigation system.
      (1)   The Executive Director of Public Works or his or her designee shall
leave notice on the premise to advise the owner/operator that the person was in
violation of this plan and has been assessed an administrative fee as approved
by the City Manager, or designee (if applicable).
      (2)   Notice shall be sent by United States Postal Service to the person
recorded as the city’s water customer notifying that person that a violation
has been found. The notice shall also state the amount of the assessed
administrative fee and shall advise the person of the procedures for payment of
the fees.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
§ 54.093 LOCKING DEVICES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, cause damage to,
or remove a locking device placed on an irrigation system by the Executive
Director of Public Works or his or her designee.
   (B)   The locking device will be removed from the irrigation system by the
Executive Director of Public Works or his or her designee within three working
days after payment is received from the customer.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
§ 54.094 COMPLIANCE.
   The Executive Director of Public Works or his or her designee may require
that an irrigation system comply with all current regulations and ordinances
if:
   (A)   The customer or irrigation system is found to be in violation of this
plan on four separate occasions;
   (B)   In the opinion of the Director of Utility Operations or his or her
designee, the violation warrants immediate compliance; or
   (C)   The design, installation, or operation of the irrigation system
prohibits the efficient use of water.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
§ 54.095 FAILURE TO PAY.
   Failure to pay assessed administrative fees within the indicated timeframe
will constitute a separate violation of this plan.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
APPENDIX A:    TEXAS COMMISSION ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY RULES ON MUNICIPAL
WATER CONSERVATION PLANS
 
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality Rules on Water Conservation Plans for
Municipal Uses by Public Water Suppliers
TITLE 30            ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
PART 1            TEXAS COMMISSION ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
CHAPTER 288         WATER CONSERVATION PLANS, DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLANS,
GUIDELINES AND REQUIREMENTS
SUBCHAPTER A         WATER CONSERVATION PLANS
RULE § 288.2         Water Conservation Plans for Municipal Uses by Public
Water Suppliers
   (a)   A water conservation plan for municipal water use by public water
suppliers must provide information in response to the following. If the plan
does not provide information for each requirement, the public water supplier
shall include in the plan an explanation of why the requirement is not
applicable.
      (1)   Minimum requirements. All water conservation plans for municipal
uses by public water suppliers must include the following elements:
         (A)   a utility profile in accordance with the Texas Water Use
Methodology, including, but not limited to, information regarding population
and customer data, water use data (including total gallons per capita per day
(GPCD) and residential GPCD), water supply system data, and wastewater system
data;
         (B)   a record management system which allows for the classification
of water sales and uses into the most detailed level of water use data
currently available to it, including, if possible, the sectors listed in
clauses (i) - (vi) of this subparagraph. Any new billing system purchased by a
public water supplier must be capable of reporting detailed water use data as
described in clauses (i) - (vi) of this subparagraph:
            (i)   residential;
               (I)   single family;
               (II)   multi-family;
            (ii)   commercial;
            (iii)   institutional;
            (iv)   industrial;
            (v)   agricultural; and,
            (vi)   wholesale.
         (C)   specific, quantified five-year and ten-year targets for water
savings to include goals for water loss programs and goals for municipal use in
total GPCD and residential GPCD. The goals established by a public water
supplier under this subparagraph are not enforceable;
         (D)   metering device(s), within an accuracy of plus or minus 5.0% in
order to measure and account for the amount of water diverted from the source
of supply;
         (E)   a program for universal metering of both customer and public
uses of water, for meter testing and repair, and for periodic meter
replacement;
         (F)   measures to determine and control water loss (for example,
periodic visual inspections along distribution lines; annual or monthly audit
of the water system to determine illegal connections; abandoned services;
etc.);
         (G)   a program of continuing public education and information
regarding water conservation;
         (H)   a water rate structure which is not “promotional,” i.e., a rate
structure which is cost-based and which does not encourage the excessive use of
water;
         (I)   a reservoir systems operations plan, if applicable, providing
for the coordinated operation of reservoirs owned by the applicant within a
common watershed or river basin in order to optimize available water supplies;
and
         (J)   a means of implementation and enforcement which shall be
evidenced by:
            (i)   a copy of the ordinance, resolution, or tariff indicating
official adoption of the water conservation plan by the water supplier; and
            (ii)   a description of the authority by which the water supplier
will implement and enforce the conservation plan; and
         (K)   documentation of coordination with the regional water planning
groups for the service area of the public water supplier in order to ensure
consistency with the appropriate approved regional water plans.
      (2)   Additional content requirements. Water conservation plans for
municipal uses by public drinking water suppliers serving a current population
of 5,000 or more and/or a projected population of 5,000 or more within the next
ten years subsequent to the effective date of the plan must include the
following elements:
         (A)   a program of leak detection, repair, and water loss accounting
for the water transmission, delivery, and distribution system;
         (B)   a requirement in every wholesale water supply contract entered
into or renewed after official adoption of the plan (by either ordinance,
resolution, or tariff), and including any contract extension, that each
successive wholesale customer develop and implement a water conservation plan
or water conservation measures using the applicable elements in this chapter.
If the customer intends to resell the water, the contract between the initial
supplier and customer must provide that the contract for the resale of the
water must have water conservation requirements so that each successive
customer in the resale of the water will be required to implement water
conservation measures in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Additional conservation strategies. Any combination of the
following strategies shall be selected by the water supplier, in addition to
the minimum requirements in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection, if they
are necessary to achieve the stated water conservation goals of the plan. The
commission may require that any of the following strategies be implemented by
the water supplier if the commission determines that the strategy is necessary
to achieve the goals of the water conservation plan:
         (A)   conservation-oriented water rates and water rate structures such
as uniform or increasing block rate schedules, and/or seasonal rates, but not
flat rate or decreasing block rates;
         (B)   adoption of ordinances, plumbing codes, and/or rules requiring
water-conserving plumbing fixtures to be installed in new structures and
existing structures undergoing substantial modification or addition;
         (C)   a program for the replacement or retrofit of water-conserving
plumbing fixtures in existing structures;
         (D)   reuse and/or recycling of wastewater and/or graywater;
         (E)   a program for pressure control and/or reduction in the
distribution system and/or for customer connections;
         (F)   a program and/or ordinance(s) for landscape water management;
         (G)   a method for monitoring the effectiveness and efficiency of the
water conservation plan; and
         (H)   any other water conservation practice, method, or technique
which the water supplier shows to be appropriate for achieving the stated goal
or goals of the water conservation plan.
   (b)   A water conservation plan prepared in accordance with 31 TAC § 363.15
(relating to Required Water Conservation Plan) of the Texas Water Development
Board and substantially meeting the requirements of this section and other
applicable commission rules may be submitted to meet application requirements
in accordance with a memorandum of understanding between the commission and the
Texas Water Development Board.
   (c)   A public water supplier for municipal use shall review and update its
water conservation plan, as appropriate, based on an assessment of previous
five-year and ten-year targets and any other new or updated information. The
public water supplier for municipal use shall review and update the next
revision of its water conservation plan every five years to coincide with the
regional water planning group.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
Source Note: The provisions of this § 288.2 adopted to be effective May 3,
1993, 18 TexReg 2558; amended to be effective February 21, 1999, 24 TexReg 949;
amended to be effective April 27, 2000, 25 TexReg 3544; amended to be effective
October 7, 2004, 29 TexReg 9384; amended to be effective December 6, 2012, 37
TexReg 9515
 
APPENDIX B: FORM FOR WATER UTILITY PROFILE AND WATER CONSERVATION REPORT
 
Customer Water Conservation Report Due May 1 of Every Year
Name of Utility:   ____________________________________________________
Address & Zip:      ____________________________________________________
Telephone Number:
                                                                 Fax:
                     
Form Completed By:   ____________________________________________________
Title:            ____________________________________________________
Signature:
                                                                       Date:
                    
Name and Phone Number of Person/Department responsible for implementing a water
conservation program:
                                                                                                          
      
 
UTILITY PROFILE
 
I.   POPULATION CUSTOMER DATA
   A.   Population and Service Area Data
      1.   Service area size (square miles):
                                               
      2.   Current population of service area:
                                            
      3.   Current population served by utility:
         a:   water      ________________
         b:   wastewater   ________________
4.   Population served by water utility service area for the previous five 5.   Projected population for in the following
years:                                                                        decades:
4.   Population served by water utility service area for the previous five 5.   Projected population for in the following
years:                                                                        decades:
   Year Population                                                            YePopulation
   _________________                                                          20____________
   _________________                                                          20____________
   _________________                                                          20____________
   _________________                                                          20____________
   _________________                                                          20____________
   _________________                                                          20____________
 
      5.   List specific source(s)/method(s) for the calculation of current and
projected
         population:
                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                     
   B.   Active Connections
      1.   Current number of active connections by user type. Check whether
multifamily service is counted as Residential                 or Commercial
               .
 
Treated water users Metered Not-metered Total
Residential                            
Commercial                             
Industrial                             
Public                                 
Other                                  
 
      2.   List the net number of new connections per year for most recent
three years:
 
Year  20XX      20XX      20XX
Total    ____   ____   ______
 
   C.   High Volume Customers
      List annual water use for the ten highest volume customers (indicate if
treated or raw water delivery). Provide date of most recent water use audit -
if never audited, please indicate so.
 Customer Use (1,000 gallons / year) Treated / Raw Water Date of Last Water Use
                                                         Audit
     Customer Use (1,000 gallons / Treated / Raw Water Date of Last Water Use
              year)                                    Audit
(1)                                                  
(2)                                                  
(3)                                                  
(4)                                                  
(5)                                                  
(6)                                                  
(7)                                                  
(8)                                                  
(9)                                                  
(10)                                                 
 
II.   WATER USE DATA FOR SERVICE AREA
   A.   Water Accounting Data
      1.   Amount of water use for previous five years (in 1,000 gal.):
Total Diverted and Treated Water Deliveries and Sales by Month
Total Diverted and Treated Water Deliveries and Sales by Month
Month     Year
          20XX 20XX 20XX 20XX 20XX
January                    
February                   
March                      
April                      
May                        
June                       
July                       
August                     
September                  
October                    
November                   
December                   
Total                      
 
         Indicate how the above figures were determined (e.g., from a master
meter located at the point of a diversion from the source or located at a point
where raw water enters the treatment plant, or from water sales).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
      2.   Indicate whether water is supplied from:
         a.   Untreated surface water sources:                      
         b.   Another utility as treated water:                      
      2a.   For entities that treat their own water:
         Does utility operate a raw water intake? If so, indicate intake
location and minimum elevations of safe operation.
 
Location of raw water intake                                                       Elevation
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
 
      2b.   For entities that purchase treated water from another utility, list
water supply sources and quantity purchased from each source:
 
Treated water sources purchased                                                    Quantity
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
 
      3.   Amount of water (in 1,000 gallons) delivered (sold) as recorded by
the following account types for the past five years.
 
Account Type Year
Account Type  Year
             20XX 20XX 20XX 20XX 20XX
Residential                    
Commercial                     
Public /                       
Institutional
Industrial                     
Wholesale                      
Other                          
Total Sold                     
Residential:         Single + multifamily residences
Commercial:         Restaurants, retail, office
Public / Institutional:      Municipal, airports, schools, hospitals
Industrial:         Large manufacturing
Wholesale:         Deliveries to successive customers
Other:            Uses not included in above categories.
            Please describe:                                                                   
 
      4.   Calculate gallons per capita per day by account types for the past
five years.
Account Type Gallons per capita per day by Account Type (Total water diverted
             (or treated) / population / 365)
Account Type           Gallons per capita per day by Account Type (Total water
                       diverted (or treated) / population / 365)
                       20XX 20XX 20XX 20XX 20XX
Residential                             
Commercial                              
Public / Institutional                  
Industrial                              
Wholesale                               
Other                                   
Total                                   
 
      5.   List previous five years records for water loss (the difference
between water diverted (or treated) and water delivered (or sold)). The goal
for percent of unaccounted for water is 12%.
 
Year      Amount (gal.) % of Total Water Diverted or Treated
   ____   ________   _________
   ____   ________   _________
   ____   ________   _________
   ____   ________   _________
   ____   ________   _________
 
      6.   List previous five years records for water reuse. Reuse is the
authorized use for one or more beneficial purposes of use of water that remains
unconsumed after the water is used for the original purpose of use and before
that water is either disposed of or discharged or otherwise allowed to flow
into a watercourse, lake or other body of state-owned water.
 
Year      Amount (gal.) % of Total Water Diverted or Treated
   ____   ________   _________
   ____   ________   _________
   ____   ________   _________
   ____   ________   _________
   ____   ________   _________
 
      7.   Municipal per capita water use (in gallons per day) for previous
five years. Municipal per capita water use is the sum total of water diverted
into a water supply system for residential, commercial, and public and
institutional uses divided by total population served. GPCD includes water
losses.
 
Year      Population    Total Water Diverted      Municipal Per Capita Use
                        (or Treated) (1,000 gal.) (GPCD)
   ____   ________   _________           _________
   ____   ________   _________           _________
   ____   ________   _________           _________
   ____   ________   _________           _________
   ____   ________   _________           _________
 
      7.   Previously stated per capita goals:   5-year:
                     10-year:    _________
                                 (by 200X)           (by 200X)
      8.   Did water use (GPCD) increase or decrease from previous year?
_________
         Percent increase or decrease from previous year?
______________________
      9.   Briefly discuss reasons for the increase or decrease in municipal
water use.
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(Ord. OR-2631-24, passed 4-22-24)
APPENDIX C: LETTER TO REGION C WATER PLANNING GROUP
Letter to Region C Water Planning Group
Date
 
 
 
Mr. Kevin Ward
Chair, Region C Water Planning Group
Trinity River Authority
P.O. Box 60
Arlington, TX 76004
 
Dear Mr. Ward:
Enclosed please find a copy of the water conservation plan for customers of the
City of Mansfield. I am submitting a copy of this plan to the Region C Water
Planning Group in accordance with the Texas Water Development Board and Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality rules.
Sincerely,
 
 
Jeff Price
Executive Director, Public Works
City of Mansfield
1.   INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES
This plan addresses all of the current Texas Commission on Environmental
Equality (TCEQ) requirements for a drought contingency plan. The purpose of
this drought contingency plan is as follows:
•   To protect and preserve public health, welfare, and safety
•   To conserve the available water supply in times of drought and emergency
•   To maintain supplies for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire
protection
•   To minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortages
•   To minimize the adverse impacts of emergency water supply conditions.
2.   TEXAS COMMISSION ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY RULES
The TCEQ rules governing development of drought contingency plans for public
water suppliers and wholesale water suppliers are contained in Title 30, Part
1, Chapter 288, Subchapter B of the Texas Administrative Code. For the purpose
of these rules, a drought contingency plan is defined as “a strategy or
combination of strategies for temporary supply and demand management responses
to temporary and potentially recurring water supply shortages and other water
supply emergencies.”
3.   DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN
3.1   Provisions to Inform the Public and Opportunity for Public Input
The City of Mansfield will provide opportunity for public input in the
development of this drought contingency plan by the following means:
•   Having a public meeting at a time and place convenient to the public and
providing written notice to the public concerning the proposed plan and
meeting.
3.2   Provisions for Continuing Public Education and Information
The City of Mansfield will inform and educate the public about the drought
contingency plan by the following means:
•   Preparing a bulletin describing the plan and making it available at city
hall and other appropriate locations.
•   Making the plan available to the public through the city’s website.
•   Notifying local organizations, schools, and civic groups that staff are
available to make presentations on the drought contingency plan (usually in
conjunction with presentations on water conservation programs).
At any time that the drought contingency plan is activated or the drought stage
changes, the City of Mansfield will notify local media of the issues, the
drought response stage, and the specific actions required of the public. The
information will also be publicized on the city’s website. Newsletters and/or
notices on bill stuffers will also be used as appropriate.
3.3   Initiation and Termination of Drought and Emergency Response Stages
Initiation of a Drought and Emergency Response Stage
The City Manager or official designee may order the implementation of a drought
response stage or water emergency when one or more of the trigger conditions
for that stage is met. The following actions will be taken when a drought stage
is initiated:
•   The public will be notified through local media and the city’s website as
described in Section 3.2.
•   Wholesale customers and the Tarrant Regional Water District (TRWD) will be
notified by telephone and with a follow-up letter or e-mail that provides
details of the reasons for initiation of the drought stage.
•   If any mandatory provisions of the drought contingency plan are activated,
the City of Mansfield will notify the Executive Director of TCEQ within five
business days.
The City Manager or official designee may decide not to order the
implementation of a drought response stage or water emergency even though one
or more of the trigger criteria for the stage are met. Factors which could
influence such a decision include, but are not limited to, the time of the
year, weather conditions, the anticipation of replenished water supplies, or
the anticipation that additional facilities will become available to meet
needs. The reason for this decision should be documented.
Termination of a Drought Stage
The City Manager or official designee may order the termination of a drought
response stage or water emergency when the conditions for termination are met
or at their discretion. The following actions will be taken when a drought
stage is terminated:
•   The public will be notified through local media and the city’s website as
described in Section 3.2.
•   Wholesale customers and TRWD will be notified by telephone and with a
follow-up letter or email.
•   If any mandatory provisions of the drought contingency plan that have been
activated are terminated, the City of Mansfield will notify the Executive
Director of the TCEQ within five business days.
The City Manager or official designee may decide not to order the termination
of a drought response stage or water emergency even though the conditions for
termination of the stage are met. Factors which could influence such a decision
include, but are not limited to, the time of the year, weather conditions, or
the anticipation of potential changed conditions that warrant the continuation
of the drought stage. The reason for this decision should be documented.
3.4 Drought and Emergency Response Stages
Stage 1, Water Watch
Triggering and Terminating Conditions
TRWD has initiated Stage 1, Water Watch, which may be initiated by one or more
of the following:
•   Total raw water supply in TRWD western and eastern division reservoirs
drops below 75% (25% depleted) of conservation storage.
•   Water demand for all or part of the TRWD delivery system exceeds delivery
capacity because delivery capacity is inadequate. Water demand has exceeded or
is expected to exceed 80% of maximum sustainable production of delivery
capacity for an extended period
•   Water demand is projected to approach the limit of TRWD’s permitted supply.
•   TRWD’s supply source becomes contaminated.
•   TRWD’s water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or
damage of major water system components.
•   The TRWD General Manager, with the concurrence of the TRWD Board of
Directors, finds that conditions warrant the declaration of a Stage 1 drought.
•   The City of Mansfield’s demand exceeds the amount that can be delivered to
customers.
•   City’s water demand for all or part of the delivery system approaches
delivery capacity because delivery capacity is inadequate.
•   City’s water treatment or distribution system becomes contaminated.
•   City’s water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or
damage of major water system components.
•   City’s plan may be implemented if other criteria dictate.
Stage 1 may terminate when TRWD terminates its Stage 1 condition, when the
circumstances that caused the initiation of Stage 1 no longer prevail, or at
the discretion of the City Manager or official designee.
Stage 1 may be terminated when total raw water supply in TRWD western and
eastern division reservoirs reaches 85% for 90 days or lake levels reach 95%,
or at the discretion of the City Manager or official designee.
Goal for Use Reduction
The goal for water use reduction under Stage 1, Water Watch, is to decrease use
by five percent. If circumstances warrant or if required by TRWD, the City
Manager or his/her official designee can set a goal for greater water use
reduction.
Actions Available under Stage 1, Water Watch
The City Manager or official designee may implement any action(s) requested by
TRWD. In addition, the City Manager or official designee may order the
implementation of any of the other actions listed below, as deemed necessary.
The City of Mansfield must notify TCEQ within five business days if any
mandatory measures are implemented.
All Water Users
•   Initiate mandatory restrictions to prohibit non-essential water use as
follows:
   o   Prohibit hosing of buildings or other structures for purposes other than
fire protection or surface preparation prior to painting.
   o   Prohibit using water in such a manner as to allow runoff or other waste,
including:
      (1)   failure to repair a controllable leak, including a broken sprinkler
head, a leaking valve, leaking or broken pipes, or a leaking faucet;
      (2)   operating a permanently installed irrigation system with: (a) a
broken head; (b) a head that is out of adjustment and the arc of the spray head
is over a street or parking lot; or (c) a head that is misting because of high
water pressure; or
      (3)   during irrigation, allowing water to (a) to run off a property and
form a stream of water in a street for a distance of 50 feet or greater; or (b)
to pond in a street or parking lot to a depth greater than one-quarter of an
inch.
•   Outdoor watering with sprinklers or irrigation systems is prohibited
between 10 a.m. and 6 p.m. year-round, in all stages.
•   Limit landscape watering with sprinklers or irrigation systems at each
service address to a twice per week schedule as determined by the Executive
Director of Public Works.
   Exceptions:
      •   Foundations may be watered up to two hours on any day by handheld
hose; or using a soaker hose or drip irrigation system placed within 24-inches
of the foundation that does not produce a spray of water above the ground.
      •   New plantings, (first year) of shrubs, and trees may be watered up to
two hours on any day by handheld hose, drip irrigation, or a soaker hose. Tree
watering is limited to an area not to exceed the drip line of a tree.
      •   Twice per week landscape watering restrictions do not apply to
locations using well water or treated wastewater effluent for irrigation.
      •   Outdoor watering at service addresses with large multistation
irrigation systems may take place in accordance with a variance granted by the
Executive Director of Public Works. If the Executive Director determines that a
property cannot be completely irrigated with an average of three-quarters of an
inch of water in a single day, the property should be divided into sections to
be irrigated on different days.
•   Establishing new turf is discouraged. If new hydromulch, grass sod, or
grass seed is installed, there are no watering restrictions for the first 30
days while it is being established. After that, the watering restrictions set
forth in this stage apply.
•   Washing of any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane, or other
vehicle shall be limited to the use of a hand-held bucket or a hand-held hose
equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. Vehicle washing may
be done at any time on the premises of a commercial car wash or commercial
service station. Further, such washing may be exempt from these requirements if
the health, safety, and welfare of the public are contingent upon frequent
vehicle cleansing, such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food
and perishables.
•   Encourage reduction in frequency of draining and refilling swimming pools.
•   Encourage use of Texas native and drought-tolerant plants in landscaping.
City and Local Governments
In addition to actions listed above, the City Manager or official designee may
also:
•   Review conditions and problems that caused Stage 1. Take corrective action.
•   Increase public education efforts on ways to reduce water use.
•   Intensify leak detection and repair efforts.
•   Audit all city and local government irrigation systems to ensure proper
condition, settings, and operation.
•   Identify and encourage voluntary reduction measures by high-volume water
users through water use audits.
•   Increase enforcement efforts.
•   Landscape watering of municipal parks, golf courses, and sports fields is
restricted to twice per week watering schedule, per irrigation station.
   Exceptions:
      •   Golf courses may water greens and tee boxes without restrictions,
however watering must be done before 10 a.m. and after 6 p.m.
      •   Watering of athletic fields (field only, does not include surrounding
landscaped areas) used for organized sports practice, competition, or
exhibition events may occur as necessary to protect the health and safety of
the players, staff, or officials present for athletic events. Encouraged to
reduce water use by five percent.
      •   See all water users category above for rules that apply to facilities
with large multistation irrigation systems.
•   Reduce non-essential water use. As used herein, non-essential water uses
are those that do not have any health or safety impact and are not needed to
meet the core function of the agency.
•   Notify wholesale customers of actions being taken and request them to
implement similar procedures.
Commercial or Industrial
•   All actions listed above for all water users apply to commercial and
industrial users.
•   Landscape watering of parks, golf courses, and sports fields is restricted
to twice per week watering schedule, per irrigation station.
   Exceptions:
      •   Golf courses may water greens and tee boxes without restrictions,
however watering must be done before 10 a.m. and after 6 p.m.
      •   Watering of athletic fields (field only, does not include surrounding
landscaped areas) used for organized sports practice, competition, or
exhibition events may occur as necessary to protect the health and safety of
the players, staff, or officials present for athletic events. Encouraged to
reduce water use by five percent.
      •   See all water users category above for rules that apply to facilities
with large multi-station irrigation systems.
•   Stock at commercial plant nurseries is exempt from Stage 1 watering
restrictions.
•   Hotels are encouraged to implement laundry conservation measures by
encouraging patrons to reuse linens and towels.
Stage 2, Water Warning
Triggering and Terminating Conditions
The TRWD has initiated Stage 2, Water Warning, which may be initiated by one or
more of the following:
•   Total raw water supply in TRWD western and eastern division reservoirs
drops below 60% (40% depleted) of conservation storage.
•   Water demand has exceeded or is expected to exceed 85% of maximum
sustainable production of delivery capacity for an extended period. Water
demand is projected to approach the limit of TRWD’s permitted supply.
•   TRWD’s supply source becomes contaminated.
•   TRWD’s water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or
damage of major water system components.
•   The TRWD General Manager, with the concurrence of the TRWD Board of
Directors, finds that conditions warrant the declaration of a Stage 2 drought.
•   The City of Mansfield’s demand exceeds production capacity of the amount
that can be delivered to customers for 1 day.
•   City’s demand for all or part of the delivery system equals or exceeds
delivery capacity because delivery capacity is inadequate.
•   City’s water treatment or distribution system becomes contaminated.
•   City’s water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or
damage of major water system components.
•   City’s plan may be implemented if other criteria dictate.
Stage 2 may terminate when TRWD terminates its Stage 2 condition, when the
circumstances that caused the initiation of Stage 2 no longer prevail, or at
the discretion of the City Manager or official designee.
Stage 2 may be terminated when total raw water supply in TRWD western and
eastern division reservoirs reaches 70% for 30 days or lake levels reach 75%,
or at the discretion of the City Manager or official designee.
Goal for Use Reduction
The goal for water use reduction under Stage 2, Water Warning, is to decrease
use by ten percent. If circumstances warrant or if required by TRWD, the City
Manager or official designee can set a goal for greater water use reduction.
Actions Available under Stage 2, Water Warning
The City Manager or official designee may implement any action(s) requested by
TRWD. In addition, the City Manager or official designee may order the
implementation of any the other actions, including but not limited to those
listed below, as deemed necessary. The City of Mansfield must notify TCEQ
within five business days if any mandatory measures are implemented:
All Water Users
•   Landscape watering with sprinklers or irrigation systems at each service
address is limited to once every seven days. Outdoor watering schedule to be
determined by director of utilities.
   Exceptions:
      •   Foundations may be watered up to two hours on any day by handheld
hose; or using a soaker hose or drip irrigation system placed within 24 inches
of the foundation that does not produce a spray of water above the ground.
      •   New plantings, (first year) of shrubs, and trees may be watered up to
two hours on any day by handheld hose, drip irrigation, or a soaker hose. Tree
watering is limited to an area not to exceed the drip line of a tree.
      •   Once per week outdoor watering restrictions do not apply to locations
using well water or treated wastewater effluent for irrigation.
      •   Outdoor watering at service addresses with large multistation
irrigation systems may take place in accordance with a variance granted by the
Executive Director of Public Works. If the executive director determines that a
property cannot be completely irrigated with an average of three-quarters of an
inch of water in a single day, the property should be divided into sections to
be irrigated on different days.
•   The public is encouraged to wait until the current drought or emergency
situation has passed before establishing new landscaping. If new hydromulch,
grass sod, or grass seed is installed, there are no watering restrictions for
the first 30 days while it is being established. After that, the watering
restrictions set forth in this stage apply.
•   Prohibit use of water for dust control, except as required to protect
public health.
•   Prohibit the operation of ornamental fountains or ponds that use potable
water except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or
ponds are equipped with a recirculation system.
•   Discourage filling of swimming pools with automatic valves.
City and Local Governments
In addition to actions listed above:
•   Continue or initiate any actions available under Stage 1.
•   Review conditions or problems that caused Stage 2. Take corrective action.
•   Increase frequency of media releases on water supply conditions.
•   Further accelerate public education efforts on ways to reduce water use.
•   Landscape watering at municipal parks, golf courses, and sports fields is
limited to once every seven days, per irrigation station.
   Exceptions:
      •   Golf courses may water greens and tee boxes as needed to keep them
alive, however watering must be done before 10 a.m. and after 6 p.m.
      •   Watering of athletic fields (field only, does not include surrounding
landscaped areas) used for organized sports practice, competition, or
exhibition events may occur as necessary to protect the health and safety of
the players, staff, or officials present for athletic events. Encouraged to
reduce water use by ten percent.
      •   See all water users category above for rules that apply to facilities
with large multistation irrigation systems.
•   Halt non-essential water use. As used herein, non-essential water uses are
those that do not have any health or safety impact and are not needed to meet
the core function of the agency.
•   Notify wholesale customers of actions being taken and request them to
implement similar procedures.
Commercial or Industrial
•   All actions listed above for all water users apply to commercial and
industrial users.
•   Landscape watering at parks, golf courses, and sports fields is limited to
once every seven days, per irrigation station.
   Exceptions:
      •   Golf courses may water greens and tee boxes as needed to keep them
alive, however watering must be done before 10 a.m. and after 6 p.m.
      •   Watering of athletic fields (field only, does not include surrounding
landscaped areas) used for organized sports practice, competition, or
exhibition events may occur as necessary to protect the health and safety of
the players, staff, or officials present for athletic events. Encouraged to
reduce water use by ten percent.
      •   See all water users category above for rules that apply to facilities
with large multi-station irrigation systems.
Stage 3, Water Emergency
Triggering and Terminating Conditions
TRWD has initiated Stage 3, Water Emergency, which may be initiated by one or
more of the following:
•   Total raw water supply in TRWD western and eastern division reservoirs
drops below 45% (55% depleted) of conservation storage.
•   Water demand has exceeded or is expected to exceed 90% of the maximum
sustainable production of delivery capacity for an extended period.
•   Water demand is projected to approach or exceed the limit of TRWD’s
permitted supply.
•   TRWDs supply source becomes contaminated.
•   TRWD’s water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or
damage of major water system components.
•   The TRWD General Manager, with the concurrence of the TRWD Board of
Directors, finds that conditions warrant the declaration of a Stage 3 drought.
•   The City of Mansfield’s demand exceeds production capacity of the amount
that can be delivered to customers for two consecutive days.
•   City’s demand for all or part of the delivery system exceeds delivery
capacity because delivery capacity is inadequate.
•   Natural or man-made contamination of the water supplier’s treatment or
distribution system.
•   City’s water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or
damage of major water system components.
•   City’s plan may be implemented if other criteria dictate.
Stage 3 may terminate when TRWD terminates its Stage 3 condition, when the
circumstances that caused the initiation of Stage 3 no longer prevail, or at
the discretion of the City Manager or official designee.
Stage 3 may be terminated when total raw water supply in TRWD western and
eastern division reservoirs reaches 55% for 30 days or lake levels reach 60%,
or at the discretion of the City Manager or official designee.
Goals for Use Reduction
The goal for water use reduction under Stage 3, Emergency Water Use, is to
decrease use by 20 percent. If circumstances warrant or if required by TRWD,
the City Manager or official designee can set a goal for a greater water use
reduction.
Actions Available under Stage 3, Water Emergency
The City Manager or official designee must implement any action(s) required by
TRWD. In addition, the City Manager or official designee may order the
implementation of any other actions, including but not limited to those listed
below, as deemed necessary. The City of Mansfield must notify TCEQ within five
business days if any mandatory measures are implemented:
All Water Users
•   Prohibit landscape watering.
   Exceptions:
      •   Foundations may be watered up to two hours on any day by handheld
hose; or using a soaker hose or drip irrigation system placed within 24 inches
of the foundation that does not produce a spray of water above the ground.
      •   Trees may be watered up to two hours on any day by handheld hose,
drip irrigation, or a soaker hose. Tree watering is limited to an area not to
exceed the drip line of a tree.
•   Establishment of new landscaping shall be done in accordance with Section
3.5 (Procedures for Granting Variances to the Plan) ONLY.
•   Vehicle washing restricted to commercial car wash or commercial service
station and can only be done as necessary for health, sanitation, or safety
reasons, including but not limited to the washing of garbage trucks and
vehicles used to transport food and other perishables. All other vehicle
washing is prohibited.
City and Local Governments
In addition to actions listed above:
•   Continue or initiate any actions available under Stages 1 and 2.
•   Review conditions or problems that caused Stage 3. Take corrective action.
•   Implement viable alternative water supply strategies.
•   Increase frequency of media releases explaining emergency situation.
•   Reduce city and local government water use to maximum extent possible.
•   Landscape watering at municipal parks, golf courses, and sports fields is
prohibited.
   Exceptions:
      •   Golf course greens may be watered by hand as needed to keep them
alive, however watering must be done before 10 a.m. and after 6 p.m.
      •   Watering of athletic fields (field only, does not include surrounding
landscaped areas) used for organized sports practice, competition, or
exhibition events may occur as necessary to protect the health and safety of
the players, staff, or officials present for athletic events. A reduction of
water use by 20% is encouraged.
•   Institute a mandated reduction in deliveries to all customers. Such a
reduction will be distributed as required by Tex. Water Code § 11.039.
•   If TRWD has imposed a reduction in water available to customers, impose the
same percent reduction on wholesale customers.
•   Notify wholesale customers of actions being taken and request them to
implement similar procedures.
Commercial or Industrial
•   All actions listed above for all water users apply to commercial and
industrial users.
•   Landscape watering at parks, golf courses, and sports fields is prohibited.
   Exceptions:
      •   Golf course greens may be watered by hand as needed to keep them
alive, however watering must be done before 10 a.m. and after 6 p.m.
      •   Watering of athletic fields (field only, does not include surrounding
landscaped areas) used for organized sports practice, competition, or
exhibition events may occur as necessary to protect the health and safety of
the players, staff, or officials present for athletic events. Encouraged to
reduce water use by twenty percent.
•   Hotels required to implement laundry conservation measures by encouraging
patrons to reuse linens and towels.
•   Stock at commercial plant nursery may be watered only with a hand-held
hose, hand-held watering can, or drip irrigation system.
•   Commercial and industrial water users required to reduce water use by a set
percentage (20 percent is the goal for stage 3).
3.5   Procedures for Granting Variances to the Plan
The City Manager or official designee may grant temporary variances for
existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this drought contingency plan if
one or more of the following conditions are met:
•   Failure to grant such a variance would cause an emergency condition
adversely affecting health, sanitation, or fire safety for the public or the
person requesting the variance.
•   Compliance with this plan cannot be accomplished due to technical or other
limitations.
•   Alternative methods that achieve the same level of reduction in water use
can be implemented.
Variances shall be granted or denied at the discretion of the City Manager or
official designee. All petitions for variances should be in writing and should
include the following information:
•   Name and address of the petitioner(s)
•   Purpose of water use
•   Specific provisions from which relief is requested
•   Detailed statement of the adverse effect of the provision from which relief
is requested
•   Description of the relief requested
•   Period of time for which the variance is sought
•   Alternative measures that will be taken to reduce water use
•   Other pertinent information.
3.6   Procedures for Enforcing Mandatory Water Use Restrictions
Mandatory water use restrictions may be imposed in Stages 1, 2, and 3 drought
stages. These mandatory water use restrictions will be enforced by warnings and
penalties as follows:
•   On the first violation, customers will be given a written warning that they
have violated the mandatory water use restriction.
•   On the second and subsequent violations, citations may be issued to
customers, with minimum and maximum fines established by ordinance.
•   After two violations have occurred, utility may install a flow restrictor
in the line to limit the amount of water that may pass through the meter in a
24-hour period.
•   After three violations have occurred, the utility may cut off water service
to the customer.
3.7   Wholesale Water Contracts
The City of Mansfield will include a provision in every wholesale water
contract entered into or renewed after adoption of the plan, including contract
extensions, that in case of a shortage of water resulting from drought, the
water to be distributed shall be divided in accordance with Tex. Water Code §
11.039.
3.8   Review and Update of Drought Contingency Plan
As required by TCEQ rules, the City of Mansfield will review this drought
contingency plan at least every five years. The plan will be updated as
appropriate based on new or updated information.
(Ord. OR-2361-24, passed 4-22-24)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      Chapter
         
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
         
72.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
         
73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Short title; adoption of Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways
   
70.02   Accident reports
   
70.03   General powers and duties to enforce
   
70.04   Liability of registered owner or operator and property owner
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.15   Conformance with state manual
   
70.16   Obedience to devices
   
70.17   Applicability of provisions to authorized emergency vehicles
   
70.18   Erection of signs, markings and the like resembling traffic-control
devices
   
70.19   Interfering with official traffic-control devices
   
70.20   Erection, installation of devices; filing of report
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 SHORT TITLE; ADOPTION OF UNIFORM ACT REGULATING TRAFFIC ON HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   This title may be known and cited as the Traffic Code.
   (B)   All provisions of the Tex. Transp. Code are hereby adopted by
reference as a part of this title and are supplemented by the regulations set
forth in this title.
('78 Code, § 16-1) (Ord. 464, passed 5-10-82)
§ 70.02 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in any accident resulting in injuries or
death to any person or property damage to an apparent extent of $250 or more
shall make a written report of such accident to the police headquarters in this
city, regardless of who may be at fault or negligent.
('78 Code, § 16-3) (Ord. 21, passed 6-10-47)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Accident reports by operator, see Tex. Transp. Code §§ 550.026 and 550.067
§ 70.03 GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES TO ENFORCE.
   Unless specifically declared otherwise:
   (A)   The Chief of Police, or any member of the Police Department designated
by the Chief of Police, shall have the responsibility for and duty to enforce
all of the provisions of this title; and
   (B)   The Chief of Police, or any member of the Police Department designated
by the Chief of Police, is hereby authorized to issue a citation to any person
who is found to have violated any provision of this title; and
   (C)   In addition to any applicable fine, any vehicle in violation of the
provisions of this title may be subject to being towed, at the discretion of
the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, to a place of impoundment in the
manner provided for by law.
(Ord. OR-2327-23, passed 11-13-23)
§ 70.04 LIABILITY OF REGISTERED OWNER OR OPERATOR AND PROPERTY OWNER.
   (A)   If any vehicle is found in violation of any provision of this title,
and the identity of the operator of the vehicle cannot be determined, the
registered owner shall be the presumed operator at the time of the violation.
   (B)   If the operator or registered owner is a corporation, then the senior
or managing officer of the corporation shall be the presumed operator of the
vehicle at the time of the violation.
   (C)   When the registered owner or operator is charged with having committed
and violating any provision of this title, or commits an act which is
prohibited under this title and which violates state law or city ordinance,
proof that the vehicle was, on the date of the offense alleged, owned or
operated by the person charged with the offense shall constitute prima facie
evidence that the act which constitutes the violation under this title was
committed by the registered owner or operator.
   (D)   Property owner shall be responsible for adherence to applicable
provisions within this title, specifically §
71.31(B). Failure to do so may result in liability of the property owner for
violations of said section.
   (E)   Unless specifically declared otherwise, the following shall apply for
provisions of this title:
      (1)   OWNER shall mean the person registered with the state as the
present owner of a vehicle in the most current registration records available
to the city, or any transferee not designated in such records, provided that
actual notice of the transfer is given. The term shall also include a person
entitled to the use and possession of a vehicle; and
      (2)   OPERATOR shall mean the person having possession of, in charge of,
or using such vehicle during the time any violation under this title is
committed.
      (3)   PROPERTY OWNER shall mean the person holding title to the property.
The term shall also include the property manager or agent for commercial and
retail establishments.
(Ord. OR-2327-23, passed 11-13-23)
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.15 CONFORMANCE WITH STATE MANUAL.
   All traffic-control devices including signs, signals and markings (pavement
and/or curb) installed or used for the purpose of directing and controlling
traffic within the city shall conform with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices for Streets and Highways (hereinafter called the "Manual"). All
signs, signals and markings erected or used by the City of Mansfield shall be
uniform and be located so far as practicable according to the directions shown
in the Manual. All existing traffic-control devices and those erected in the
future by the city that are consistent with the Manual, state law and this
subchapter shall be designated as official traffic-control devices.
('78 Code, § 16-56) (Ord. 408, passed 4-28-80)
§ 70.16 OBEDIENCE TO DEVICES.
   The driver of any vehicle, motor vehicle or animal shall obey the
instructions of any official traffic-control device, sign, signal or marking
applicable thereto placed in accordance with this subchapter, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of
an authorized emergency vehicle permitted by this subchapter.
('78 Code, § 16-57) (Ord. 408, passed 4-28-80)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.17 APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, as the term "authorized
emergency vehicle" is defined by state law, when responding to an emergency
call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or
when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the
privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein
stated.
   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may do the following.
      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this title or any
ordinance.
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.
      (3)   Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he/she does not
endanger life or property.
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specific directions.
   (C)   The exemption herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall
apply only when the driver of any said vehicle in motion sounds audible signal
by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the
vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light
visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the
front of such vehicles, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as
a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light from in front
of the vehicle.
   (D)   The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of
his/her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
('78 Code, § 16-58) (Ord. 408, passed 4-28-80)
§ 70.18 ERECTION OF SIGNS, MARKINGS AND THE LIKE RESEMBLING TRAFFIC-CONTROL
DEVICES.
   (A)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
highway, street or alley any unauthorized signs, signals, marking or device
which purports to be, or is an imitation of, or resembles an official traffic-
control device or railroad signal or sign, or which attempts to direct the
movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official control device or any railroad sign or signal.
   (B)   No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority
permit upon any highway, street or alley any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising.
   (C)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private
property adjacent to highways, streets or alleys of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official
signs.
   (D)   Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance, and the Chief of Police is hereby empowered to remove the
same or cause it to be moved without notice.
('78 Code, § 16-59) (Ord. 408, passed 4-28-80)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.19 INTERFERING WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device, sign,
signal or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia
thereon, or any part thereof.
('78 Code, § 16-60) (Ord. 408, passed 4-28-80)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.20 ERECTION, INSTALLATION OF DEVICES; FILING OF REPORT.
   (A)   (1)   The City Manager shall have the duty of and is hereby authorized
to erect or install upon, over, along or beside any highway, street or alley
signs, signals and markings, or cause the same to be erected, installed or
placed in accordance with this subchapter and consistent with the manual. The
traffic-control devices shall be installed immediately, or as soon as the
specific device, sign or signal can be produced.
      (2)   Whenever the City Manager has erected and installed any official
traffic-control device, signal or sign at any location in the city, or has
caused the same to be done under his/her direction in obedience to this
subchapter and the manual, he/she shall thereafter file a report with the City
Secretary in writing and signed officially by the City Manager, stating the
type of traffic-control device, sign or signal, and when and where the same was
erected and installed. The City Secretary shall file and maintain the report of
the City Manager among the official papers of the office of the City Secretary.
('78 Code, § 16-61)
   (B)   It being unlawful for any person other than the Street Superintendent,
acting pursuant to an ordinance of the city, to install or cause to be
installed any signal, sign or device purporting to direct the use of the
streets or the activities on those streets of pedestrians, vehicles, motor
vehicles or animals, proof, in any prosecution for a violation of this
subchapter or any traffic ordinance of the city, that any traffic-control
device, sign, signal or marking was actually in place on any street shall
constitute prima facie evidence that the same was installed by the Street
Superintendent pursuant to the authority of this subchapter and of the
ordinance directing the installation of the device, signal or marking.
('78 Code, § 16-62)
(Ord. 408, passed 4-28-80)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Wherever in this title an act is prohibited or is made or declared to
be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in this title the doing
of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful,
and no specific penalty is otherwise provided in this code of ordinances, the
violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500, provided, however,
that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same
or a similar offense of the laws of the state.
   (B)   Each day a violation of this code or any ordinance continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Abandoned vehicles
   
71.02   Go-carts
   
71.03   Riding motorcycles on private property
   
71.04   General speed regulations
Commercial Motor Vehicles
   
71.20   Definitions
   
71.21   Use of truck routes and commercial delivery routes by inter-city
vehicles
   
71.22   Use of truck routes and hazardous material truck routes required;
exceptions
   
71.23   Signs to designate truck routes
   
71.24   Alternate truck routes
   
71.25   Oversize and overweight vehicles
   
71.26   Size limitations
   
71.27   Weight limitations
   
71.28   Permit required for oversize and overweight vehicles
   
71.29   Spillage
   
71.30   Light weight vehicles excepted
   
71.31   Parking commercial motor vehicles
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01 ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly leave parked or
standing any motor vehicle for a period of more than 48 hours on public
property, on private property without the consent of the owner or person in
control of the property or on the right-of-way of a designated county, state or
federal highway. It shall also be unlawful for any person to knowingly leave
parked or standing any motor vehicle for more than 12 hours on a turnpike
project constructed and maintained by the Texas Turnpike Authority. Any vehicle
left parked or standing in violation of this section shall be presumed to be an
abandoned vehicle.
   (B)   Any vehicle left parked or standing in violation of this section is
hereby declared to be a nuisance per se and the fact that any person in whose
name the vehicle is registered allows, permits or suffers the vehicle to be
left unattended shall be prima facie evidence that the registered owner
unlawfully and knowingly parked or left the vehicle.
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall have the authority to direct the removal,
impoundment and/or disposal of vehicles in violation of this section in
accordance with the procedures set forth by state law on abandoned vehicles
and/or traffic on highways.
('78 Code, § 16-2) (Ord. 464, passed 5-10-82)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Offense of placing obstructions in streets, see Tex. Penal Code, § 42.03
§ 71.02 GO-CARTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a go-cart on the public
streets or sidewalks within the city.
('78 Code, § 16-7) (Ord. 134, passed 5-9-61)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.03 RIDING MOTORCYCLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person shall ride or drive any motorcycle on any private property within
the city, other than in parking areas at commercial establishments, without
having in his/her possession written permission from the owner of such property
to ride or drive a motorcycle thereon.
('78 Code, § 16-9) (Ord. 444, passed 7-13-81)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.04 GENERAL SPEED REGULATIONS.
   Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation heretofore made
on the designated streets within the corporate limits of the city as set forth
in Ch. 73, Sch. I, authorized by the provisions of Tex. Transp. Code § 545.356,
the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, the speed limits indicated in
Ch. 73, Sch. I for vehicles are hereby determined and declared to be the lawful
maximum prima facie reasonable and prudent speed limits during the hours
specifically indicated; and the speed limits being the lawful maximum prima
facie reasonable and prudent speed limits for vehicles traveling at any time or
during the specific hours upon the named streets and highways, or parts
thereof, described in Ch. 73, Sch. I.
('78 Code, § 16-4 (part)) (Ord. 142, passed 6-26-62; Ord. 219, passed 4-14-70;
Ord. 248, passed 9-12-72; Ord. 303, passed 5-27-75; Ord. 304, passed 7-8-75;
Ord. 311, passed 10-28-75; Ord. 446, passed 8-12-81; Ord. 617, passed 7-8-85;
Ord. 627, passed 8-26-85; Ord. 680, passed 6-9-86; Ord. 832, passed 5-8-89;
Ord. 844, passed 8-28-89; Ord. 856, passed 11-27-89; Ord. 858, passed 3-12-92;
Ord. 903, passed 9-4-91; Ord. 981, passed 9-27-93; Ord. 997, passed 3-28-94;
Ord. 1023, passed 9-26-94; Ord. 1063, passed 1-23-95; Ord. 1098, passed 10-23-
95)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Cross reference:
   Traffic schedules, see
Ch. 73
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 71.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle (other than a motorcycle or
passenger car) designed or used primarily for the transportation of property,
including any passenger car which has been reconstructed so as to be used, and
which is being used, primarily for delivery purposes, with the exception of
passenger cars used in the delivery of the United States mails.
   DESIGNATED CITY OFFICIAL.  Any city employee designated as such by the City
Manager or his designee.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any materials designated as hazardous under the
hazardous materials regulations contained within the Code of Federal
Regulations, as amended.
   MOBILE HOME. A living quarters unit equipped and used for sleeping and
eating which may be moved from one location to another over a public street by
being pulled behind a motor vehicle.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle, as herein defined, that is self-propelled.
   POLE TRAILER. A vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another
vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach, or pole, or by
being boomed, or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used
for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes or
structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams
between the supporting connections.
   SEMITRAILER. A vehicle of the trailer type so designed or used in
conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of
its own load rests upon or is carried by such motor vehicle.
   TRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used to carry its load wholly or on its
own structure and to be drawn by a motor vehicle.
   TRUCK-TRACTOR. A motor vehicle designed or used primarily for drawing other
vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the
weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
   VEHICLE. Every device in or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved only by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(‘78 Code, § 16-20) (Ord. 182, passed 10-12-65; Ord. 498, passed 7-11-83; Ord.
896, passed 4-22-91; Am. Ord. 1600, passed 11-27-06; Am. Ord. OR-1918-14,
passed 9-8-14)
§ 71.21 USE OF TRUCK ROUTES AND COMMERCIAL DELIVERY ROUTES BY INTER-CITY
VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any truck-tractor,
trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or any combination thereof through the city
in inter-city travel, without a local destination or point or origin, except
upon such streets as are designated as truck routes by this title.
   (B)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any commercial motor
vehicle through the city in inter-city travel without a local destination or
point of origin, except upon such streets as are designated as truck routes or
commercial delivery routes by this title.
   (C)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any truck, truck-
tractor, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer, commercial motor vehicle or any
other type of motor vehicle or combination thereof through the city in inter-
city travel, without a local destination or point of origin, while bearing
hazardous materials, except upon such street or streets as are designated as
hazardous materials truck routes by this title.
('78 Code, § 16-21) (Ord. 498, passed 7-11-83; Ord. 896, passed 4-22-91)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.22 USE OF TRUCK ROUTES AND HAZARDOUS MATERIAL TRUCK ROUTES REQUIRED;
EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Required. The use of truck and hazardous materials truck routes are
required except as provided in this section.
   (B)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
following.
      (1)   To a vehicle traveling to or from a truck terminal, garage, place
of repair, place of performing a service or a place of loading or unloading,
providing it is traveling over the shortest practicable route to a point on a
truck route; any such vehicle shall be permitted to proceed from one such point
not on a truck route to another such point without returning to a truck route
if to so return would unreasonably increase the distance to be traveled between
such points; the operator of any such vehicle shall carry evidence of the
location of its last stop and of its immediate destination in order for this
exception to apply.
      (2)   To a vehicle carrying hazardous materials in inter-city travel,
which may travel to or from the hazardous materials truck route by using the
shortest practical route to or from the duly licensed place of loading or
unloading such hazardous materials. The operator of any vehicle carrying
hazardous materials shall carry evidence of the location of its last stop and
of its immediate destination, and shall provide such evidence to any officer
authorized to enforce this subchapter upon request of the officer.
      (3)   To emergency vehicles operating in response to any emergency call.
      (4)   To vehicles operated by a public utility while cruising in an
assigned area for the purpose of inspecting the facilities of the public
utility and/or providing maintenance service to the facilities.
('78 Code, § 16-22) (Ord. 182, passed 10-12-65; Ord. 896, passed 4-22-91)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.23 SIGNS TO DESIGNATE TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   The following streets and parts of streets are designated truck routes
under this subchapter:
      US 287 through the City
      SH 360 through the City
      FM 157 from North City Limits to BU 287 (Mouser Way)
      FM 157 (Lone Star Road) from US 287 to South City Limits
      BU 287 (N. Main Street) from North City Limits to FM 157
      BU 287 from FM 917 (Heritage Parkway) to US 287
      FM 1187 from the West City Limits to BU 287 (Main Street)
      FM 917 / Heritage Parkway from the West City Limits to SH 360
      West Debbie Lane from BU 287 (N. Main Street) to FM 157
   (B)   The following streets and parts of streets are designated commercial
delivery routes under this subchapter:
      Debbie Lane from FM 157 to the East City Limits
      Broad Street through the City
      Walnut Creek Drive from East Broad Street to the North City Limits
      Country Club Drive from Walnut Creek Drive to Matlock Road
      Matlock Road from the North City Limits to Heritage Parkway
      South Wisteria Street from Union Pacific Railroad to Heritage Parkway
      Mouser Way from Main Street (FM 157) to US 287
      S. Main Street from Industrial Boulevard to FM 917/Heritage Parkway
      Industrial Boulevard from S. Main Street to S. 2nd Avenue
      S 2nd Avenue from Industrial Boulevard to FM 917
(‘78 Code, § 16-23(d)) (Ord. 182, passed 10-12-65; Ord. 498, passed 7-11-83;
Ord. 896, passed 4-22-91; Am. Ord. 1600, passed 11-27-06; Am. Ord. OR-1918-14,
passed 9–8-14; Am. Ord. OR-2092-18, passed 8-27-18)
§ 71.24 ALTERNATE TRUCK ROUTES.
   Whenever any street designated as a truck route, commercial delivery route
or hazardous material truck route is being repaired or is otherwise temporarily
out of use, the Chief of Police is hereby authorized to designate alternate
truck routes, commercial delivery routes or hazardous materials truck routes
for such period as may be necessary.
('78 Code, § 16-23(e)) (Ord. 182, passed 10-12-65; Ord. 498, passed 7-11-83;
Ord. 896, passed 4-22-91)
§ 71.25 OVERSIZE AND OVERWEIGHT VEHICLES.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to
drive, operate or move, and/or to cause or permit to be driven, operated or
moved, on any public street within the city any commercial motor vehicle with
or without load, contrary to any of the regulations contained in §§
71.26 through
71.28.
('78 Code, § 16-24) (Ord. 182, passed 10-12-65)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Municipal authority, see Tex. Transp. Code § 621.303
§ 71.26 SIZE LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   The limitations as to size of a vehicle stated in this section shall
not apply to implements of husbandry, machinery used solely for the purpose of
drilling water wells or to highway or street building or maintenance machinery
owned or operated by or on behalf of the state or any of its political
subdivisions or the city.
   (B)   No commercial motor vehicle shall exceed a total outside width,
including any load thereon, of 96 inches.
   (C)   No commercial motor vehicle unladen or with load shall exceed a height
of 13 feet, six inches including load.
   (D)   No commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer or semitrailer,
except pole trailers, shall exceed a length of 35 feet except when the vehicle
is operated in combination and coupled to another such vehicle, and when
operated in combination no such combination of vehicles coupled together shall
exceed a total length of 50 feet; provided, however, the provisions of this
subsection shall not apply to any disabled vehicle being towed by another
vehicle to an intake place for repairs; and provided, further, the above
limitations shall not apply to any mobile home or to any combination of a
mobile home and a motor vehicle, but no mobile home and motor vehicle
combination shall exceed a total length of 55 feet.
   (E)   No vehicle or combination of vehicles, except pole trailers, shall
carry any load extending more than three feet beyond the front thereof, nor
more than four feet beyond the rear thereof.
('78 Code, § 16-25) (Ord. 182, passed 10-12-65)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.27 WEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful and in
violation of this Code for any person to drive, operate or move, or to cause or
permit to be driven, operated or moved on public property, public sidewalks or
a public street other than a state or federal highway within the corporate
limits of the city, any commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer or
semi-trailer or combination of such vehicles having a weight in excess of one
or more of the following limitations.
      (1)   No such vehicle or combination of vehicles shall have a greater
weight than 20,000 pounds carried on any one axle; or with a tandem-axle weight
in excess of 34,000 pounds; or with an overall gross weight on a group of two
or more consecutive axles calculated by application of the following formula.
      W = 500 (LN  + 12N + 36)
            N-1
Where:
   W   =   Overall gross weight on any group of two or more consecutive axles
to the nearest 500 pounds.
   L   =   Distance in feet between the extreme of any group of two or more
consecutive axles.
   N   =   Number of axles in group under consideration, except that two
consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a gross load of 34,000 pounds each,
providing the overall distance between the first and last axles of such
consecutive sets of tandem axles is 36 feet or more; provided, that such
overall gross weight may not exceed 80,000 pounds.
   (B)   Vehicles used exclusively to transport ready-mixed concrete shall be
operated in accordance with the following rules and regulations governing the
operation of vehicles to transport ready-mixed concrete over public highways
maintained by the city.
      (1)   No single axle load shall exceed 20,000 pounds.
      (2)   No tandem-axle load shall exceed 36,000 pounds.
      (3)   No gross load shall exceed 48,000 pounds.
      (4)   No such vehicle shall be operated unless it shall be equipped with
a functioning device attached to the concrete chute which is designed to trap
concrete and which is in proper position to trap concrete at all times when the
vehicle is operated on a public street within the city.
   (C)   Vehicles used exclusively to transport milk may be operated if the
distance between the front wheel of the forward tandem axle and the rear wheel
of the rear tandem axle, measured longitudinally, is at least 28 feet, and the
maximum load carried on any group of axles does not exceed 68,000 pounds.
   (D)   Vehicles used exclusively to transport solid waste (except hazardous
waste), as defined in the Solid Waste Disposal Act, Tex. Health & Safety Code
§§ 361.001 et seq., may be operated upon the public streets of the city with a
tandem-axle gross load not to exceed 44,000 pounds, a single-axle gross load
not to exceed 20,000 pounds and a gross load for the vehicle not to exceed
64,000 pounds, provided that where the vehicle is to be operated with a tandem-
axle load in excess of 34,000 pounds, the owner shall have first filed with the
State Department of Highways and Public Transportation a surety bond as
required by Tex. Transp. Code § 623.163.
   (E)   No vehicle or combination of vehicles shall have a greater weight than
600 pounds per inch width of tire upon any wheel concentrated upon the surface
of the highway and using high-pressure tires, and a greater weight than 650
pounds per inch width of tire upon any wheel concentrated upon the surface of
the highway and using low-pressure tires, and no wheel shall carry a load in
excess of 8,000 pounds on high-pressure tires and 10,000 pounds on low-pressure
tires, nor any axle load in excess of 16,000 pounds on high-pressure tires and
20,000 pounds on low-pressure tires.
   (F)   In this section, an axle load is defined as the total load transmitted
to the road by all wheels whose centers may be included between two parallel
transverse vertical planes 40 inches apart, extending across the full width of
the vehicle. Tandem-axle group is defined as two or more axles spaced 40 inches
or more apart from center to center having at least one common point of weight
suspension.
('78 Code, § 16-26) (Ord. 182, passed 10-12-65; Ord. 498, passed 7-11-83; Ord.
709, passed 11-24-86)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.28 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR OVERSIZE AND OVERWEIGHT VEHICLES.
   (A)   Upon written application timely made by any person who desires to
operate or cause to be operated on the public streets within the overweight or
oversize equipment for the transportation of such commodities as cannot be
reasonably dismantled, where the total gross weight or size of the vehicle and
its load exceed the limits allowed by this subchapter, the Police Department,
after consulting with the office of the City Manager, shall issue a permit for
the operation of such equipment or fleets of equipment for a specified period
of time, over a route or routes to be designated by the designated city
official if such routes can be determined at the time application for the
permit is made.
   (B)   The application for the permit provided for in this section shall be
in writing and contain the following.
      (1)   The kind of equipment to be operated, with a complete description
of same and a statement as to its weight.
      (2)   The kind of commodity to be transported and a certificate as to its
weight.
      (3)   The street or streets over which the equipment is to be operated
and the dates and the approximate time of the operation, and the number of
trips to be made, except when the nature, route, time or frequency of operation
cannot be determined at the time the permit is issued.
      (4)   The application shall be dated and signed by the applicant.
   (C)   Before a permit is issued under this section, the applicant for same
shall file with the office of the City Secretary a bond in an amount to be set
and approved by the City Manager. The amount of the bond shall not exceed the
product of the number of vehicles for which a permit is sought multiplied by
$10,000; the bond shall be payable to the city and conditioned that the
applicant will pay to the city the sum of money necessary to repair any damage
which might be occasioned to any public street or publicly-owned fixture
appurtenant to such street by virtue of operation of any commercial vehicle
under the permit. Venue of any suit for recovery upon the bond shall be in this
county, and any bond issued hereunder shall contain an unambiguous contractual
provision to that effect.
   (D)   A fee shall be charged for each permit as follows.
      Single trip permits         -   $10
      Periods not exceeding 30 days   -   $15
      Periods not exceeding 60 days   -   $20
      Periods not exceeding 90 days   -   $25
      Periods not exceeding one year   -   $50
   (E)   Any permit issued hereunder shall include at least the following.
      (1)   The name of the applicant, the date, a description of the equipment
to be operated and a description of the commodity to be transported.
      (2)   The signature of an authorized member of the Police Department and
any other designated city office.
      (3)   The time for which the permit is issued.
      (4)   The specified streets over which the equipment is to be operated,
insofar as it can be determined at the time the permit is issued.
(‘78 Code, § 16-27) (Ord. 182, passed 10-12-65; Am. Ord. 1600, passed 11-27-06;
Am. Ord. OR-1918-14, passed 9-8-14)
§ 71.29 SPILLAGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any
commercial motor vehicle on a public street of the city in such manner as to
permit any portion of its cargo, either liquid or solid, to fall out of, spill
from or blow out of such vehicle.
('78 Code, § 16-28) (Ord. 182, passed 10-12-65)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.30 LIGHT WEIGHT VEHICLES EXCEPTED.
   The provisions of this subchapter, except § 71.29, shall not be applicable
to any vehicle which has a gross weight not exceeding 10,000 pounds.
('78 Code, § 16-29) (Ord. 182, passed 10-12-65)
§ 71.31 PARKING COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, COMMERCIAL VEHICLE shall include
commercial motor vehicles, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, pole trailers,
truck-tractors, trailers, and semitrailers.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store, or allow to be
parked or stored, any commercial vehicle upon any public street, parkway,
boulevard, public place, public right-of-way, parking lot, public parking lot,
or railroad right-of-way within the corporate limits of the city.
   (C)   Any commercial vehicle left in violation of this section for more than
48 hours is subject to the additional enforcement action, including but not
limited to removal and impoundment, by the Chief of Police, or any member of
the Police Department designated by the Chief of Police, applicable to §
71.01 for abandoned vehicles.
   (D)   This section is not intended to apply to, and it shall be an
affirmative defense under this section that the commercial vehicle described in
this section is:
      (1)   Parked or standing in such zoned areas for the purpose of
expeditiously loading and unloading passengers, freight or merchandise;
      (2)   Parked or standing at a lawfully zoned business establishment,
wherein such vehicle is utilized as an integral part of such lawfully zoned
business;
      (3)   Street construction equipment, maintenance and repair equipment or
trucks, rollers and implements, equipment trailers or vehicles used by public
service utility companies engaged in repairing or extending public service
utilities when used, or intended for use, in the general vicinity;
      (4)   Utilized by the city (its employees or contractors) in
constructing, maintaining, or repairing public infrastructure or in the scope
of their employment;
      (5)   Experiencing mechanical difficulties or defects and are receiving
emergency repairs, or are parked in line awaiting repairs or maintenance
outside from a business that provides such repairs or maintenance if the driver
remains with the commercial vehicle;
      (6)   Parked upon an approved parking surface within an area zoned
industrial according to the city zoning ordinance or is parked at a lawfully
zoned business establishment, wherein such commercial vehicle is utilized as an
integral part of such lawfully zoned business;
      (7)   A passenger bus or commercial vehicle parked on a parking lot in an
area designated by the owner of the parking lot for the parking of buses or
commercial vehicles, and with the consent of the owner, during such period as
the bus passengers or operator of the commercial vehicle are attending an event
at a facility zoned for such activities, or are customers at a retail center or
business establishment, or, in the case of a hotel or motel, during such
periods of time that the bus passengers or operator of the commercial vehicle
are customers of the hotel or motel;
      (8)   Parked in a designated area at an exhibit or exhibition hall,
convention center, entertainment, or similar facility when the commercial
vehicle is involved in the delivery and removal of equipment, products,
merchandise, livestock or other items to and from the facility; or
      (9)   A truck or trailer, each individually, no greater than 26 feet in
length, bumper to bumper being used for the purpose of transporting personal
property from one location to another and parked for less than 48 hours.
(Ord. OR-2327-23, passed 11-13-23)
CHAPTER 72: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Parking certain vehicles in residential area
   
72.02   Double parking
Parking Zones
   
72.15   Authority to designate
   
72.16   Maximum parking time
   
72.17   Presumptive evidence of overtime parking
   
72.18   Manner of parking
   
72.19   Marking spaces; parking within lines
   
72.20   Presumption of lawful designation of restricted space
   
72.21   Reserved
   
72.22   Downtown parking
   
72.23   Special event parking
   
72.24   Designating parking spaces for disabled persons
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 PARKING CERTAIN VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL AREA.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle rated in excess of one
ton capacity, or any vehicle incapable of operating under its own power or any
trailer, to cause or to permit such vehicle to be parked on a public street in
the residential area of the city.
('78 Code, § 16-5) (Ord. 21, passed 6-10-47; Ord. 168, passed 6-22-64; Ord.
168A, passed 5-24-66; Am. Ord. 1456, passed 10-27-03)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.02 DOUBLE PARKING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to double park, as that term is
defined in division (B) of this section, on any street in the city, except that
commercial vehicles may double park to load or unload merchandise within such
area.
   (B)   DOUBLE PARKING means the parallel parking of a vehicle within two feet
of another vehicle already parked parallel with the curb, or adjacent to, or
not entirely within an empty parking space.
('78 Code, § 16-6) (Ord. 146, passed 9-11-62; Ord. 153, passed 4-23-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
PARKING ZONES
§ 72.15 AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE.
   The City Manager, and/or his or her designee, is hereby authorized to
designate parking zones upon any street or portion of any street where it is
determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the
installation of parking zones shall be necessary to aid in the regulation,
control or operation of the parking of vehicles in the exercise of police power
of regulating, operating or controlling the operation of vehicles using the
public streets.
('78 Code, § 16-40) (Ord. 342, passed 12-12-77; Ord. 480, passed 12-13-82)
§ 72.16 MAXIMUM PARKING TIME.
   (A)   The maximum parking time for each space within the restricted parking
zones shall be two hours unless otherwise designated by the City Manager or the
City Council.
('78 Code, § 16-41)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a vehicle to be parked,
to remain or to be placed in any parking space within the restricted parking
zone for a period of time in excess of two hours or that time which is
designated by the City Manager or the City Council.
('78 Code, § 16-42)
(Ord. 342, passed 12-12-77; Ord. 343, passed 12-12-77))
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.17 PRESUMPTIVE EVIDENCE OF OVERTIME PARKING.
   If any car is parked, remains or is placed within a restricted parking zone
for a period in excess of two hours or that time designated by the City Manager
or the City Council, it shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle has been
parked overtime and beyond the period of time established by this subchapter by
the City Manager or the City Council.
('78 Code, § 16-43) (Ord. 342, passed 12-12-77)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.18 MANNER OF PARKING.
   Any vehicle parked in any parking space in any restricted parking zone shall
be parked with the hood of the vehicle alongside of or next to the curb or
shoulder alongside of such parking space in parallel parking spaces, and with
the front of the vehicle at the curb or shoulder in diagonal parking spaces,
and in either event shall be parked within the lines marked on the street for
such parking spaces as provided hereinafter.
('78 Code, § 16-44) (Ord. 342, passed 12-12-77)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.19 MARKING SPACES; PARKING WITHIN LINES.
   The City Manager, or such other officers or employees as he or she shall
select, shall place lines or marks on the curb or shoulder or on the street to
designate the parking space. Each vehicle shall park within the lines or
markings so established. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any
such line or mark or to park the vehicle in a way that the same shall not be
within the area so designated by the line or mark.
('78 Code, § 16-45) (Ord. 342, passed 12-12-77; Ord. 480, passed 12-13-82)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.20 PRESUMPTION OF LAWFUL DESIGNATION OF RESTRICTED SPACE.
   When any person is charged with having committed an offense under this
subchapter, proof that the parking space was within a restricted parking zone
in connection with which the offense was committed shall constitute prima facie
evidence that the restricted parking zone was established and the space laid
out by order of the City Manager and that the location and regulation of
parking time of the space were lawfully designated by the City Manager.
('78 Code, § 16-46) (Ord. 342, passed 12-12-77)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.21 RESERVED.
§ 72.22 DOWNTOWN PARKING.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, DOWNTOWN PARKING shall mean the parking
spaces along the portion of South Main Street between Broad Street and Hunt
Street.
   (B)   Use of downtown parking that is designated by official signage that
reads "Back-In Parking Only" shall be limited to back-in parking only. Any
vehicle parked in downtown parking designated for back-in parking only shall be
parked with the hood of the vehicle away from the curb or shoulder of the
roadway.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in downtown
parking designated for back-in parking only with the hood of the vehicle
closest to the curb or shoulder of the roadway. A violation of this division
shall be an offense that is a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine not to
exceed $500.
(Ord. OR-2195-20, passed 11-9-20)
§ 72.23 SPECIAL EVENT PARKING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in the following locations when
an official sign is posted indicating that there is no parking:
      (1)   On either side of the portion of Van Worth Street from W. Oak
Street to North Street;
      (2)   On either side of Van Worth Street from North Street to a point 30
feet from North Main Street;
      (3)   On either side of North Street from W. Oak Street to a point a
distance of 500 feet to the north;
      (4)   On either side of W. Oak Street from its west end to N. 2nd Avenue;
      (5)   On either side of Smith Street from W. Oak Street to a point 30
feet north of Depot Street;
      (6)   On either side of Smith Street from W. Oak Street to Depot;
      (7)   On either side of Walnut Street from W. Oak Street to Broad;
      (8)   On either side of N. 1st Avenue from Broad to a point a distance of
250 feet to the north;
      (9)   On either side of N. 2nd Avenue from W. Oak Street to a point a
distance of 250 feet to the south;
      (10)   On either side of N. 4th Avenue from its north end to Broad;
      (11)   On either side of S. 1st Avenue from Broad to a point a distance
of 200 feet to the south of Alvarado Street;
      (12)   On either side of S. 1st Avenue from Alvarado Street to W. Dallas
Street;
      (13)   On either side of S. 2nd Avenue from Broad to W. Dallas Street;
      (14)   On either side of S. 2nd Avenue from its south end to W. Dallas
Street;
      (15)   On either side of S. 3rd Avenue from Broad to W. Kimball Street;
      (16)   On either side of S. 3rd Avenue from W. Dallas Street to the south
end of S. 3rd Avenue;
      (17)   On either side of S. 4th Avenue from Broad to Alvarado Street;
      (18)   On either side of S. 4th Avenue from Alvarado Street to W. Kimball
Street;
      (19)   On either side of Alvarado Street from the west end of Alvarado
Street to S. 2nd Avenue;
      (20)   On either side of Alvarado Street from S. 2nd Avenue to S. 1st
Avenue;
      (21)   On either side of W. Kimball Street from S. 4th Avenue to a point
500 feet to the west of S. 4th Avenue and from S. 3rd Avenue to S. 1st Avenue;
      (22)   On either side of W. Kimball Street from S. 4th Avenue to S. 3rd
Avenue and from S. 1st Avenue to S. Main Street;
      (23)   On either side of W. Dallas Street from Phillips Court to S. 1st
Avenue;
      (24)   On either side of W. Dallas Street from S. 1st Avenue to S. Main
Street;
      (25)   On either side of Phillips Court from the west end of Phillips
Court to W. Dallas Street;
      (26)   On either side of Eddie Court;
      (27)   On either side of Pond Street from Broad to E. Dallas Street;
      (28)   On either side of Tarrant Street from E. Kimball Street to E.
Dallas Street;
      (29)   On either side of Short Street from E. Kimball Street to E. Dallas
Street;
      (30)   On either side of S. Waxahachie Street from Broad to Lake Street;
      (31)   On either side of S. Waxahachie Street from Lake Street to E.
Dallas Street;
      (32)   On either side of Hollyberry Drive from E. Dallas Street to Stell;
      (33)   On either side of Blueberry Hill Lane from Hollyberry Drive to
Stell;
      (34)   On either side of E. Kimball Street from Pond Street to S.
Waxahachie Street;
      (35)   On either side of Lake Street from Tarrant Street to S. Waxahachie
Street;
      (36)   On either side of E. Dallas Street from S. Main Street to S.
Waxahachie Street;
      (37)   On either side of Sycamore Street from Elm Street to Broad Street;
      (38)   On either side of Sycamore Street from Depot Street to Elm Street;
and
      (39)   On either side of Elm Street from Smith Street to Brown Street.
   (B)   The Police Chief, in his or her sole discretion, may place or cause no
parking signs to be placed in any or all of the locations identified in
division (A) to prohibit parking in those locations during a special event. The
Police Chief shall have complete discretion to determine what is a special
event. The signs shall read "No Parking During Special Events." The signs shall
be placed at both ends of the locations where parking is prohibited, and there
shall be at least one sign every 100 feet in the locations where parking is
prohibited. The signs shall be of such construction and design such that they
remain in place and are visible and reasonably understood to be controlling.
   (C)   A violation of division (A) of this section shall be an offense that
is a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
   (D)   A vehicle illegally parked as defined in this section may be subject
to a citation and or towed at the discretion of the Police Department.
(Ord. OR-2195-20, passed 11-9-20)
§ 72.24 DESIGNATING PARKING SPACES FOR DISABLED PERSONS.
   (A)   Under the provisions of Tex. Transp. Code § 681.009, as amended, it is
hereby required that the owners of all private property or persons who control
property used for parking in the City and establish parking spaces or areas for
persons with disabilities shall conform said parking spaces or areas to the
standards and specifications referred to in Tex. Transp. Code § 681.009(b).
   (B)   The use of any parking space established for disabled persons shall be
unlawful except for use by those persons parking vehicles which are being
operated by or for a person with disabilities and which vehicle displays a
valid disabled parking placard issued pursuant to Tex. Transp. Code Ch. 681 or
special license plates issued pursuant to Tex. Transp. Code §§ 504.201 or
504.202.
   (C)   Pursuant to Tex. Transp. Code § 681.011(f), it is hereby provided that
Tex. Transp. Code § 681.011, as amended, shall apply to a parking space or area
for persons with disabilities on private property that is designated in
compliance with the identifications requirements set forth in Tex. Transp. Code
§ 681.009(b).
   (D)   The Chief of Police, or any member of the Police Department designated
by the Chief of Police, is hereby authorized to issue a citation to any person
who is found to have violated division (B) above; and
   (E)   The Director of Regulatory Compliance, or designee, is hereby
authorized to enforce the provision of division (A) above as follows:
      (1)   It is an offense for any person owning, leasing, claiming,
occupying, or having supervision or control of any real property within the
city to suffer, permit, or allow disabled accessible parking spaces to be in
violation of the standards and specification referred to in Tex. Transp. Code §
681.009(b).
      (2)   All existing, non-conforming disabled accessible parking spaces
shall be repaired within 60 days from the date of the adoption of this section.
It shall be considered a nuisance to maintain a disabled accessible parking
space that is not in compliance with this section.
      (3)   Notice of violation prior to abatement by city.
         (a)   Notice required. If the person owning, leasing, claiming,
occupying, or having supervision or control of any property fails to comply
with the requirements of these provisions, a city official may cause the
property owner notified to comply within 30 days of the date of notice.
         (b)   Method of notice. The notice shall be given:
            1.   Personally to the owner in writing;
            2.   By letter addressed to the owner at the owner’s address as
recorded in the appraisal district records of the Appraisal District in which
the property is located;
            3.   Personally to the person owning, leasing, claiming, occupying,
or having supervision or control of the property; or
            4.   By letter addressed to the person owning, leasing, claiming,
occupying, or having supervision or control of the property.
         (c)   Unclaimed notice. If notice is mailed in accordance with this
division (E), and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as
“refused” or “unclaimed” the validity of the notice is not affected, and the
notice is considered as delivered.
         (d)   Work to be performed. If the owner does not cause to be repaired
the violations of this section, the city may go on such property or authorize
another to go on such property, and do or cause the work to be done and charge
the expenses incurred to the owner of the property and assess the expenses
against the real estate on which the work was done. The remedy provided in this
section is in addition to any criminal penalties or other remedies authorized
by this chapter or other law.
         (e)   Contents of notice. The notice shall contain:
            1.   The name and address of the record owner;
            2.   An identification, which is not required to be a legal
description, of the property upon which the violation is located;
            3.   A statement describing the violation and the work necessary to
correct the violation;
            4.   A statement advising the owner that if the work is not
completed within 30 days, the city will complete the work and charge the
expenses to the owner; and
            5.   A statement that if the city performs the work and the owner
fails to pay the expenses, a priority lien may be placed on the property.
      (4)   Assessment of expenses; lien; appeal.
         (a)   Notice. In assessing the expenses incurred pursuant to this
division (E) against the property on which the work is done or improvements
made, the city shall send the owner of the property upon which the work was
done a notice which shall include:
            1.   Identification of the property;
            2.   A description of the violation;
            3.   A statement that the city abated the condition;
            4.   A statement of the city’s expenses in abating the condition;
            5.   An explanation of the property owner’s right to request a
hearing within ten days of the date of the letter; and
            6.   A statement that if the owner fails or refuses to pay the
expenses within 30 days of the date of the notice, the city shall place a lien
against the property by filing with the County Clerk of the county in which the
property is located a notice of lien and statement of expenses incurred.
         (b)   Method. The notice shall be sent in the same manner as provided
in division (E)(3)(b) above.
         (c)   Hearing. The City Manager or designee will conduct a hearing if
the property owner submits a written request within ten days of the date of the
notice. At the hearing:
            1.   The owner and the city may testify or present witnesses or
written information related to the city’s abatement of the nuisance.
            2.   The city has the burden to show that a violation of this
section existed, notice was given in substantial compliance with this section,
and expenses were incurred to abate the violation.
            3.   At the close of the hearing, the City Manager or designee may
find, based upon a preponderance of the evidence, that the expenses are valid,
or that they are erroneous or he or she may adjust them.
         (d)   Placement of lien. If no hearing is requested, or a hearing is
held and the expenses are determined to be valid or are otherwise appropriately
adjusted, and the owner fails or refuses to pay the expenses within 30 days
after written notification to pay, the city shall place a lien against the
property by filing with the County Clerk of the county in which the property is
located a notice of lien and statement of expenses incurred.
         (e)   Security. The lien is security for the expenses and interest
accruing at the rate of 10% per annum from the date the work was performed or
the expenses were incurred by the city.
         (f)   Filing. When the statement is filed, the city shall have a
privileged lien on that property, second only to tax liens and liens for street
improvements.
         (g)   Suit. The city may institute suit to recover the expenses, with
interest, and may foreclose on the property. The original or a certified copy
of the statement of expenses is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by
the city in doing the work or making the improvements.
   (F)   In addition to any applicable fine, any vehicle in violation of this
section, whether on public or private property, may be removed and stored at
the expense of the owner or operator of the vehicle in accordance with the
provisions of Tex. Occ. Code Ch. 2308, as amended.
(Ord. OR-2362-24, passed 4-22-24)
CHAPTER 73: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Speed limits
Cross reference:
   Commercial motor vehicles, see §§
71.20 et seq.
   General speed regulations, see §
71.04
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   General.  
Prefix Street Location Speed Limit (mph)
Prefix        Street                  Location                Speed Limit (mph)
              Airport Drive           South 2nd Avenue to     40
                                      South 6th Avenue
East          Broad Street            U.S. Hwy 287 to Main    40
                                      Street
East          Broad Street            U.S. Hwy 287 to east    45
                                      city limits
West          Broad Street            Main Street to 400 feet 35
                                      west of N. 4th Avenue
                                      400 feet west of N. 4th
West          Broad Street            Avenue to west city     40
                                      limits
                                      Mile post 14.962 (north
                                      city limits) south
              Business U.S. 287 (Main 2.638 miles to mile     50
              Street)                 post 17.600 (approx.
                                      200 feet south of
                                      Turtle Hill Trail)
                                      Mile post 17.600
              Business U.S. 287 (Main (approx. 200 feet south 45
              Street)                 of Turtle Hill Trail)
                                      south to Main Street
                                      Mile post 0.000
              Business U.S. 287 (Main (Johnson County line)
              Street)                 south 1.900 miles to    50
                                      mile post 1.900 (U.S.
                                      287)
              Cannon Drive            In its entirety         40
              Cardinal Road           In its entirety         35
              Commerce Drive          In its entirety         35
              Country Club Drive      In its entirety         40
North         Day Miar Road           East Broad Street to    40
                                      Seeton Road
              Debbie Lane             In its entirety         45
                                      Mile post 28.292
                                      (Mansfield west city
              F.M. 1187               limits) east 0.181      45
                                      miles to mile post
                                      28.473 (eastbound lane
                                      only in city limits)
                                      Mile post 28.473 east
              F.M. 1187               1.169 miles to mile     45
                                      post 29.642 (Business
                                      Hwy 287)
                                      Mile post 23.811 (north
                                      city limits) south
              F.M. 157                0.812 miles to mile     50
                                      post 24.623 (approx.
                                      550 feet south of
                                      Hogpen Branch)
                                      From mile post 24.623
                                      (approx. 550 feet south
              F.M. 157                of Hogpen Branch) south 45
                                      1.718 miles to mile
                                      post 26.341 (Business
                                      Hwy 287 intersection)
                                      Business U.S. Hwy 287
              F.M. 917                (Main Street) south to  55
                                      southern city limits
              Gertie Barrett Road     F.M. 1187 to Turner     35
                                      Warnell
              Grand Meadow Boulevard  From North Holland Road 35
                                      to North Day Miar Road
              Heritage Parkway        Business U.S. Hwy 287   45
                                      (Main Street) to SH 360
             Heritage Parkway South  SH 360 to National      45
                                      Parkway
North         Holland Road            SH 360 to Yellow Rose   45
                                      Trail
South         Holland Road            Yellow Rose Trail to    45
                                      National Parkway
South         Holland Road            National Parkway to     40
                                      Britton Road
              Hummingbird Lane        In its entirety         20
              Justice Lane            In its entirety         35
              Live Oak Drive          In its entirety         20
              Lone Star Road          U.S. Hwy 287 to SH 360  40
                                      Mouser Way (Business
                                      U.S. Hwy 287) to 500
North         Main Street             feet north of its       45
                                      intersection with
                                      Pleasant Ridge Drive
                                      From a point 500 feet
                                      north of its
North         Main Street             intersection with       35
                                      Pleasant Ridge Drive to
                                      a point 100 feet north
                                      of Van Worth Street
                                      From a point 100 feet
North & South Main Street             north of Van Worth      30
                                      Street to Hunt Street
South         Main Street             Hunt Street to Heritage 45
                                      Parkway (F.M. 917)
              Mansfield Webb Road     Matlock Road to east    40
                                      city limits
              Matlock Road            In its entirety         45
              Meadowlark Drive        In its entirety         20
              Mockingbird Court       In its entirety         20
              Mockingbird Drive       In its entirety         20
              Mouser Way              House Road to U.S. Hwy  40
                                      287 SB Frontage Road
              National Parkway        In its entirety         40
              Oriole Drive            In its entirety         20
              Pleasant Ridge Drive    In its entirety         35
              Ragland Road            Matlock Road to east    40
                                      city limits
              Regency Parkway         East Broad Street to    40
                                      Heritage Parkway
                                      Seeton Road (Grand
East          Seeton Road             Prairie) to National    40
                                      Parkway
              Seeton Road             National Parkway to     45
                                      Ashbury Lane
              Seeton Road             Ashbury Lane to South   40
                                      Holland Road
                                      Mile post 23.284 (north
                                      city limits) south
              SH 360 Frontage Roads   2.894 miles to mile     50
                                      post 26.178 (county
                                      line)
                                      Mile Post 0.000 (county
              SH 360 Frontage Roads   line) south 1.819 miles 50
                                      to mile post 1.819 (US
                                      287)
              Skylark Drive           In its entirety         20
              Turner Warnell Road     F.M. 157 to Callender   35
                                      Road
              U.S. Hwy 287            North city limits to    70
                                      Johnson County line
              U.S. Hwy 287            Johnson County line to  65
                                      south city limits
              U.S. Hwy 287 Frontage   North city limits to    40
              Roads                   south city limits
North         Walnut Creek Drive      East Broad Street to    40
                                      north city limits
South         Walnut Creek Drive      East Broad Street to    35
                                      East Dallas Street
South         Wisteria Street         East Dallas Street to   40
                                      Heritage Parkway
South         2nd Avenue              F.M. 917 to Burl Ray    45
                                      Road
South         6th Avenue              West Broad Street to    40
                                      Easy Drive
   For all other streets within the corporate limits of the city, the lawful
maximum prima facie reasonable and prudent speed limit on the streets shall be
30 m.p.h.
 
(‘78 Code, § 16-4(b)) (Am. Ord. 1623, passed 6-11-07; Am. Ord. 1640, passed 9-
10-07; Am. Ord. 1642, passed 9-10-07; Am. Ord. OR-1706-08, passed 8-25-08; Am.
Ord. OR-1750-09, passed 9-1-09; Am. Ord. OR-1786-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord.
OR-1810-11, passed 8-1-11; Am. Ord. OR-1838-12, passed 7-23- 12; Am. Ord. OR-
1923-14, passed 11-10-14; Am. Ord. OR-1956-15, passed 8-10-15; Am. Ord. OR-
1960-15, passed 9-8-15; Am. Ord. OR- 1970-15, passed 10-12-15; Am. Ord. OR-
1988-15, passed 12-16-15; Am. Ord. OR-2034-17, passed 2-13-17; Am. Ord. OR-
2057-17, passed 8-28-17; Am. Ord. OR-2100-18, passed 10-22-18; Am. Ord. OR-
2153-19, passed 10-28-19; Am. Ord. OR-2160-19, passed 11-25-19; Am. Ord. OR
2171-20, passed 3-2-20; Am. Ord. OR-2213-21, passed 7-26-21)
   (B)   School zones.
Prefix Street Location Times Speed Limit (mph)
Prefix    Street           Location          Times            Speed Limit (mph)
                           A point 75 feet
                           east of the
                           railroad tracks
East      Broad Street     to a point 225    When flashing    20
                           feet west of its
                           intersection with
                           Willow Street
                           A point 904 feet
                           east of its
                           intersection with
East      Broad Street     Miller Road to a  When flashing    20
                           point 2180 feet
                           east of its
                           intersection with
                           Miller Road
                           A point 90 feet
                           east of its
                           intersection with
East      Broad Street     Miller Road to a  When flashing    20
                           point 850 feet
                           east of its
                           intersection with
                           Miller Road
                           A point 420 feet
                           east of Volk Lane
East      Broad Street     to a point 200    When flashing    20
                           feet west of Day
                           Miar Road
          Business U.S.    Mile post 16.727
          287 (Main        south 0.190 miles When flashing    35
          Street)          to mile post
                           16.917
          Business U.S.    Mile post 0.437
          287 (Main        south 0.400 miles When flashing    35
          Street)          to mile post
                           0.837
                           A point 55 feet
                           west of its
                           intersection with
          Cannon Drive     Walnut Bend Drive When flashing    20
                           to a point 440
                           feet east of its
                           intersection with
                           Carlin Road
                           A point 150 feet
                           south of Hidden
          Cardinal Road    Oaks Drive to a   When flashing    20
                           point 200 feet
                           north of Hidden
                           Oaks Drive
                           A point 300 feet
                           south of Legacy
          Cardinal Road    Way to a point    When flashing    20
                           175 feet north of
                           Legacy Way
                           A point 200 feet
                           north of its
                           intersection with 8:00 a.m. - 9:00
          Clover Hill Road Almond Drive to a a.m. and 3:45    20
                           point 740 feet    p.m. - 4:30 p.m.
                           north of its
                           intersection with
                           Almond Drive
                           Intersection with 7:15 a.m.- 8:15
          Concord Drive    Country Club      a.m. and 3:00    20
                           Drive to a point  p.m.- 4:00 p.m.
                           750 feet north
                           A point 225 feet
                           east of its
                           intersection with
                           Landing Street to
          Connerton Drive  a point 800 feet  When flashing    20
                           east of its
                           intersection with
                           Julian Feild
                           Street
                           A point 585 feet
                           west of its
                           intersection with
          Country Club     Highland Drive to When flashing    20
          Drive            a point 165 feet
                           east of its
                           intersection with
                           Hilton Drive
                           A point 110 feet
                           south of its
          Cutting Horse    intersection with 7:15 a.m.- 8:15
          Drive            Remington Ranch   a.m. and 3:00    20
                           Road to a point   p.m.- 4:00 p.m.
                           130 feet north of
                           Star Grass Drive
                           A point 200 feet
                           south of its
                           intersection with
North     Day Miar Road    E. Broad Street   When flashing    20
                           to a point 250
                           feet south of its
                           intersection with
                           Meseta Drive
                           A point 460 feet
                           north of the
                           northern Lake
                           Ridge High School
North     Day Miar Road    driveway to a     When flashing    20
          (E. Seeton Road) point 245 feet
                           south of the
                           southern Lake
                           Ridge High School
                           driveway
                           A point 675 feet
                           east of Walnut
East      Debbie Lane      Creek Drive to a  When flashing    20
                           point 310 feet
                           west of Walnut
                           Creek Drive
                           A point 250 feet
                           west of the west
                           Ben Barber Drive
West      Debbie Lane      approach to a     When flashing    35
                           point 540 feet
                           east of the east
                           Ben Barber Drive
                           approach
                           Mile post 28.922
          F.M. 1187        east 0.320 miles  When flashing    35
                           to mile post
                           29.242
                           Mile post 29.349
          F.M. 1187        east 0.234 miles  When flashing    35
                           to mile post
                           29.583
                           A point 50 feet
                           south of its
                           intersection with
          Gertie Barrett   Nelson Wyatt Road When flashing    20
          Road             to a point 1,150
                           north of its
                           intersection with
                           Nelson Wyatt Road
                           Intersection with 7:15 a.m.- 8:15
     Highland Drive   Country Club      a.m. and 3:00    20
                           Drive to a point  p.m.- 4:00 p.m.
                           800 feet north
                           A point 145 feet
                           north of its
                           intersection with 6:45 a.m.- 7:15
          Hillcrest Street East Dallas       a.m. and 2:30    20
                           Street to its     p.m.- 3:00 p.m.
                           intersection with
                           East Broad Street
                           A point 100 feet
                           north of
                           Waterford Glen
North     Holland Road     Drive to a point  When flashing    20
                           800 feet south of
                           Waterford Glen
                           Drive
                           A point 376 feet
                           south of National
South     Holland Road     Parkway to a      When flashing    20
                           point 258 feet
                           south of Fox
                           Meadows
                           A point 115 feet
                           south of its
                           intersection with
          Julian Feild     Bluff Creek Drive When flashing    20
          Street           to a point 130
                           feet south of its
                           intersection with
                           Connerton Drive
                           A point 150 feet
                           east of Wood
          Killian Drive    River Parkway to  When flashing    20
                           a point 150 feet
                           north of Nelson
                           Wyatt Road
                           A point 68 feet
                           east of Cardinal
          Legacy Way       Road to a point   When flashing    20
                           65 feet west of
                           North Main Street
                           (Business 287)
                           A point 123 feet
                           east of its
                           intersection with
                           Laurel Street to
          Magnolia Street  a point 929 feet  When flashing    20
                           east of its
                           intersection with
                           Walnut Creek
                           Drive
                           A point 275 feet
                           west of its
                           intersection with
          Mathis Road      South Matlock     When flashing    20
                           Road to a point
                           210 feet east of
                           its intersection
                           with Casa Circle
                           A point 115 feet
                           south of its
                           intersection with
South     Matlock Road     River Birch Drive When flashing    20
                           to a point 480
                           feet north of its
                           intersection with
                           Mathis Road
                           A point 460 feet
                           north of its
                           intersection with
North     Miller Road      East Broad Street When flashing    20
                           to a point 1,015
                           feet north of its
                           intersection with
                           East Broad Street
                           A point 86 feet
                           south of its
                           intersection with
North     Miller Road      East Broad Street When flashing    20
                           to a point 100
                           feet north of
                           Scenic Glen Drive
                           A point 95 feet
                           east of its
                           intersection with
                           U.S. Business 287
          Pleasant Ridge   (Main Street) to  When flashing    20
          Drive            a point 200 feet
                           east of its
                           intersection with
                           Nightingale
                           Circle
                           A point 190 feet
                           north of Rocky
                           Creek Drive to a
                           point 920 feet
                           south of Rocky
North     Walnut Creek     Creek Drive and   When flashing    20
          Drive            from a point 190
                           feet north of
                           Misty Mesa Trail
                           to a point 920
                           feet south of
                           Misty Mesa Trail
                           A point 105 feet
                           south of its
                           intersection with
North     Walnut Creek     Aspen Lane to a   When flashing    20
          Drive            point 660 feet
                           south of its
                           intersection with
                           Debbie Lane
                           Intersection with
                           North Holland
          Waterford Glen   Road to a point   7:15 a.m.- 8:15
          Drive            200 feet east of  a.m. and 3:00    20
                           its intersection  p.m.- 4:00 p.m.
                           with High Point
                           Lane
                           A point 350 feet
                           south of
          Wood River       Meriwether Street When flashing    20
          Parkway          to a point 100
                           feet south of
                           Killian Drive
 
   (C)   Penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this
Chapter 73, as amended hereby, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon the conviction in the Municipal Court of the City of Mansfield, shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $200 for each offense, and each and
every day any such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a
separate offense.
(‘78 Code, § 16-4 (a)) (Ord. 142, passed 6-26-62; Ord. 219, passed 4-14-70;
Ord. 248, passed 9-12-72; Ord. 303, passed 5-27-75; Ord. 304, passed 7-8-75;
Ord. 311, passed 10-28-75; Ord. 446, passed 8-12-81; Ord. 617, passed 7-8-85;
Ord. 627, passed 8-26-85: Ord. 680, passed 6-9-86; Ord. 832, passed 5-8-89;
Ord. 844, passed 8-28-89; Ord. 856, passed 11-27-89; Ord. 858, passed 3-12-90;
Ord. 903, passed 9-4-91; Ord. 981, passed 9-27-93; Ord. 997, passed 3-28-94;
Ord. 1023, passed 9-26-94; Ord. 1063, passed 1-23-95; Ord. 1098, passed 10-23-
95; Am. Ord. 1186, passed 1-12-98; Am. Ord. 1223, passed 9-14-98; Am. Ord.
1390, passed 6-24-02; Am. Ord. 1391, passed 6-24-02; Am. Ord. 1394, passed 8-
12-02; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 9-9-02; Am. Ord. 1452, passed 10-13-03; Am. Ord.
1465, passed 12-8-03; Am. Ord. 1492, passed 8-9-04; Am. Ord. 1502, passed 10-
25-04; Am. Ord. 1524, passed 3-14-05; Am. Ord. 1515, passed 3-14-05; Am. Ord.
1492, passed 8-9-04; Am. Ord. 1636, passed 8-27-07; Am. Ord. 1641, passed 9-10-
07; Am. Ord. 1658, passed 12-10-07; Am. Ord. OR-1750-09, passed 9-1-09; Am.
Ord. OR-1779-10, passed 8-23-10; Am. Ord. 1810-11, passed 8-1-11; Am. Ord. OR-
1838-12, passed 7-23-12; Am. Ord. OR-1881-13, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. OR-1923-
14, passed 11-10-14; Am. Ord. OR-1960-15, passed 9-8-15; Am. Ord. OR-1970-15,
passed 10-12-15; Am. Ord. OR-1970-15, passed 10-12-15; Am. Ord. OR-2057-17,
passed 8-28-17; Am. Ord. OR-2100-18, passed 10-22-18; Am. Ord. OR-2153-19,
passed 10-28-19; Am. Ord. OR- 2160-19, passed 12-9-19; Am. Ord. OR-2171-20,
passed  3-2-20; Am. Ord. OR-2186-20, passed 9-28-20; Am. Ord. OR-2213-21,
passed 7-26-21)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
90.   ANIMAL CONTROL
         
91.   FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
         
92.   HEALTH AND SANITATION
         
93.   JUNKED VEHICLES
         
94.   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT REGULATIONS
         
95.   LIBRARY
         
96.   PARKS AND RECREATION
         
97.   ALARM SYSTEMS
         
98.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
         
99.   NATURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 90: ANIMAL CONTROL
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Establishment of the Animal Care and Control Department
Animal Control
   
90.03   Number of dogs and cats at residences; multiple pet permit
   
90.04   Animal establishments
   
90.05   Adoption of cats or dogs
   
90.06   Livestock and livestock permits
   
90.07   Potbellied pigs
   
90.08   Keeping of fowl
   
90.09   Animals at-large
   
90.10   Wild animals
   
90.11   Slaughtering of animals
   
90.13   Nuisances
   
90.14   Feeding of wild, stray, or feral animals prohibited
   
90.15   Humane trapping
   
90.20   Appealing ACO determinations, orders, and permit denials and
revocations
   
90.21   Promotional displays; dyeing prohibited
   
90.22   License, vaccination and microchip requirements
   
90.23   Impoundment; fees
   
90.23.1   Fee schedule
   
90.24   Enforcement
   
90.25   Care and humane treatment of animals
Rabies Control and Bite Procedures
   
90.35   Definitions
   
90.36   Report of rabies
   
90.37   Quarantine procedures for animals
   
90.38   Disposition or release of quarantined animal
   
90.39   Animal exposed to rabies
Animal Advisory Committee
   
90.50   Animal Advisory Committee
Dangerous Dogs
   
90.55   Dangerous incident report
   
90.56   Filing of report of a dangerous incident with court
   
90.57   Animal Care and Control Officer determination and appeal
   
90.58   Knowledge of a dangerous dog
   
90.59   Requirements for owner of a dangerous dog
   
90.60   Dangerous dog order of destruction
   
90.61   Failure to comply
   
90.62   Hearing
   
90.63   Appeal of dangerous dog order
   
90.64   Notices
   
90.65   Dangerous dog ordered removed from the city
   
90.66   Registration
   
90.67   Declassification of Level 1, 2, or 3 dangerous dog
   
90.68   Nuisance declared
   
90.69   Offenses
   
90.70   Defenses
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDON. Failure to adequately provide an animal with one or more of the
following necessities of life, including but not limited to, air, food, potable
water, sanitary conditions, shelter, protection from the heat, cold, or other
environmental conditions, or other circumstances that may cause bodily injury,
serious bodily injury, or death of the animal, or to leave an animal in the
care, custody, or control of another person or entity without his or her
consent.
   ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL OFFICER. Any person designated by the city to
perform animal control duties and who otherwise enforces the provisions of
state and local laws as they pertain to animals within the city.
   ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL MANAGER. A person designated by the Director of
Regulatory Compliance to supervise the daily operations of the Animal Care and
Control Department, and his/her authorized designees.
   ANIMAL. Includes dogs, cats, rabbits, rodents, birds, reptiles, and any
other species of animal which is sold or retained as a household pet, but shall
not include skunks, nonhuman primates and any other species of wild, exotic, or
carnivorous animal that may be further restricted by law. Wild animals that
have been trapped will be treated the same as a domestic animal for all
purposes including care and humane treatment.
   ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any pet shop, boarding kennel or cattery, grooming
shop, auction, performing animal exhibition, or other facility engaged in the
handling of domestic animals, excluding veterinary clinics, hospitals, animal
shelters and individuals caring for animals in their private residence in
compliance with the terms of this chapter.
   ANIMAL FIGHTING PARAPHERNALIA. Any item or equipment that is designed,
adapted, or used for animal fighting purposes, including, but not limited to,
scales, fighting pits, instruments designed, adapted, or used in a manner that
attaches to the leg of the bird, such as a knife, gaff, or other sharp
instrument, or items used to train or condition animals to fight, such as
hanging devices, spring poles, breaking sticks or “bite sticks”.
   ANIMAL HOUSING. Any structure or enclosure contained within the owner’s
property limits and designed, adapted, or used to segregate an animal to a
smaller area or restrict an animal to a limited space, including, but not
limited to, pens, kennels, dog runs, rooms, cages, compartments, hutches,
coops, and fenced portions of a yard or property. This term does not include
the term shelter as defined in the section.
   ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION. Any not-for-profit organization that has tax
exempt status under section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue
Code, which rescues and places animals into permanent homes. ANIMAL RESCUE
ORGANIZATION does not include an entity that breeds animals or an entity that
in exchange for payment or compensation obtains any dog or cat from a person
who either breeds dogs and cats or facilitates the sale of dogs and cats that
were obtained from a person who breeds dogs or cats.
   AT-LARGE. Not completely confined by a building, wall, or fence of
sufficient strength or construction to restrain the animal, except when such
animal is either on a hand-held leash under the control of a capable person or
held in the hands of the owner. An animal confined within an automobile or
other vehicle under the control of its owner shall not be deemed at-large so
long as such confinement reasonably prevents access to the public. Animals that
are unrestrained in the open bed of a truck,  tractor, trailer, or similar type
vehicle will be considered at-large. Any dog confined within a city owned dog
park is not considered at-large.
   BASIC GROOMING. Maintaining the eyes, ears, beaks, hooves, feet, nails, coat
and skin of an animal in such a manner that is reasonably necessary for the
health and safety of the animal.
   BOARDING KENNEL OR CATTERY. Any establishment where dogs, cats, puppies, or
kittens are kept for the primary purpose of boarding for any part of a 24-hour
period. This does not include veterinary clinics where boarding is offered in
addition to clinical services or grooming facilities where boarding is not
offered overnight.
   BODILY INJURY. Physical pain, illness, or any impairment of physical
condition that would cause a reasonably prudent person to seek treatment from a
medical professional or veterinarian without regard to whether the person
actually sought treatment. This term includes, but is not limited to, a bite or
scratch wound and any bodily injury resulting from the victim attempting to
escape or prevent contact with the injuring animal.
   COOP. A covered, predator-resistant house for domestic fowl that is designed
to be easily accessed, cleaned, and maintained, and meets all the
specifications for a shelter, animal housing enclosure, and any other
applicable requirements of this chapter.
   COMMERCIAL BREEDER. Any owner who breeds animals and transfers ownership of
more than 12 animals or more than two litters, clutches, or other group of
offspring (whichever occurs first) of any breeding animals during any 12
consecutive month period to another person for the purpose of breeding, show,
personal pet, slaughter, or resale to a third person.
   COLLAR. Any collar constructed of nylon, leather, or similar materials,
specifically designed to be used for a dog, cat, or ferret.
   CAT. Any live or dead cat (felis catus).
   DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that:
      (1)   Makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury
and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept
and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure
on its own;
      (2)   Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which
the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from
leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably
believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that person;
      (3)   Makes an unprovoked attack on a domestic animal or livestock that
causes bodily injury or death and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in
which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog
from leaving the enclosure on its own;
      (4)   While at large, is found to menace, to chase, or to display
threatening or aggressive behavior toward any domestic animal or livestock;
      (5)   While at large, is found to have caused a severe bodily injury to
any domestic animal or livestock; or
      (6)   While at large, is found to have killed or cause the death or any
domestic animal or livestock.
   DANGEROUS INCIDENT. An incident in which a dog:
      (1)   Makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury
and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept
and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure
on its own; or
      (2)   Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which
the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from
leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably
believe that the dog will attack or cause bodily injury to a person or to
another animal.
   DIRECT PHYSICAL CONTACT. Having precautions in place so the person may
exercise physical control over the animal in the event it should become
necessary to do so to protect the animal, a human, or another animal from harm.
For purposes of this chapter, voice control, shock collars, e-Collars, and
collar mounted electronic training devices, regardless of the animal’s
proximity or training status shall not be considered direct physical contact.
   DOG. Any live or dead dog (canis familirais).
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal that lawfully may be kept as a pet or as
livestock within the City of Mansfield so long as all the required provisions
of this chapter are met, ownership or possession of said animal is not
prohibited by any international, federal, local or state law, and is not a wild
animal, as defined herein, including but not limited to, the following animals:
      (1)   REPTILES. Any non-venomous reptile that does not typically reach
total lengths greater than six feet;
      (2)   BIRDS. Any birds commonly kept as pets, or any bird kept for
falconry purposes by a state and federally permitted falconer;
      (3)   AMPHIBIANS. Any frog or toads commonly kept as pets;
      (4)   MAMMALS. Any mammals commonly kept as pets or livestock including,
but not limited to, dogs, cats, ferrets, rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters,
hedgehogs, rats, mice, chinchillas, sugar gliders, horses, cows, alpacas, and
llamas.
   DOMESTIC FOWL. Birds of a breed developed or kept for the purpose of meat
production, egg laying, or purely ornament or show, including but not limited
to ducks, guineas, geese, chickens, turkeys, quail, parakeets and pigeons.
   ESTRAY. Any branded or unbranded livestock, fowl, exotic livestock, or
exotic fowl found running at large.
   EUTHANIZE. To cause the death of an animal by a method which:
      (1)   Rapidly produces unconsciousness and death without visible evidence
of pain or distress; or
      (2)   Utilizes anesthesia produced by an agent, which causes painless
loss of consciousness and death following such loss of consciousness.
   EXERCISE YARD. An enclosure attached to a coop that provides exercise for
domestic fowl and is constructed to prevent the domestic fowl from escaping
such enclosure and offers protection from predators. Mobile/moveable housing
such as chicken tractors may also be used.
   EXIGENT CIRCUMSTANCES. Any circumstances in which the officer, in his or her
best judgment, determines that a life threatening or serious injury may occur
if immediate action is not taken (i.e., animal may die if not immediately
transported to a veterinarian, or animal may bite and seriously injure a human
or other animal if not immediately impounded, or animal may die if officer does
not immediately enter property and rescue, etc.).
   FERAL. Any untamed animal living in the wild that will not voluntarily
accept handling by human beings despite usually being considered a domestic
animal.
   HARBORING. Any act of a person which provides care, shelter, protection,
refuge or nourishment to an animal that is not in the person’s ownership, which
incentivizes or encourages the same animal to return to the same premises for
care, shelter, protection, or nourishment for a period of ten days or longer.
   HUMANE TRAP. Any trap designed to capture an animal without injuring the
animal.
   IDENTIFICATION. Any acceptable method, such as microchipping, registration
tag, or tattoo, which can be used to readily trace the current ownership of an
animal.
   INCLEMENT WEATHER. Includes rain, hail, sleet, snow, high winds, any high
wind advisory warnings, extreme low temperatures, any cold or freeze advisory
warnings, extreme high temperatures, and any heat advisory warnings.
   KENNEL. Any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises where five or
more adult animals are kept and wherein any person engages in the business of
boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling
dogs, cats, or other animals.
   LIVESTOCK. Any domestic animal typically kept to provide food or fiber or
perform work, whether or not they actually provide these functions, included,
but not limited to, regardless of age, sex or breed: horses, consisting of all
equine species including ponies, mules, donkeys, jackasses, and burros; cattle,
consisting of all bovine species; sheep, consisting of all ovine species;
llamas and alpacas; goats, consisting of all caprine species; rabbits kept
primarily outdoors or raised for food or fiber source; domestic fowl; and pigs
or hogs, consisting of all swine species.
   LOCAL RABIES CONTROL INCIDENT. Any bite or other injury to a person caused
by a warm- blooded animal that breaks the victim’s skin or causes him or her to
bleed and potentially come in contact with the injuring animal’s saliva and
could allow the rabies virus to be transmitted from the animal to the person.
   MICROCHIP IMPLANT. A passive electronic device that is injected into an
animal, under the skin, by means of a hypodermic type syringe device.
   NESTING BOX. A clean, dry enclosed area in a coop designed to facilitate egg
laying that is large enough to allow each hen being kept inside to sit, stand
up, and turn around easily, with sufficient bedding material or nest pads to
reduce egg breakage during laying.
   NUISANCE. An act that threatens the health, morals, safety, comfort,
convenience, or welfare of a community.
   OWNER. Any person or persons, firm, partnership, corporation, association or
entity that harbors, shelters, keeps, controls, manages, possesses, has whole
or part interest in an animal, or is a caretaker who has responsibility for
feeding, watering, or otherwise providing care for any animal. The occupant,
owner, or head of household of any premises where an animal remains for 72
hours or more shall be presumed to be the owner of the animal. The presumption
may be rebutted with proof that the animal has been reported to the department
as a stray animal as required in this chapter. A property owner, occupant, any
adult resident, or head of household of any premises on which a dog, cat, or
feral animal remains or customarily returns to is an owner for the purposes of
this chapter. If a person that harbors, shelters, keeps, controls, manages,
possesses, or has whole or part interest in an animal is under the age of 17
years, the parent, legal guardian, or head of the household shall be considered
the owner for the purpose of this chapter. There may be more than one person
who is the owner or responsible for the animal, including, but not limited to,
caretaker, pet sitters, groomers, boarders, walkers, and trainers.
   POLICE ANIMAL. An animal owned by the City of Mansfield or other
governmental law enforcement agency, specifically trained or equipped to assist
personnel in a law enforcement capacity.
   POTBELLIED PIG. A domesticated miniature Vietnamese, Chinese, or Asian
potbellied or potbelly pig, not exceeding 250 pounds in weight and 30 inches in
height measured at the shoulder, kept as a pet for personal enjoyment and not
kept or raised for breeding, sale or human consumption.
   POULTRY FARM. An agriculturally zoned tract of land devoted principally to
the raising of poultry for commercial purposes.
   PROPERLY FITTED. With respect to a collar, a collar that measures the
circumference of the animal’s neck plus at least one inch as to prevent escape
from the collar, that does not choke or impede normal breathing or swallowing,
and that does not cause pain or injury.
   QUARANTINE. To take into custody and place in confinement, isolated from
human beings and other animals in such a way as to preclude the possibility of
disease transmission.
   SECURE ENCLOSURE. A fence or structure, being securely enclosed and locked,
having four sides, a top, and a bottom, and clearly marked as containing a
dangerous dog with nine-inch letters, that are capable to prevent the escape or
release of a dangerous dog and to prevent any unauthorized entry.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. An injury characterized by severe bite wounds or
severe ripping and tearing of muscle that would cause a reasonably prudent
person to seek treatment from a medical professional and would require
hospitalization without regard to whether the person actually sought treatment.
   SHELTER. A structure that is capable of adequately providing cover and
protection from the heat, cold and other environmental conditions. At minimum,
a shelter must have three sides, a top, and a bottom and must be adequately
ventilated to satisfy the requirement of adequately providing cover and
protection. It must have bedding material. It must be large enough so that the
animal can enter, stand, turn around and lie down, but be small enough to
prevent the loss of body heat during cold weather.
   STRAY. Any animal, for which there is no identifiable owner or harborer,
which is found to be at large within the corporate limits of the city.
   SWINE. Any of various omnivorous, even-toed ungulates of the family Suidae,
including pigs, hogs, and boars, having a stout body with thick skin, a short
neck, and a movable snout.
   TETHER. Any leash, chain, cord, rope, or other means of restraining an
animal or the act of chaining, tying, fastening or otherwise securing an animal
to a fixed point so that it can move or range only within certain limits. For
purposes of this chapter, tether does not include a trolley line.
   UNPROVOKED. The animal was not hit, kicked, pulled, struck, pinched, poked,
prodded, shocked, or squeezed by a person with an object or part of the
person’s body, or otherwise teased or tormented in any manner. While properly
restrained, the animal was defending or protecting a person(s) or another
animal trespassing or committing a crime on the premises or property occupied
by the owner. If the animal was protecting itself or its offspring.
   VACCINATION. The inoculation of an animal with an anti-rabies vaccine that
is licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture for use in that
species and which is administered in accordance with the label’s directions and
all state and federal laws for the purpose of immunizing the animal against
rabies.
   VACCINATED, CURRENTLY. Vaccinated and satisfying the following criteria:
      (1)   The animal must have been at least 12 weeks of age at the time of
vaccination;
      (2)   At least 30 days must have elapsed since the initial vaccination;
and
      (3)   The time elapsed since the most recent vaccination has not exceeded
the recommended interval for booster vaccination as established by the
manufacturer.
      (4)   This definition applies only to bite cases in determining cause of
action in dealing with the animal.
   VACCINATION CERTIFICATE. A document showing that the animal described
thereon has received a current inoculation of rabies vaccine in an amount
sufficient to produce an immunity that satisfies the requirement of the state
law, inscribed with the date of the inoculation, the duration of immunity
approved for that vaccine, the name and address of the animal’s owner, all
other information required by state law and signed by a licensed veterinarian.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any animal not normally considered domesticated, regardless of
the state or duration of captivity, that can typically be found in a wild state
which, because of its size, vicious nature, potential disease threat, or other
natural characteristic(s), would constitute a danger to human life, property or
domestic animals, or any animal that is restricted from ownership by any
international, federal, or state law including, but not limited to, the
following animals:
      (1)   REPTILES: Venomous reptiles, crocodiles, alligators, any reptile
that typically reaches a total length of greater that six feet and iguanas;
      (2)   BIRDS: Emus, ostriches, or rheas;
      (3)   MAMMALS: Ocelots, lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars,
bobcats, wolves, dingoes, coyotes, jackals, elephants, armadillos, kangaroos,
wallabies, wallaroos, opossums, beavers, porcupines,  weasels, martins, minks,
badgers, pandas, bears, raccoons, bats, foxes, skunks, cheetahs, servals,
caracals, hyenas, squirrels, wild rabbits, or non-human primates;
      (4)   Any species illegal to own under federal or state law, or any
animal in which is, or may be hereafter, listed as a “high risk “animal in the
Texas Rabies Control Act;
      (5)   Any hybrid of any animal classified as a wild animal.
   WILDLIFE REHABILITATOR. A person holding all current state and federal
permits needed to temporarily house allowed native wild animal species in his
or her possession with the goal of rehabilitating the animal(s) and releasing
it back to its natural habitat in accordance with all state and federal laws.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-2143-19, passed 8-26-19; Am.
Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   There shall be and is hereby created the Department of Animal Care and
Control for the City of Mansfield.
   (B)   The Animal Care and Control Department shall act as the Local Rabies
Control Authority for the purposes of Tex. Health and Safety Code Chapter 826,
as amended.
   (C)   The Animal Care and Control Department shall employ Animal Care and
Control Officers to assist in the carrying out of the duties under this
chapter.
   (D)   The Animal Care and Control Department and Animal Care and Control
Officers shall be assigned to the Regulatory Compliance Department under the
authority of the City Manager.
   (E)   The responsibilities of the Animal Care and Control Department shall
be as follows:
      (1)   To enforce and see to the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter and other ordinances of the city and state law as they pertain to
animals and their management and maintenance;
      (2)   Supervise the operations of the Animal Care and Control Department
of the city; and
      (3)   Render interpretations of this chapter and adopt policies and
procedures to clarify the application of its provisions.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-2143-19, passed 8-26-19; Am.
Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
ANIMAL CONTROL
§ 90.03 NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS AT RESIDENCES; MULTIPLE PET PERMIT.
   (A)   For purposes of this section only, pet shall mean dogs or cats.
   (B)   Except as provided by this section, no residence in the city shall
house more than four dogs or four cats or exceed the combined total of six such
pets over the age of eight weeks.
   (C)   Any person desiring to keep more than four dogs or four cats or exceed
the combined total of six such pets over the age of eight weeks at a residence
may apply with the Animal Care and Control Department for a multiple pet
permit.
      (1)   Multiple pet permits.
         (a)   A multiple pet permit is valid for one year starting January 1
until December 31 of the same year.
         (b)   Mid-year application for a multiple pet permit shall be valid
from the time of permit fee payment and the application has been approved,
through December 31 of the same year. Thereafter, a multiple pet permit shall
be valid from January 1 until December 31 of the year of issuance.
         (c)   The applicant shall pay an annual permit fee at the time of
filing the pet permit. The annual permit fee shall be established in the Master
Fee Schedule which shall be adopted by City Council, as amended from time to
time.
         (d)   Notice for renewal may be provided by the Animal Care and
Control Department by mail to the designated (last known) mailing or email
address.
         (e)   Failure to renew by January 1 shall forfeit the multiple pet
permit.
         (f)   A multiple pet permit that has lapsed for failure to renew shall
not be reinstated until completion of a new permit application and payment of
the permit fee has been received and approved by the Animal Care and Control
Department.
      (2)   The Animal Care and Control Department is authorized to issue a
multiple pet permit if the following conditions are met:
         (a)   All animals have a current rabies vaccination, a current city
license, and are microchipped and sterilized;
         (b)   An applicant provides on a form prescribed by the Animal Care
and Control Department information concerning the maximum number of animals to
be kept at any one time at such premises;
         (c)   A record search indicates that no enforcement action for
violations of this chapter has been necessary within the preceding 12 months;
         (d)   An Animal Care and Control Officer inspects the property and
interviews the occupants of all immediately adjacent properties; and
         (e)   Upon review of the following circumstances, the Animal Care and
Control Officer, in their sole discretion, deems it appropriate for housing
multiple pets based on criteria including, but not limited to:
            1.   Facilities shall be of sufficient size as to allow each animal
to move about freely. Size of the facility shall be in proportion to the size
of the individual animal's height and weight.
            2.   Adequate food, water, and shelter must be provided so that
each and all animals kept shall be maintained in good health and free of
malnutrition and/or dehydration and protected from the elements.
            3.   The said premises shall be kept in a sanitary condition and
reasonably free of animal waste, parasites, insects, and flies that could be
harmful to the animal's health and/or to the health of the general public.
            4.   The animals must be maintained in a manner which does not pose
a danger to the health of the animals themselves or adjacent animals.
            5.   The animals must not cause noise which is offensive or
disturbing to a person of ordinary sensibilities on adjacent premises.
            6.   All animals must be vaccinated, microchipped, and sterilized
and must wear current tags at all times in accordance with this chapter.
      (3)   Multiple pet permits are issued only for the current pets residing
in the home at the time of permit issuance. Any interchanging of animals in the
home shall require reapplication for a multiple pet permit to be issued based
on the animals that are now within the home. If an owner reduces the number of
animals in the home to the number allowed to be kept in the City of Mansfield
without a multiple pet permit, the current multiple pet permit will be
forfeited as it is no longer required.
      (4)   Fees for the issuance of a multiple pet permit shall be established
in the Master Fee Schedule as adopted by the City Council, as amended from time
to time.
      (5)   The Animal Care and Control Department may revoke a multiple pet
permit prior to its expiration if:
         (a)   The conditions at the premises are no longer reasonably adequate
to maintain the number of animals allowed by the permit;
         (b)   The owner fails to comply with conditions, limitations, and
restrictions specified in the permit; or
         (c)   A persistent nuisance occurs, determined as three or more state
law or city ordinance violations, cumulatively, during the term of the permit.
      (6)   Multiple pet permits must be renewed annually by January 1 each
year and each renewal will require the payment of a renewal fee, re-inspection
of the premises as outlined in §
90.03(C)(2), and approval by the Animal Care and Control Department. Failure to
timely renew the permit shall result in forfeiture of the multiple pet permit.
      (7)   Any person either denied a multiple pet permit, or who has had
their permit revoked, may file an appeal as outlined in §
90.20(B).
      (8)   Multiple pet permits are issued for specific owners of a specific
property. Application for a new multiple pet permits will be required if:
         (a)   The original permit holder moves to a new residence within the
city limits and wishes to keep more than four dogs or four cats or exceed a
combined total of six such animals over the age of eight weeks on the new
property; or
         (b)   Ownership of the property for which a permit was originally
issued changes and the new owners desire to keep more than four dogs or four
cats or exceed a combined total of six such animals over the age of eight
weeks.
      (9)   Multiple pet permits will not be issued for commercial breeders or
boarding kennels or cattery facilities.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to animal rescue organizations or any
other tax-exempt nonprofit organization founded for the purpose of providing
temporary care or humane sanctuary or shelter for abandoned or unwanted
animals.
   (E)   This section shall not apply to animals temporarily in the home for a
period not to exceed 21 days.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.04 ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for an animal establishment to sell, trade, or
give away any dog or cat, over 16 weeks of age, unless the dog or cat has been
vaccinated as required by this chapter.
   (B)   The Animal Control Manager shall be permitted to inspect any animal
establishment and all animals and the premises where such animals are kept at
any reasonable time during normal business hours to ensure compliance with all
provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, animal
establishments shall comply with the following minimum standards:
      (1)   Remove manure and droppings from pens, yards, cages, and other
enclosures daily and handle or dispose of the excretions in such manner as to
keep the premises free of any nuisance.
      (2)   Place food in impervious containers on impervious surfaces.
      (3)   Remove all refuse on the premises and dispose of same by a means
approved by the City Health Officer.
      (4)   Such standards of sanitation shall be administered by the Animal
Control Manager.
      (5)   Such establishments will comply with all laws and city ordinances.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10)
§ 90.05 ADOPTION OF CATS OR DOGS.
   (A)   The Animal Care and Control Department shall be authorized to place
for adoption dogs or cats impounded by the city.
   (B)   In determining whether an impounded dog or cat will be placed for
adoption, the Animal Care and Control Department shall consider whether a dog
or cat is healthy enough for adoption and is of sufficient health and age to be
vaccinated. However, such decision by the Animal Care and Control Department
shall not constitute a warranty of the health or age of the animal.
   (C)   The Animal Care and Control Department shall be authorized to place
any animal in the temporary custody of an authorized person or Animal Rescue
Organization until the animal is deemed ready to be surgically altered,
vaccinated, and adopted. The animal remains the property of the city until such
time as the animal is returned to the shelter or adopted.
   (D)   In the event an adopted dog or cat does not have microchip
identification, as determined by the Animal Care and Control Department, the
adopting person shall be required to pay for a microchip implantation at an
amount established in the Master Fee Schedule adopted by the City Council, as
amended from time to time.
      (1)   Upon payment of the microchip fee, the dog or cat will be provided
microchip implantation by the Animal Care and Control Department.
      (2)   Each microchip shall contain a unique and original number that is
read by an electronic scanning device for purposes of animal identification and
recovery by the animal's owner. The microchip implant shall be supplied with an
exterior collar type tag for purposes of an external means of recognition that
the animal has been implanted with a microchip.
   (E)   An adoption fee for all dogs and cats shall be set at an amount
established in the Master Fee Schedule as adopted by the City Council, as
amended from time to time. Adoption fees may be reduced or waived as determined
and at the sole discretion of the Animal Care and Control Department.
   (F)   Requirements for adoption of dog or cat age 16 weeks or older.
      (1)   Vaccination fee.
         (a)   In the event a dog or cat age 16 weeks or older is adopted and
is not vaccinated, a fee shall be paid for the issuance of a rabies vaccination
voucher. The vaccination fee shall be in an amount established in the Master
Fee Schedule as adopted by the City Council, as amended from time to time.
Within ten days of receipt of the vaccination voucher, the adopting person
shall present to any licensed veterinarian the vaccination voucher and ensure
successful vaccination against rabies of the adopted dog or cat and provide
proof of such vaccination to the Animal Care and Control Department. The
veterinarian shall present the voucher with a statement verifying the
vaccination to the Animal Care and Control Department for receipt of the
prepaid fee or the veterinarian's fee for administering the vaccination,
whichever is less.
         (b)   An adopting person commits an offense if after adopting a dog or
cat 16 weeks of age or older he or she fails to obtain a rabies vaccination for
such animal within ten days of the adoption date.
         (c)   It shall be presumed that the adopting person failed to have the
animal vaccinated if, within ten days of the adoption date, he or she has not
presented the Animal Care and Control Department with proof of the vaccination.
Such proof shall be in the form of a receipt from the veterinarian who
administered the vaccination.
         (d)   Any person adopting an animal understands that ownership of the
adopted animal is contingent on completing the requirements of this section and
failure to do so shall revert ownership of said animal back to the city. In the
event the requirements of this section are not completed as described, the
Animal Care and Control Department shall be authorized to seize and impound any
dog or cat adopted under this division (F) if the vaccination is not obtained
within the required time, as described in division (F)(1)(a) above. In such
case, there shall be no refund of the adoption fee, and ownership of the animal
shall revert back to the city, and the city shall be deemed the owner.
      (2)   License fee. In the event the adopted dog or cat age 16 weeks or
older is not licensed, the adopting person shall present to the Animal Care and
Control Department the license fee established in the Master Fee Schedule as
adopted by the City Council, as amended from time to time.
   (G)   Requirements for adoption of a dog or cat under 16 weeks of age.
      (1)   Vaccination fee.
         (a)   In the event the dog or cat to be adopted is under 16 weeks of
age, the vaccination will not be required until the animal is 16 weeks of age.
A fee in an amount established in the Master Fee Schedule as adopted by the
City Council, as amended from time to time shall be paid for the issuance of a
rabies vaccination voucher. Within ten days of the animal turning 16 weeks of
age, the adopting person shall present to any licensed veterinarian the
vaccination voucher and ensure successful vaccination against rabies of the
adopted dog or cat and provide proof of such vaccination to the Animal Care and
Control Department. The veterinarian shall present the certificate with a
statement verifying the vaccination to the Animal Care and Control Department
for receipt of the prepaid fee or the veterinarian's fee for administering the
vaccination, whichever is less.
         (b)   A person who adopts a dog or cat under this division (G) commits
an offense if he or she fails to obtain a rabies vaccination for such animal
within the age limits required in this division (G).
         (c)   It shall be presumed that the person failed to have the animal
vaccinated when it turned 16 weeks of age, if within ten days of the animal
turning 16 weeks of age, the owner has not presented proof of vaccination to
the Animal Care and Control Department. Proof shall be in the form of a receipt
from the licensed veterinarian who administered the vaccine.
         (d)   The Animal Care and Control Department shall be authorized to
impound the adopted dog or cat under this division (G) if the vaccination is
not obtained within the time required by division (G)(1)(a) above. In such case
there shall be no refund of the adoption fee, and ownership of the animal shall
revert to the city.
      (2)   License fee.
         (a)   Within ten days after a dog or cat, which was under 16 weeks old
when adopted, is vaccinated against rabies, the adopting person shall furnish
to the Animal Care and Control Department the original adoption receipt and
proof of vaccination to receive the city license.
         (b)   The adopting person shall pay the Animal Care and Control
Department the license fee as established in the Master Fee Schedule adopted by
the City Council, as amended from time to time, at the time the person receives
the city license.
   (H)   Sterilization.
      (1)   Written agreement. A person adopting a dog or cat that has not been
sterilized shall sign a written agreement that they will have the animal
sterilized:
         (a)   Within 30 days after adoption if the dog or cat is an adult; or
         (b)   Within 30 days after a specified date determined by the Animal
Care and Control Department. Said specified date is to be the date, as
estimated by the Animal Care and Control Department, an adopted infant female
dog or cat becomes six months old or an adopted infant male dog or cat becomes
eight months old.
      (2)   Fee.
         (a)   A person adopting an unsterilized animal shall pay the Animal
Care and Control Department a sterilization fee. The fee shall be in an amount
established in the Master Fee Schedule as adopted by the City Council, as
amended from time to time, and shall receive a spaying or neutering voucher
stating the date by which the animal must be sterilized.
         (b)   Before the sterilization date, the adopting person shall present
the voucher to a licensed veterinarian who shall perform the sterilization of
the adopted animal.
         (c)   The veterinarian shall present a spaying or neutering voucher to
the Animal Care and Control Department along with a statement verifying that
the animal was sterilized, for receipt of the prepaid fee or the veterinarian's
fee, whichever is less.
      (3)   Offense.
         (a)   A person who signs a sterilization agreement commits an offense
if he or she fails to have the animal sterilized on or before the sterilization
completion date stated in the agreement, unless the adopting person provides
information to the Animal Care and Control Department as set out by division
(H)(4) of this section.
         (b)   If the sterilization date falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal
holiday, the deadline is extended to the first day that is not a Saturday,
Sunday or legal holiday.
         (c)   The Animal Care and Control Department may extend the
sterilization deadline for 30 days upon presentation by the adopting person of
a written report by a licensed veterinarian stating that the life or health of
the adopted animal may be jeopardized by surgery. There is no limit to the
number of extensions that may be granted under this division (H).
      (4)   Confirmation of sterilization.
         (a)   A person who signs a sterilization agreement shall deliver to
the Animal Care and Control Department a letter signed by the veterinarian who
performed the surgery. The letter shall be delivered in person or by mail not
later than the seventh day after the date on which the animal was sterilized.
The letter shall state that the animal has been sterilized, briefly describe
the animal and provide the date of sterilization.
         (b)   If an adopted animal dies on or before the sterilization
completion date, the adopting person shall deliver to the Animal Care and
Control Department a signed letter stating that the animal is dead. The letter
shall be delivered not later than ten days after the date of the animal's
death, and shall describe the cause of death if known and provide the date of
death. This letter shall be in lieu of the letter required in division (H)(4)
(a) of this section.
         (c)   If an adopted animal is lost or stolen before the sterilization
date, the adopting person shall deliver to the Animal Care and Control
Department a signed letter stating that the animal is lost or stolen. The
letter shall be delivered not later than ten days after the date of the
animal's disappearance and shall describe the circumstances surrounding the
disappearance and the approximate date of disappearance. This letter shall be
in lieu of the letter required in division (H)(4)(a) of this section.
      (5)   Prosecution.
         (a)   If the Animal Care and Control Department does not receive a
letter under division (H)(4) of this section before the expiration of the
seventh day after the sterilization completion date, the Animal Care and
Control Department shall file a complaint against the adopting person in the
Mansfield Municipal Court.
         (b)   In a prosecution of a person for failing to sterilize an adopted
animal by the sterilization completion date, it shall be presumed that the
failure of such person to deliver to the Animal Care and Control Department a
letter required by division (G)(4) of this section is the result of the
person's refusal to have the adopted animal sterilized. The person may rebut
this presumption at trial with the proof required by division (G)(4) of this
section.
      (6)   Reclamation of animal. The Animal Care and Control Department may
reclaim an adopted animal after the expiration of the seventh day after the
sterilization completion date, if the Animal Care and Control Department has
not received a letter as outlined in division (G)(4) of this section. In such
case there shall be no refund of the adoption fee, and ownership of the animal
shall revert to the city.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.06 LIVESTOCK AND LIVESTOCK PERMITS.
   (A)   Permits will only be issued by the Animal Care and Control Department
for livestock that are kept in conformance with the regulations in this
chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and illegal for any person owning or having
control over any livestock to allow the same to be at-large unattended on any
public property, on any public right-of-way, or on the property of another
without the consent of such other person.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful and illegal for any person owning or having
control over any livestock to keep said livestock within the corporate limits
of the City of Mansfield, regardless of whether livestock are kept for personal
use or for commercial purposes, unless a livestock permit has been obtained
from the Animal Care and Control Department as designated within this chapter.
   (D)   In order to obtain a livestock permit, an owner of livestock shall
complete an application on a form prescribed by the Animal Care and Control
Department, registering their property with the city and describing the type of
livestock and the number of livestock which shall live thereon. In completing
the livestock application, the owner of livestock shall be required to pay a
one-time permit application fee. The fee shall be set at an amount established
in the Master Fee Schedule as adopted by the City Council, and as amended from
time to time. A livestock permit is valid for one year starting January 1 until
December 31 of the same year. Mid-year application for a livestock permit shall
be valid from the time of permit fee payment and the application has been
approved, through December 31 of the same year. Thereafter, a livestock permit
shall be valid from January 1 to December 31 of the year of issuance.
   (E)   All livestock permits shall be renewed on an annual basis. The permit
renewal shall be on a form prescribed by the Animal Care and Control
Department, and shall be filed with the Animal Care and Control Department by
January 1 each year. Current livestock permit holders shall not be required to
pay a permit renewal fee provided they have complied with the filing
requirements under this subsection. Notice for renewal may be provided to the
permit holder by the Animal Care and Control Department by mail to the
designated (last known) mailing or email address, as provided in the previous
years’ livestock permit application. Failure to renew the livestock permit by
January 1 shall result in citation. A livestock permit that has lapsed for
failure to renew will be reinstated upon completion of a new permit application
and payment of the permit application fee.
   (F)   Livestock permit holders may receive penalties as permitted within
this chapter for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Animal cruelty or neglect as defined in Tex. Penal Code § 42.09.
      (2)   More than three violations of livestock at-large within a calendar
year.
      (3)   Failure to obtain a livestock permit within 15 calendar days of
placing livestock on property within the city.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-1805-11, passed 6-27-11; Am.
Ord. OR-2143-19, passed 8-26-19; Am. Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.07 POTBELLIED PIGS.
   (A)   The keeping of potbellied pigs on any property within the City of
Mansfield must comply with the regulations of the Zoning Ordinance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or raise more than
two potbellied pigs on any one tract or lot within the city.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to breed, sell, give away, or
release a potbellied pig in any location within the city.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a potbellied pig outdoors
other than at those times necessary for the elimination of waste materials,
eating, or exercise, and no potbellied pig may be outside more than two hours
during a 24-hour period. All outdoor areas must be kept clean and free of
excess waste material.
   (E)   Potbellied pigs are subject to all applicable sections of this chapter
including the requirements of this chapter which address animals at-large,
nuisances, permitting, impoundment, enforcement, care and humane treatment,
rabies and quarantine, and penalties.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a potbellied pig at any
location within the city unless such person has first paid an annual permit fee
and filed a permit application with the Animal Care and Control Department. The
annual permit fee shall be established in the Master Fee Schedule which shall
be adopted by City Council, as amended from time to time. A potbellied pig
permit is valid for one year starting January 1 until December 31 of the same
year. Mid-year application for a potbellied pig permit shall be valid from the
time of permit fee payment and the application has been approved, through
December 31 of the same year. Thereafter, a potbellied pig permit shall be
valid from January 1 to December 31 of the year of issuance. Each permit
application must include the following:
      (1)   Name, street address and phone number of the owner;
      (2)   Evidence that the animal has been spayed or neutered;
      (3)   Name and description of the animal;
      (4)   Approximate weight, height and age of the animal; and
      (5)   Animal's general health.
   (G)   All potbellied pig permits shall be renewed on an annual basis. The
permit renewal shall be on a form prescribed by the Animal Care and Control
Division, and shall be filed by January 1 each year. Potbellied pig owners
shall not be required to pay a permit renewal fee. Notice for renewal may be
provided by the Animal Care and Control Department by mail to the designated
(last known) mailing or email address. Failure to renew shall forfeit the
potbellied pig permit. A potbellied pig permit that has lapsed for failure to
renew will be reinstated upon completion of a new permit application and
payment of the permit application fee.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-2143-19, passed 8-26-19; Am.
Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.08 KEEPING OF FOWL.
   (A)   The keeping of domestic fowl on any residential properties shall meet
the following conditions:
      (1)   For any lot size, if the distance between the exterior side of the
coop on the property and the exterior side of the primary residential
structures on all adjacent properties is less than 50 feet, no fowl may be kept
on the property.
      (2)   For any lot size, if the distance between the exterior side of the
coop on the property and the exterior side of the primary residential
structures on all adjacent properties is 50 feet or greater but less than 70
feet, no more than six domestic fowl shall be kept.
      (3)   For properties in which the distance between the exterior side of
the coop on the property and the exterior side of the primary residential
structures on all adjacent properties is 70 feet or greater:
         (a)   If the property is less than one-half acre, no more than ten
domestic fowl shall be kept.
         (b)   If the property is greater than one-half acre but less than
three quarters of an acre, no more than 15 domestic fowl shall be kept.
         (c)   If the property is greater than three quarters of an acre but
less than one acre, no more than 18 domestic fowl may be kept.
         (d)   If the property is greater than one acre, no more than 25
domestic fowl may be kept.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person:
      (1)   Fails to keep any duck, goose, or swan from being at-large;
however, all ducks, geese, or swans found within the parks of the city are
hereby exempted.
      (2)   Fails to keep any domestic fowl contained within a coop or exercise
yard at any time, except:
         (a)   When being removed to be transported to, or returned from, a
location off the property;
         (b)   During daylight hours when they are under the direct supervision
of an adult, provided that they are enclosed within a perimeter fence at a
height which would prevent them from becoming at-large; or,
         (c)   When being temporarily confined in a garage or indoor space
during periods of extreme weather or brooding.
      (3)   Constructs or maintains a coop or exercise yard that fails to
comply with the requirements of this chapter and all zoning requirements for
accessory buildings.
      (4)   Keeps or maintains roosters except within a poultry farm.
      (5)   Keeps or maintains fowl within 100 feet of any private water well.
   (C)   In connection with all of the above, the premises and facilities used
for the keeping of domestic fowl authorized to be kept under any of the
provisions of this section must be kept in such a manner so as not to endanger
the public health, safety or welfare of others, or become a public nuisance.
This shall include:
      (1)   Hay, grain, feed, and all other food sources shall be stored in
secure containers that are not accessible to rats, flies, mosquitos, or other
rodents and insects;
      (2)   Manure and soiled bedding material shall be immediately disposed
of, properly composted, or stored in secure containers that are not accessible
to rats, flies, mosquitos, or other rodents or insects;
      (3)   Food scraps, kitchen scraps, or other perishable food items shall
not be fed on the ground or in any container other than an impervious container
or on an impervious platform; and,
      (4)   Domestic fowl meat byproducts may not be sold or offered to be
sold.
   (D)   This section shall not supersede, replace, or have control over any
recorded deed restrictions, covenants, homeowner association rules, or other
applicable restrictions that prohibit the keeping of domestic fowl on such
property.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-2143-19, passed 8-26-19; Am.
Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.09 ANIMALS AT-LARGE.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person fails to keep an animal the
person owns from being at-large or fails to keep an animal under restraint in a
securely enclosed or confined area and in a manner that will isolate the animal
from the public.
   (B)   It is an exception to division (A) of this section that the animal was
a police animal under the supervision of a peace officer in the performance of
his or her official duties.
   (C)   Each animal in violation of this section constitutes a separate
offense.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.10 WILD ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to keep any wild animal inside the city.
   (B)   It shall be an exception that a wild animal may be kept within the
city only during the time a performing animal exhibition or circus is
performing for a maximum of 30 days, and the wild animal must be under the care
and control of a bona fide performing animal exhibition or circus.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.11 SLAUGHTERING OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   The slaughter or butcher of an animal or fowl must not be in public
view.
   (B)   To prevent odor and attraction of scavengers or pests, all waste
material produced from the slaughter or butcher of animals, fish or fowl
(blood, hide, pelt, skin, feathers, entrails, scales, bones, feet, head,
carcass, etc.) must be placed in sealable containers or double bagged in
plastic bags of sufficient size and strength to contain the waste material.
   (C)   Waste material from the slaughter or butchering of animals, fish or
fowl shall not be stored in public view and shall be disposed of per city
ordinance.
   (D)   No animals shall be slaughtered for any purpose other than as food for
personal consumption.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to haul, carry, or transport any slaughtered or
dead animals or meat on, along, or upon any street, alley, highway, park, or
other public grounds within the corporate limits of the city without having the
same covered and protected from public view and screened from insects, germs,
and dust.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-2143-19, passed 8-26-19; Am.
Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.13 NUISANCES.
   (A)   The following actions are considered to be a nuisance and shall be
unlawful:
      (1)   No female animal in heat shall be allowed upon any street, avenue,
highway, alley, sidewalk, parkway, park or other public place within the city,
unless such animal is under the control of the owner or any other person,
either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise, and only for the minimal amount of
time necessary for female animal to defecate or urinate. Should female animal
create or cause a nuisance as described in any other division of this section,
the person in control of the female animal shall be found to be in violation of
division (B) of this section.
      (2)   Animal noise nuisances.
         (a)   Barking dog means a dog that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes
any noise for an extended period of time to the disturbance of any person at
any time of day or night, regardless of whether the dog is physically situated
in or upon private property. Such extended period of time shall consist of
incessant barking for 30 minutes or more in any 24-hour period, or intermittent
barking for 60 minutes or more during any 24-hour period.
            1.   Exception: A dog shall not be deemed a “barking dog” for
purposes of this chapter if, at any time the dog is barking, due to a person
trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon which
the dog is situated, or when the dog is being provoked.
         (b)   Any animal, other than a dog or livestock animal, creates a
nuisance when it makes a noise which emanates from the animal and such noise
occurs for an extended period of time to the disturbance of any person at any
time of day or night. Such extended period of time shall consist of incessant
noise for 30 minutes or more in any 24-hour period, or intermittent noise that
accumulates to a total of 60 minutes or more during any 24-hour period.
         (c)   Responsible person for a violation of this section includes:
            1.   A person who allows a barking dog or animal nuisance violation
to exist, whether through willful action, failure to act, or failure to
exercise proper control over a barking dog or nuisance animal;
            2.   A person whose agent, employee, or independent contractor
allows a barking dog or animal nuisance violation to exist, whether through
willful action, failure to act, or failure to exercise proper control over a
barking dog or nuisance animal; and
            3.   A person who is the owner of, and a person who is a lessee or
sub-lessee with the current right of possession of, real property in or upon
which a barking dog or nuisance animal violation occurs.
      (3)   The keeping of any non-livestock animal in such a manner so to
endanger the public health; to annoy neighbors by the accumulation of animal
wastes which cause foul and offensive odors, or are considered to be a hazard
to any other animal or human being; or by continued presence on the premises of
another is prohibited.
      (4)   All non-livestock animal enclosures in which any animal may be kept
or confined which, from use, have become offensive to a person of ordinary
sensibilities are prohibited.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to cause to be
placed or place on the premises of any other person, or in any of the streets
or other public ways, a dead animal, either wild or domesticated, or any dead
fowl, either wild or domesticated, or allow to remain on his or her premises a
dead animal, either wild or domesticated.
      (6)   An animal owner shall not allow or cause to be allowed their animal
to walk along public property without a hand held leash restraint under the
direct physical control of a capable person, and shall not guide or take
animals onto the yards or driveways of properties not owned, leased, or
occupied by the animal owner for the purpose of allowing the animal to
defecate, but shall keep the animal in the public right-of-way, and shall carry
a container and implement for the sanitary removal of the animal’s fecal matter
from the public sidewalk and public right-of-way adjacent to any property with
a structure or other improvements thereon. If the animal(s) does defecate on
someone else’s property that is not owned by the owner, the owner must pick up
the feces immediately.
   (B)   It is unlawful to create or allow a nuisance as defined herein. Any
person who creates or allows a nuisance is deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, is subject to a fine, as authorized by other sections of this
chapter and references to the Code of Ordinances of the city.
   (C)   A continuing public nuisance in this section is defined as an
irresponsible action of ownership or control of an animal(s) that endangers the
public health, public safety or public welfare; an action that offends the
public morals; or an action that endangers life or health, gives unreasonable
offense to the senses, or obstructs the reasonable and comfortable use of
another's property. If the Animal Care and Control Department determines that a
continuing public nuisance exists, one which is detrimental to the public
health, safety, and welfare and one which continues unabated despite
enforcement efforts, the Animal Care and Control Department may take action to
abate such nuisance.
      (1)   If the Animal Care and Control Department determines that such
public nuisance exists unabated, the Animal Care and Control Department may
determine that a continuing public nuisance exists. The Animal Care and Control
Department may investigate any report of perceived nuisance, and may interview
witnesses as the manager may determine necessary. The Animal Care and Control
Department shall make a disposition determination based on the necessity to
preserve the public health, safety, and welfare of the community. This
determination shall be one of the following:
         (a)   Impoundment of the animal(s) that is the source of the
continuing public nuisance and the adoption of the animal(s), except that the
owner, his/her agents or representatives, or family members may not adopt the
animals adjudged a continuing public nuisance;
         (b)   Impoundment and humane euthanasia of the animal(s) that is the
source of the continuing public nuisance; or
         (c)   Removal of an animal(s) determined to be a continuing public
nuisance from the city.
      (2)   Upon determination, the Animal Care and Control Department shall
notify the animal owner or the person in control of the animal(s). This notice
shall be in writing and shall contain a statement that such person has a right
to appeal, as outlined in §
90.20(B).
      (3)   Notice shall be mailed certified mail, return receipt requested, to
last known mailing address of the owner or person in control of the animal(s),
or delivered in person.
      (4)   An owner or person in control of the animal(s), not later than 15
calendar days after the date such person is notified that an animal(s) is a
continuing public nuisance, may appeal the determination of the Animal Care and
Control Department to the Municipal Court.
      (5)   The owner or person in control of the animal(s) determined to be a
continuing public nuisance shall remove such animal(s) from the city within 15
calendar days of such notification by the Animal Care and Control Department or
within 48 hours of an unsuccessful appeal. The failure to remove such animal(s)
shall be an offense and each day thereafter that such person fails to remove
such animal(s) shall constitute a separate offense.
      (6)   If the owner or person in control of such animal(s) fails to remove
such animal(s) as provided for by the order of the Animal Care and Control
Department or the court, such animals may be impounded and put up for adoption
or humanely euthanized.
      (7)   The owner or person in control of such animal(s) must report the
disposition and exact address or relocation of such animal(s) that is outside
the city limits of Mansfield to the Animal Care and Control Department in
writing within 15 calendar days after the expiration date for removal of such
animal(s) from the city. Each day thereafter that such information is not
provided shall constitute a separate offense.
      (8)   The Animal Care and Control Department shall be authorized, after
due process, to obtain an administrative search warrant for the purpose of
enforcing this section.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.14 FEEDING OF WILD, STRAY, OR FERAL ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to feed wild animals, stray
animals or feral animals, regardless of age, sex or temperament. It shall also
be unlawful for any person to place food of any kind with the intent to feed
wild, stray, or feral animals or to leave, store or maintain food of any kind
in a manner or area accessible to wild, stray, or feral animals including:
      (1)   On any vacant or undeveloped property or tract of land in any
zoning district; and
      (2)   On property not owned or occupied by the person feeding or
attempting to feed a wild animal, stray animal, or feral animal.
   (B)   On any fenced or unfenced property, even if owned or occupied by the
person feeding or attempting to feed said wild animals, stray animal, or feral
animal. This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Animal Care and Control Officers or police officers for the City of
Mansfield during the course of their official duties or a person caring for an
infant or injured wild animal that is not capable of surviving on its own and
said person possesses a valid Texas State Parks and Wildlife Rehabilitation
Permit and said wild animal is kept in a secure manner and in accordance with
all other city ordinances and state laws;
      (2)   Birdfeeders used for the sole purpose of feeding wild birds within
the boundaries of a person’s owned or occupied property, or the feeding of
water fowl within Mansfield city parks; and
      (3)   Any person who is using food as an attractant to live trap a wild
animal, a stray or feral animal in a legally authorized or permitted manner.
   (C)   If upon investigation, an Animal Care and Control Officer or police
officer for the City of Mansfield determines that a person is in violation of
this section, the Animal Care and Control Officer or police officer at their
discretion may issue a warning or citation and time frame for compliance to
said person.
(Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.15 HUMANE TRAPPING.
   (A)   A person trapping nuisance wildlife, including feral cats, shall have
a humane trap agreement in place with the Animal Care and Control Department,
even if the humane trap is privately owned. The humane trapping agreement must
be completed and returned to Animal Care and Control Department before trapping
begins and may be delivered by email, online, or in person to the Animal Care
and Control Department. Such agreement shall be considered executed after
receipt and confirmation by the Animal Care and Control Department.
   (B)   Humane trapping is not permitted for wildlife that is behaving
normally or which does not present a danger to public health. Seeing wildlife
or smelling skunks shall not be considered a nuisance. Wildlife that has
burrowed into homes, foundations, crawl spaces, attics, under sheds, or other
areas of a dwelling shall be considered a nuisance.
   (C)   Humane traps shall only be allowed from Sunday through Thursday
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Humane traps may be set between
Monday through Friday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. provided the
individual that is trapping is checking the trap every hour. Traps are only
serviced by the Animal Care and Control Department Monday through Friday from
8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
   (D)   Humane traps shall not be set on Saturdays, holidays, or days
immediately preceding holidays, during inclement weather, when ambient outside
air temperature measures above 90 degrees Fahrenheit, or when ambient outside
air temperature measures below 35 degrees Fahrenheit.
   (E)   Humane care shall be provided for any trapped animals, including the
provision of food, water and protection from inclement weather.
   (F)   The Animal Care and Control Department may lend humane traps for a
period of not more than seven days. Humane traps shall be lent out in person at
the Animal Care and Control Department. The person who is trapping must come to
the Office of the Animal Care and Control Department to complete a humane
trapping agreement and be provided a humane trap. No deposit is required to
borrow a humane trap, but said trap must be returned on the date specified or
the recipient of the humane trap shall be subject to prosecution under the
State of Texas Penal Code § 31.03 - Theft, which is classified as a Class "C"
misdemeanor and punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
   (G)   Individuals are not allowed to release any animal from a humane trap
unless approved by an Animal Care and Control Officer or any other staff under
the Animal Care and Control Department.
   (H)   A person is only allowed to humanely trap on their own private
property. Individuals are not allowed to trap on public property or property
they do not own. In the event any animal traps are discovered on public
property, said traps shall be declared to be abandoned, and the Animal Care and
Control Department are hereby authorized and directed to seize any such trap
and process the same as abandoned property in accordance with the applicable
provisions of state law and city procedures.
   (I)   A person who is humanely trapping shall call Animal Care and Control
Department promptly if an animal is in a humane trap. Notification may be in
the form of a voicemail or by telephone call to the Animal Care and Control
Department. Notification shall include the person’s full name, address, phone
number, type of animal caught, and where the humane trap is located. Such
information is provided to allow an Animal Care and Control Officer to retrieve
the trapped animal.
   (J)   The use of steel jaw, leg hold, snare traps or any other inhumane trap
shall be prohibited.
   (K)   The use of any poisonous or toxic substance inside a humane trap as
bait, lure, or attractant to entice an animal to enter such humane trap shall
be prohibited.
   (L)   Any high-risk rabies animal, including any living species of fox,
skunk, bat, coyote or raccoon, cannot be transported under any circumstances.
Those exempt from this restriction, per Texas state law, shall be the
following: peace officers; individuals hired or contracted by state or federal
agencies or local government; employees of zoos or other institutions
accredited by the American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums;
educators permitted by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department for educational
display; rehabilitators permitted by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department;
or pest management professionals licensed by the Texas Department of
Agriculture. If an exempt person transports such animals for release, the
animals must be released within a ten-mile radius or within ten miles of the
city limits of where they were originally captured, and the release must be
within the county in which they were originally captured.
   (M)   Any person who utilizes any humane trap on any property within the
city limits shall be deemed responsible for the health, safety, and welfare of
the trapped animal concerning shade, shelter, prevention of injury by insects,
and access to adequate food and water. If an Animal Care and Control Officer
observes any misuse of a live trap, including harm or death of a trapped
animal, the Animal Care and Control Officer may: recover the trap (if loaned
out from the city); issue a citation to the person for violation of this
section or §
90.25; or initiate an animal cruelty investigation against the person.
   (N)   This shall not apply to traps designed to kill common rodents,
including but not limited to rats, mice and gophers. A person shall not place
rodent traps on the person’s property in such a manner that is likely to trap
animals other than common rodents. A person must also provide proof that said
trap was designed or used for common rodents only.
   (O)   Animal Care and Control staff and any sworn peace officer for the city
is exempt from this section.
(Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.20 APPEALING ACO DETERMINATIONS, ORDERS, AND PERMIT DENIALS AND
REVOCATIONS.
   (A)   Upon the written appeal by an owner whose animal has been seized,
ordered to be removed from the city, been denied a permit required in this
chapter, had a permit required by this chapter revoked, or had restrictions
placed upon the keeping of an animal, the municipal court shall set a time for
a hearing to determine the appropriateness of any decision. The hearing must be
held not later than ten business days after the date on which the decision was
issued, unless agreed to by all parties.
   (B)   Appeal and hearing process.
      (1)   The owner may appeal a decision in writing not later than 15
calendar days after the decision made by the Animal Care and Control Department
or an Animal Care and Control Officer.
      (2)   The hearing must be requested with the Animal Care and Control
Manager.
      (3)   The municipal court shall give written notice of the time and place
of the hearing to:
         (a)   All involved department staff, Police Officer, and any other
city staff deemed appropriate to receive such notification;
         (b)   The owner of the animal, or the person from whom the animal was
seized or received the order to remove said animal from the city; and
         (c)   The person who made the complaint, if there is one.
      (4)   Any interested party, including the City Attorney, is entitled to
present evidence at the hearing.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.21 PROMOTIONAL DISPLAYS; DYEING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, barter,
or give away as toys, premiums or novelties, baby chickens, ducklings, or other
fowl under three weeks old, or rabbits under eight weeks old, unless the manner
or method of display is first approved by the Animal Care and Control
Department.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to color, dye, stain, or otherwise change the
natural color of any chickens, ducklings, other fowl, or rabbits, or to possess
for the purpose of sale or to be given away, any of the above-mentioned animals
which have been so colored.
   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, exchange, trade,
barter, lease, give away, or display for a commercial purpose, any live animal
on any roadside, public right-of-way, parkway, median, park, playground,
swimming pool, other recreation area, garage sale, flea market, or commercial
or retail parking lot that is generally accessible by the public, regardless of
whether such access is authorized, or any property to which the public has
access that does not have a valid business license allowing the sale of animals
on the property.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to receive any live animal
through sale, exchange, trade, barter, lease, rent, or give away from any
roadside, public right-of-way, parkway, median, park, playground, swimming
pool, other recreation area, garage sale, flea market, or commercial or retail
parking lot that is generally accessible by the public, regardless of whether
such access is authorized, or any property to which the public has access that
does not have a valid business license allowing the sale of animals on the
property.
      (3)   This section shall not apply to animal rescue organizations or any
other tax-exempt nonprofit organization founded for the purpose of providing
humane sanctuary or shelter for abandoned or unwanted animals.
      (4)   Officers in the city’s Regulatory Compliance Department and Public
Safety Departments are authorized to investigate alleged violations of this
section and to issue citations for such violations.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.22 LICENSE, VACCINATION AND MICROCHIP REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person owns any dog or cat over 16
weeks of age without having such dog or cat currently vaccinated against
rabies. The same animal must receive a booster within the 12-month interval
following the animal's initial vaccination and must be revaccinated against
rabies at the recommended interval for booster vaccination as established by
the vaccine manufacturer.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person owns any dog or cat over 16
weeks of age without having such dog or cat currently licensed with the city.
The animal license will be valid from January 1 until December 31 of each given
year. City licenses issued mid-year shall be valid from the time of issuance
until December 31 of the same year. The color of the city license will change
from year to year for easy visual recognition. This subsection does not apply
to animals temporarily within the city for a period not to exceed 14
consecutive days. Dogs temporarily in the city will not be allowed access to
the Man’s Best Field Dog Park unless a city license is obtained.
   (C)   A person who owns a dog or cat commits an offense if the person fails
to display on such dog or cat both a current rabies vaccination tag furnished
by a veterinarian and a current license tag furnished by the city.
   (D)   A person who owns a dog or cat commits an offense if the person
displays on such dog or cat a rabies or license tag issued to another animal.
   (E)   A person who owns any dog or cat over 16 weeks of age shall have such
dog or cat microchipped, or any existing microchip verified by the Animal Care
and Control Department. A dog or cat with a microchip registered with a
national microchip database shall receive a discount from the annual license
fee.
   (F)   The Animal Care and Control Department may revoke or deny the license
of a cat or dog issued to any person who has been convicted in any duly
authorized court of jurisdiction in the state, or resides with any person so
convicted of any of the following:
      (1)   Cruelty to animals as defined in the Tex. Penal Code § 42.09,
inhumane treatment, or negligence to an animal; or
      (2)   Conviction of four or more separate and distinct violations of an
animal control ordinance of a municipality in the state within any 12-month
period.
   (G)   A person denied such a license may appeal the refusal as set out in §
90.20(B).
   (H)   Each animal in violation of this section constitutes a separate
offense.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-2143-19, passed 8-26-19; Am.
Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.23 IMPOUNDMENT; FEES.
   (A)   The City Manager shall select and establish a place for impounding all
animals impounded under any provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Animals that may be impounded are as follows:
      (1)   Cats and dogs not exhibiting evidence of being vaccinated as
described in §
90.22 or licensed as described in §
90.22.
      (2)   Any animal kept under conditions that could endanger the public
health or public safety.
      (3)   Any animal that creates a nuisance, as defined in §
90.13.
      (4)   Any animal running at-large, as provided in §
90.09.
      (5)   A dog or cat that has rabies or symptoms thereof, or that a person
could suspect as having rabies, or that bites or otherwise creates a condition
which may have exposed or transmitted the rabies virus to any human being.
      (6)   A dog or cat that is suspected of having inflicted bodily injury on
any human being or animal, or poses a threat to public safety.
      (7)   Any dog or cat whose license has been revoked, or livestock that
has had its permit revoked.
      (8)   Any animal in violation of any provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Reasonable effort shall be made by the Animal Care and Control Officer
to contact the owner of any animal impounded that is wearing a current
vaccination tag or city license tag; however, final responsibility for location
of an impounded animal is that of the owner.
   (D)   (1)   The owner can resume possession of any impounded animal upon
payment of impoundment fees, handling fees, and any veterinary bills incurred
by animal control for the welfare of the animal, and upon compliance with the
vaccination and licensing provisions of this code except where prohibited in
divisions (D)(2) and (D)(3) below and all other provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Disposition of animals impounded on the grounds of cruel or
inhumane treatment shall be determined by a court of competent jurisdiction.
      (3)   If any animal is being held under quarantine or observation for
rabies, the owner shall not be entitled to possession until it has been
released from quarantine.
   (E)   (1)   The city shall have the right, at the city’s discretion, to
provide necessary vaccinations or other veterinary care, including humane
euthanasia in the event of suffering during an animal’s stray hold period, to
an impounded animal immediately upon intake at the shelter. After the
expiration of any required holding period, the animal shall be considered
abandoned, all ownership rights shall be transferred to the city, the city
shall become the owner of the animal in question, and the city may dispose of
the animal as it deems appropriate, including humane euthanasia.
      (2)   Any animal shall remain impounded for 72 hours, except that any
animal wearing a current rabies vaccination tag and any animal that is
microchipped shall be impounded for not less than six days and any animal
wearing a city license tag shall be impounded for not less than 15 days. If an
animal is not reclaimed by the owner after the applicable waiting period, all
ownership rights for the animal shall transfer to the city, and the city may
dispose of the animal as it deems appropriate, including humane euthanasia.
      (3)   Any impounded feral or unmanageable animal, unless there is reason
to believe that it has an owner, may be immediately disposed of as may be
deemed appropriate by the Animal Care and Control Department for the safety of
staff caring for the animal during the impoundment period.
      (4)   Any nursing baby animal impounded without the mother, or where the
mother cannot or refuses to provide nutritious milk, may be immediately
euthanized to prevent further suffering.
      (5)   An owner who no longer wishes responsibility of an animal, or
believes the animal to be in an ill or injured condition, may sign an Owner
Surrender Form. Upon the signing of the Owner Surrender Form, all ownership
rights for the animal shall transfer to the city, and the city may immediately
dispose of the animal as it deems appropriate. Animals that have bitten a human
will have final disposition determined after the rabies quarantine period has
passed or a rabies shipment has been completed.
      (6)   Any impounded animal with no form of identification to contact the
owner that appears to be suffering from extreme injury or illness may be
euthanized or given to a non-profit animal rescue organization for the purpose
of immediate veterinary medical care, as determined by the Animal Care and
Control Department. The ownership rights of such animal shall be transferred to
the city and the city shall become the owner.
      (7)   After the expiration of any required impoundment period or
immediately after being voluntarily released by its owner, the animal shall
become the property of the city, all ownership rights for the animal shall
transfer to the city, and the department may dispose of the animal by any of
the following methods: adoption, transfer to another agency, reclamation, or
humane euthanasia.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-2143-19, passed 8-26-19; Am.
Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.23.1 FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   A fee schedule for animal control related matters shall be established
by the City Council to be incorporated in the policies and procedures
associated with this chapter.
Adoptions
 
Service                       Fee
Total                         $70
Spay/Neuter                   $25 (voucher) per animal
Rabies Vaccination            $10 (voucher) per animal
Microchip (with Registration) $20 per animal
 
City License
 
Type                                      Fee
Spayed/Neutered with Microchip            $5 per animal, annually
Non-Spayed/Non-Neutered with Microchip    $10 per animal, annually
Spayed/Neutered without Microchip         $10 per animal, annually
Non-Spayed/Non-Neutered without Microchip $15 per animal, annually
 
Registration
 
Type                Fee
Livestock           $25 one-time
Potbellied Pig      $25 one-time, per animal
Multiple-Pet Permit $25 annually
 
Impoundment Fees
Type Fee
Type                                           Fee
1st Impoundment (can receive a free microchip) $20 per animal
2nd Impoundment (within 12 months)             $50 per animal
3rd Impoundment (within 12 months)             $75 per animal
Livestock/Fowl                                 $50 per animal
Boarding (Non-livestock, non-fowl)             $5 per animal, per day
Boarding (Livestock, fowl)                     $20 per animal, per day
Behavioral Boarding                            $20 per animal, per day
 
Additional Impoundment Fees
 
Service             Fee
Additional Officers $10 per officer
Trapping            $20 per day
Chemical Capture    $50 per day
 
Owner Relinquished
 
Type                                                            Fee
At Animal Shelter & Altered                                     $30 per animal
At Animal Shelter & Unaltered                                   $45 per animal
In-Field Pickup (For elderly, handicapped, etc. - at AC Manager $50 per animal
Discretion)
 
Rabies Quarantine
 
Service        Fee
Boarding       $20 per animal, per day
Rabies Testing $60 per animal
 
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-1805-11, passed 6-27-11; Am.
Ord. OR-2143-19, passed 8-26-19; Am. Ord. OR-2379-24, passed 9-9-24; Am. Ord.
OR-2416-25, passed 8-25-25)
§ 90.24 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Animal
Care and Control Department, and Regulatory Compliance Department. In the
absence of an Animal Care and Control Officer, any department or official
designated by the City Manager shall have enforcement responsibilities and
authority.
   (B)   Enforcement may be by the filing of a criminal complaint in the
municipal court, by civil proceedings to enjoin nuisances or violations, any
other manner authorized by law, or any combination thereof.
   (C)   Animal Care and Control Officers shall have the authority to issue
citations for any violations of this chapter.
   (D)   If the person being cited is not present, the Animal Care and Control
Officer may send the citation to the alleged offender by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, and they may be summoned to court in
accordance with applicable law.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person being issued a citation to
municipal court or any civil proceeding to intentionally or knowingly fail to
give an Animal Care and Control Officer their true name and address to impact
their ability to appear in accordance with the terms of issuance of a citation
or civil process issued by the Animal Care and Control Department, its
officers, or any authorized designee by the city.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with an Animal Care
and Control Officer in the performance of duties. A person interferes with an
Animal Care and Control Officer if the person:
      (1)   Releases or causes an animal to be released after an Animal Care
and Control Officer has impounded the animal; or
      (2)   Physically constrains the movement of an Animal Care and Control
Officer or the officer’s vehicle or equipment by:
         (a)   Placing any part of the person or person's property in the way
of the Animal Care and Control Officer's progress in the performance of the
officer's duties; or
         (b)   Taking or moving an officer's equipment which causes a time
delay in the officer's ability to use the equipment.
      (3)   No person shall remove, alter, damage, or otherwise tamper with a
trap or equipment belonging to or set out by the Animal Care and Control
Department.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-2143-19, passed 8-26-19; Am.
Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.25 CARE AND HUMANE TREATMENT OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   An owner commits an offense if the owner fails to provide the
following for each animal under his or her care:
      (1)   Sufficient and necessary food to maintain the animal in a state of
good health;
      (2)   Clean and wholesome water served to the animal in a clean container
and available to the animal at all times. Breeding of flies, mosquitos, or
other insects or the growth of plant matter in any water troughs, bowls, tanks
or other containers is prohibited if it effects the health of the animal;
      (3)   Adequate shelter which shall allow the animal to remain dry and
protected from the elements at all times and which shall provide either natural
or artificial shade for the animal to avoid direct sunlight. If the shelter is
provided by enclosure, the enclosure shall allow for adequate ventilation. The
floor must be constructed in a solid manner that protects the animal’s feet and
legs from injury;
      (4)   Treatment for an obvious or diagnosed illness, injury, or
communicable illness transmittable to animal or human by a licensed
veterinarian; or, failing to follow a proper treatment regime for the injury or
illness;
      (5)   Basic grooming for an animal so that it is not a detriment to the
health of the animal;
      (6)   Treatment for infestation of tick, fleas, or other parasites by a
licensed veterinarian or with proper commercially reasonable treatment
available for the infestation; and
      (7)   Enclosures used as an area for a dog to regularly eat, sleep,
drink, and eliminate must have at least 100 square feet of space for each dog
six months of age or older that are housed there.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person beats, torments, overloads,
overworks, maims, disfigures, burns or scalds, mutilates or needlessly kills an
animal, or if the person carries or transports an animal in any vehicle or
other conveyance in a cruel or inhumane manner, or if the person permits any
animal to remain in its own filth or if the person causes any of these acts to
be done.
   (C)   A person commits an offense if the person exposes any known poisonous
substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same may be attractive
to any warm-blooded animal or human; except that it shall not be unlawful for a
person to expose, on his or her own property or with permission of the property
owner, commercially available rat poison or other pesticides appropriately
placed in accordance with the labeling directions.
   (D)   A person commits an offense if the person causes, allows, or trains an
animal to fight another animal or possesses animal fighting paraphernalia or
training equipment.
   (E)   A person commits an offense if the person carries or transports an
animal in any motor vehicle, conveyance, or trailer if said vehicle fails to
effectively restrain the animal so as to prevent the animal from leaving or
being accidentally thrown from the motor vehicle, conveyance, or trailer.
Transporting an animal in the open bed of a truck or leaving an animal in the
bed of a truck during inclement weather shall be considered an inhumane manner
of transportation.
   (F)   A person commits an offense if the person places or confines an
animal, or allows an animal to be placed or confined, in a motor vehicle,
conveyance, or trailer without adequately providing for the necessities of
life, including air, food, potable water, sanitary conditions, shelter, or
protection from the heat, cold, or other environmental condition or under other
circumstances that may cause bodily injury, serious bodily injury, or death of
the animal. Transporting an animal in the open bed of a truck or leaving an
animal in the bed of a truck during inclement weather shall be considered an
inhumane manner of confinement.
   (G)   A person commits an offense if a person crops a dog's ears, docks a
tail, removes dew claws or performs other surgical procedures on a dog or a cat
except as provided by the veterinary licensing act.
   (H)   A person commits an offense if the person uses steel jaw or leg-hold
traps.
   (I)   A person commits an offense if the person abandons any animal that the
person has possession of at the Office of Animal Care and Control, at any other
place of business, on public property, or with any person that has not
consented or has revoked consent to be responsible for the care of the animal.
   (J)   A person commits an offense if he or she is the owner of an animal and
fails to reclaim the animal from the Animal Care and Control Department or any
person who had temporary possession of the animal.
   (K)   A person commits an offense if a person confines an animal in a parked
or standing vehicle in such a way as to endanger the animal's health, safety,
or welfare. It is presumed that an animal's health, safety, or welfare is
endangered when the animal is confined in a parked or standing vehicle for a
period of five or more minutes when the ambient outside air temperature
measures above 85 degrees Fahrenheit or below 35 degrees Fahrenheit. It shall
be prima facia proof that temperature at time of violation when such
temperature is verified at the Animal Care and Control Office. An Animal Care
and Control Officer is authorized to use necessary force, including but not
limited to breaking a vehicle’s window, to make lawful seizures of animals
pursuant to this chapter, subject to all local, state and federal laws and
court orders.
   (L)   Tethering animals.
      (1)   A person commits an offense if the person tethers an unattended
animal to a stationary object for any length of time except as allowed by
divisions (3) and (4) of this section. Any animal that is tethered must have
access to adequate shelter, clean water, dry ground and shade from direct
sunlight at all times.
      (2)   No person shall tether a puppy, sick or injured animal, or a female
dog while in estrus.
      (3)   Restraint on the owner's property or for a lawful animal event,
veterinary treatment, grooming, training, law enforcement activity, or when
needed to protect the safety or welfare of a person or animal, shall be allowed
provided that all of the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The animal's owner maintains continuous, direct physical control
of the animal throughout the period of restraint;
         (b)   The tether is attached to a properly fitting collar or harness
and is not wrapped around the animal's neck. Choke or prong-type collars are
prohibited;
         (c)   An owner may not tether an unattended animal outside by use of a
restraint that is composed primarily of chain, has weights attached or is not
attached to a properly fitted collar or harness. A person shall not tether an
animal with a tying device that weighs more than 1/10 of the animal’s body
weight;
         (d)   The tying device (to include trolley systems) shall be attached
to the animal’s collar or harness and shall be at least ten feet in length and
must have a swivel device on the anchor and collar end to prevent tangling;
         (e)   No person shall tether their dog using a collar exceeding one
and a half inches wide for any dog weighing less than 60 pounds. Dogs weighing
60 pounds or more shall not be tethered using a collar exceeding two inches in
width;
         (f)   The collar must be adjusted to provide at least the
circumference of the animal’s neck plus one inch;
         (g)   The tether is designed and placed in a manner to prevent
entanglement or injury; and
         (h)   The tether does not allow the animal to move outside the
person's property or come within ten feet of public property if tethered
outside a fenced area.
      (4)   A “skyline” type aerial trolley consisting of a line that is strung
between two fixed points that are at least 20 feet apart with a down line that
is at least five feet in length is allowed as long as the requirements of
divisions (2)(b) and (d) of this section are met and the animal is enclosed
behind a fence of adequate size and strength capable of preventing the general
public, including children, and other animals from entering the area.
      (5)   A person commits an offense if the person tethers an animal to a
stationary object or a “skyline” aerial trolley during times of extreme
weather, including, but not limited to heat advisories, severe storm warnings
and freeze warnings.
      (6)   Any animal observed by a police officer, Animal Care and Control
Officer, or any individual otherwise designated by the City Manager to be in
immediate harm may be removed from such situation by the quickest and most
reasonable means available.
      (7)   During inclement weather, no animal is to remain on a stationary
tether or trolley system. This includes, but is not limited to, ambient outside
temperatures below 32 degrees Fahrenheit or above 95 degrees Fahrenheit, severe
storms, winter weather events, or any other weather that would cause undue
stress on an outdoor domestic animal.
      (8)   If upon investigation, exigent circumstances exist and the Animal
Care and Control Officer, police officer, or any individual otherwise
designated by the City Manager, believe that there is imminent danger of
serious bodily injury or death to a human being, another animal, or the animal
in question, and there is insufficient time to obtain a warrant, the officer
can remove the animal(s) in question from the premises to receive care or for
safe keeping.
      (9)   A person commits an offense if the person who has been subject to
animal seizure for violations of humane care and treatment of animals, where a
ruling was made in a court of law, if the person owns, harbors, possesses, has
custody and control over or provide a premises to which an animal returns for
food, shelter, or care within the city limits of Mansfield.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-2143-19, passed 8-26-19; Am.
Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
RABIES CONTROL AND BITE PROCEDURES
§ 90.35 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and terms when used in §§
90.36 –
90.39 shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
   ANIMAL. Any live or dead mammal, domesticated or wild, excluding Homo
sapiens.
   BITE. A bite from an animal that breaks the skin and is capable of
transmitting rabies.
   HIGH RISK ANIMAL. Any animal that has a high probability of transmitting
rabies (including foxes, bats, skunks, coyotes, and raccoons).
   LOW RISK ANIMAL. Any animal that has a low probability of transmitting
rabies as determined by the Animal Care and Control Department.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.36 REPORT OF RABIES.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if he or she has knowledge of an animal
bite of a human and fails to report said bite to the Animal Care and Control
Department within 24 hours from the time of the incident.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person knows of an animal within
the city limits that the person suspects is rabid and fails to report such
animal to the Animal Care and Control Department.
   (C)   A report shall be written or oral and include if known, the name and
address of the victim, the animal's owner information, and any information
which could lead to locating the victim, the animal, and the animal's owner.
   (D)   The Animal Care and Control Department shall investigate all reports
made under this section.
   (E)   The owner of the biting animal must place that animal in quarantine as
prescribed in §
90.37 under the supervision of the Animal Care and Control Department.
   (F)   Humans bitten by rodents, birds and reptiles are excluded from the
reporting requirements of this section.
   (G)   The provisions of §§
90.36 -
90.39 shall not apply to dogs trained and used by police departments,
corrections departments or other governmental service; however, bites that
occur while the animal is not working shall be subject to placement in
quarantine as prescribed in § 90.37 under the supervision of the Animal Care
and Control Department.
   (H)   A person commits an offense if the person conceals, sells, gives away
or otherwise disposes of an animal that has bitten a human or to otherwise
permit the animal to be taken beyond the limits of the city after having
knowledge of the animal’s having bitten a person as to cause an abrasion of the
person’s skin.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.37 QUARANTINE PROCEDURES FOR ANIMALS.
   (A)   The owner of an animal that has bitten a human commits an offense if
the owner fails to submit the animal to the Animal Care and Control Department
for quarantine immediately upon notification by the Animal Care and Control
Department of a biting incident.
   (B)   The owner of an animal that is suspected of being rabid commits an
offense if the owner fails to submit the animal to the Animal Care and Control
Department for quarantine immediately when ordered by the Animal Care and
Control Department to do so.
   (C)   The Animal Care and Control Department shall follow these procedures
for quarantining and testing:
      (1)   When a dog or cat has bitten a human, the dog or cat shall be
placed in quarantine in a facility specified by the Animal Care and Control
Department and approved by the Texas Department of State Health Services.
      (2)   When an animal, that has not bitten a human, is suspected of having
rabies, it shall be placed in quarantine for ten days in a facility specified
by the Animal Care and Control Department and approved by the Texas Department
of State Health Services. The quarantine period shall be ten days from the date
of the bite or other exposure, and said period may only be altered under
recommendation by the regional veterinarian from the Texas Department of
Health.
      (3)   Upon the request of the owner of a dog or cat which has bitten a
human, and at the sole discretion of the Animal Care and Control Department,
the Animal Care and Control Department may permit home quarantine for the
animal if the following criteria can be met:
         (a)   The animal was currently vaccinated against rabies at the time
of the bite;
         (b)   The animal was not at-large at the time of the bite;
         (c)   The animal's owner has secure facilities at his or her home for
the animal which have been approved by the Animal Care and Control Department;
         (d)   An Animal Care and Control Officer or a licensed veterinarian
must observe the animal on at least the first and eighth days of the quarantine
period;
         (e)   If the animal becomes ill during the observation period, the
person with possession of the animal must notify the Animal Care and Control
Department;
         (f)   The owner must sign an agreement to abide by the quarantine
rules; and
         (g)   At the end of the quarantine period, the animal shall be
observed by a licensed veterinarian and the veterinarian will complete the form
provided by the Animal Care and Control Department and submit said form to the
Animal Care and Control Department in order to authorize release from home
quarantine.
      (4)   If the Animal Care and Control Department is in possession of a dog
or cat which has bitten a human, and such animal is designated as unowned, the
Animal Care and Control Department may cause such animal to be euthanized, and
shall submit the animal's brain to a Texas Department of State Health Services
certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis.
      (5)   If the animal which has bitten a human is a high-risk animal, the
Animal Care and Control Department shall cause such animal to be euthanized,
and shall submit the animal's brain to a Texas Department of State Health
Services certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis.
      (6)   If the animal which has bitten a human is a low-risk animal, the
Animal Care and Control Department shall cause the animal to be euthanized, and
shall submit its brain for rabies diagnosis by a Texas Department of State
Health Services certified laboratory if the Animal Care and Control Department
has cause to believe the animal is rabid. If the Animal Care and Control
Department has no cause to believe the animal is rabid, then neither
quarantining nor testing will be required.
      (7)   If the animal, including a dog or cat, which has bitten a human,
inflicted multiple bite wounds, lacerations or punctures to a person, the
Animal Care and Control Department may cause the animal to be euthanized, and
shall submit the animal's brain to a Texas Department of State Health Services
certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis.
      (8)   If the animal which has bitten a human is not included in divisions
(C)(1), (C)(2), (C)(3), (C)(4), (C)(5), (C)(6) or (C)(7) of this section, the
Animal Care and Control Department shall cause the animal to be euthanized, and
shall submit the animal's brain to a Texas Department of State Health Services
certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis.
      (9)   The Animal Care and Control Department shall cause to be euthanized
any animal required to be quarantined under this division (C) which cannot be
maintained in a secure quarantine, and shall submit the animal's brain to a
Texas Department of State Health Services certified laboratory for rabies
diagnosis.
      (10)   The Animal Care and Control Department shall follow the rules
promulgated by the Texas Department of State Health Services when submitting an
animal brain for testing.
      (11)   The Animal Care and Control Department may euthanize an unowned
animal prior to the end of the quarantine, and have the brain tested for
rabies.
      (12)   All quarantined animals shall be separated from all other animals
in such a manner that there is no possibility of physical contact between
animals.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-2143-19, passed 8-26-19; Am.
Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.38 DISPOSITION OR RELEASE OF QUARANTINED ANIMAL.
   (A)   At the conclusion of the quarantine, the Animal Care and Control
Department shall release the quarantined animal to its owner if the quarantined
animal shows no clinical signs of rabies, the owner pays the quarantine fee,
and:
      (1)   If the owner presents an unexpired rabies vaccination certificate
for the animal to the Animal Care and Control Department; or
      (2)   If the animal is vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian at the owner's expense and the owner presents a rabies vaccination
certificate for the animal to the Animal Care and Control Department.
   (B)   The Animal Care and Control Department shall euthanize any animal
which at the end of the quarantine period is determined by a veterinarian to
show clinical signs of rabies.
   (C)   If an animal dies, is killed, or euthanized while in quarantine, the
Animal Care and Control Department shall submit the animal's brain to a Texas
Department of State Health Services certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis.
   (D)   The owner of a quarantined animal shall pay to the Animal Care and
Control Department all costs of quarantine and disposition of the animal by fee
at an amount established in the Master Fee Schedule adopted by the City
Council, as amended from time to time. No quarantined animal shall be released
until all fees have been paid, unless waived by the Animal Care and Control
Department.
   (E)   If the owner of an animal fails to take possession of the animal
before the fourth day following the final day of the quarantine period, the
animal shall be deemed abandoned, the city shall be deemed the owner of the
animal, and the Animal Care and Control Department shall at their option place
the animal for adoption or cause it to be euthanized.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-2143-19, passed 8-26-19; Am.
Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.39 ANIMAL EXPOSED TO RABIES.
   (A)   The owner of an animal which has been bitten by a rabid animal or
exposed by physical contact to its fresh tissues commits an offense if the
owner fails to report such bite or exposure to the Animal Care and Control
Department within 24 hours of the incident.
   (B)   The owner of an animal which has been bitten by a rabid animal or
exposed by physical contact to its fresh tissues commits an offense if the
owner fails to submit the animal to the Animal Care and Control Department for
quarantine or to be euthanized immediately when requested to do so by the
Animal Care and Control Department.
   (C)   If the animal which has been bitten or exposed has not been vaccinated
against rabies and is an animal for which an approved vaccine exists, the
Animal Care and Control Department:
      (1)   May cause such animal to be euthanized; or
      (2)   May, if sufficient justification for preserving the animal exists,
cause the animal to be immediately vaccinated against rabies, placed in strict
isolation for 90 days, and given booster vaccinations during the third and
eighth weeks of isolation. If the animal is under 16 weeks of age at the time
of the second vaccination, an additional booster shall be given when the animal
reaches 16 weeks of age.
   (D)   If the animal which has been bitten or exposed was currently
vaccinated against rabies at the time of the bite or exposure, and is an animal
for which an approved vaccine exists, the Animal Care and Control Department:
      (1)   May cause such animal to be euthanized; or
      (2)   May, if sufficient justification for preserving the animal exists,
cause the animal to be given an immediate booster rabies vaccination and be
placed in strict isolation for 45 days.
   (E)   If the animal which has been bitten or exposed is an animal for which
no approved rabies vaccine exists, the Animal Care and Control Department shall
cause such animal to be euthanized.
   (F)   The procedures for disposition or release of the animal following
isolation shall be the same as those for disposition of an animal following
quarantine set forth in §
90.38.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
ANIMAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 90.50 ANIMAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   The City of Mansfield Animal Advisory Committee is established to
assist the city with complying with the requirements of Tex. Health & Safety
Code Chapter 823.
   (B)   Membership must be composed of at least one licensed veterinarian, one
municipal official, one person whose duties include the daily operation of an
animal shelter, and one representative from an animal welfare organization.
   (C)   Members are appointed by the City Council, serve for a three year
term, and may be reappointed. Members may be removed by the City Council.
   (D)   The City of Mansfield Animal Advisory Committee shall meet at least
three times a year.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
DANGEROUS DOGS
§ 90.55 DANGEROUS INCIDENT REPORT.
   (A)   A person may report a dangerous incident involving an animal to the
Animal Care and Control Department of the city. The report must be in writing
and made under oath, and the report must include the following:
      (1)   Name, address, and telephone number of complainant and other
witnesses;
      (2)   Date, time, and location of the incident forming the basis of the
report;
      (3)   Description of the animal(s) involved in the incident;
      (4)   Name, address, and telephone number of the animal owner, if known;
      (5)   A statement of facts upon which such report or application is
based;
      (6)   A statement addressing whether the animal has exhibited dangerous
propensities in past conduct, if known;
      (7)   Any other relevant facts or circumstances; and
      (8)   A Texas state notary stamp and signature.
   (B)   The Animal Care and Control Department, upon receipt of a report filed
under this section or upon learning of a dangerous incident, shall investigate
the dangerous incident and may issue sworn reports based on the Animal Care and
Control Department's investigation or observation.
   (C)   The Animal Care and Control Department may seize and impound an animal
that is the subject of a report under division (A) of this section in secure
and humane conditions at the owner's expense pending the determination of
whether the animal is a dangerous dog if:
      (1)   The animal is found at-large and observed exhibiting specific
behavior that lead to a report under division (A) of this section;
      (2)   The animal is alleged to have exhibited Level 3 Dangerous Dog
behavior; or
      (3)   With due diligence, Animal Care and Control Department cannot
locate the owner of the animal.
(Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24; Am. Ord. OR-2402-25, passed 1-13-25)
§ 90.56 FILING OF REPORT OF A DANGEROUS INCIDENT WITH COURT.
   (A)   The City of Mansfield hereby elects to be governed by Tex. Health and
Safety Code § 822.0422.
   (B)   A person, including the Animal Care and Control Department, may file a
dangerous incident report involving an animal to the municipal court of the
city. A report filed with the municipal court under this section must comply
with the requirements of §
90.55(A).
   (C)   Upon the filing of a dangerous incident report under division (B) of
this section, the owner of the dog that is the subject of the report shall
deliver the dog to the Animal Care and Control Department not later than the
fifth day after the date on which the owner receives notice that the report has
been filed with the municipal court. The Animal Care and Control Authority
shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions
until the court enters an order concerning the dog.
   (D)   If the owner fails to deliver the dog as required by division (C) of
this section, the municipal court shall order the Animal Care and Control
Department to seize the dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure.
The Animal Care and Control Department shall seize the dog or order its seizure
and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and human conditions
until the court orders the disposition of the dog. The owner shall pay any
costs incurred in seizing the dog.
   (E)   The municipal court shall determine, after notice and hearing as
provided in §
90.61, whether the dog is a dangerous dog.
   (F)   The court, after determining that the dog is a dangerous dog, may
order the Animal Care and Control Department to continue to impound the
dangerous dog in secure and humane conditions until the dog is released to the
owner upon compliance with §
90.65 or the court orders the humane destruction of the dog under §
90.60.
   (G)   The owner of the dog shall pay any cost or fee assessed by the city
related to the seizure, acceptance, impoundment, or destruction of the dog. The
amount of the fees shall be established in the Master Fee Schedule which shall
be adopted by City Council, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.57 ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL OFFICER DETERMINATION AND APPEAL.
   (A)   Determination:
      (1)   If, after performing an investigation of a dangerous incident and
receiving the sworn statements of any witnesses, the Animal Care and Control
Department determines that the animal is a dangerous dog, the Animal Care and
Control Officer may notify the owner in writing of the determination.
      (2)   In determining whether an animal is a dangerous dog under this
division, the Animal Care and Control Department shall consider all relevant
facts and circumstances and shall have the discretion to assign a
classification set forth in this section and impose requirements on the owner
in accordance with the classification or to not find an animal to be a
dangerous dog upon mitigating or extenuating circumstances.
      (3)   The following classifications shall be utilized by the Animal Care
and Control Department to determine the level of requirements on the owner:
         (a)   Level 1. The animal, while at-large, was determined to menace,
chase, or display threatening or aggressive behavior toward any domestic animal
or livestock.
         (b)   Level 2. The animal, while at-large, was determined to have
caused a bodily injury to any domestic animal or livestock.
         (c)   Level 3. The animal, while at-large, was:
            1.   Found to have killed or cause the death or any domestic animal
or livestock; or
            2.   A dangerous dog classified as a Level 2 and is found to have
repeated the behavior in §
90.57(A)(3)(b) after the owner has received notice of the determination.
         (d)   Level 4. The animal was determined to:
            1.   Make an unprovoked attack on a person that caused bodily
injury and occurred in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was
being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the
enclosure on its own; or
            2.   Make an unprovoked attack in a place other than an enclosure
in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the
dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and that act caused a person to
reasonably believe that the dog will attack or cause bodily injury to a person.
      (4)   In addition to the behavior identified above, an animal may be
classified as a dangerous dog if the owner of the animal is found to be
criminally responsible for an animal under the owners control causing injury or
damage to another animal. The level of classification will be the level that
would have been assigned if the injury or damage had been caused while the
animal was at-large.
      (5)   The notice of determination shall include the following:
         (a)   That the animal was determined to be a dangerous dog;
         (b)   The level of requirements imposed on the owner pursuant to §
90.59; and
         (c)   That the owner has the right to appeal the classification
pursuant to §
90.57(B).
      (6)   An impounded animal that is classified by the Animal Care and
Control Department as a Level 1, 2 or 3 dangerous dog must remain impounded and
will not be released to the owner until the owner pays all fees incurred for
impoundment of the animal and complies with all requirements applicable to the
animal pursuant to §
90.59. If the owner of an impounded animal has not complied with §
90.59 within 30 days after a final determination is made that an impounded
animal is a dangerous dog, then the animal becomes the property of the city and
may be humanely destroyed. If the owner of an impounded animal has not been
located before the 15th day after seizure and impoundment, the dangerous dog
shall be considered abandoned and the city shall be deemed the owner of the
dangerous dog and the Animal Care and Control Department may order the animal
to be humanely destroyed.
   (B)   Appeal.
      (1)   An owner, not later than the 15th day after the date the owner is
notified that an animal owned by the owner is a Level 1, Level 2, Level 3, or
Level 4 dangerous dog, may appeal the determination of the Animal Care and
Control Officer to the municipal court of the city.
      (2)   Upon the filing of an appeal, the municipal court of the city shall
schedule a hearing on the appeal in accordance with §
90.62.
      (3)   To file an appeal, the owner must:
         (a)   File a notice of appeal of the Animal Care and Control
Department's dangerous dog determination with the clerk of the municipal court
of the city, which must include the name, address, and phone number of the
owner;
         (b)   Attach a copy of the determination from the Animal Care and
Control Department; and
         (c)   Serve a copy of the notice of appeal on the Animal Care and
Control Department by mailing the notice through the United States Postal
Service.
      (4)   An appeal filed under this section shall be considered effective on
the date it is postmarked by the United States Post Office or hand-delivered to
the clerk of the municipal court of the city.
      (5)   Upon filing an appeal under this section, the owner shall
immediately deliver the animal to the Animal Care and Control Department, and
the city shall provide for the impoundment of the animal in secure and humane
conditions pending an order of disposition from the municipal court of the
city.
      (6)   If the owner fails to deliver the animal, the court shall issue a
warrant authorizing the seizure of the animal. The Animal Care and Control
Department shall seize the animal or order its seizure and shall provide for
the impoundment of the animal in secure and humane conditions. The owner may be
ordered to pay any cost or fee assessed by the city related to the seizure,
acceptance, impoundment, or destruction of the animal. The governing body of
the city may prescribe the amount of the fees at an amount established in the
Master Fee Schedule adopted by the City Council, as amended from time to time.
The animal shall remain impounded pending an order of disposition from the
municipal court of the city.
(Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24; Am. Ord. OR-2402-25, passed 1-13-25)
§ 90.58 KNOWLEDGE OF A DANGEROUS DOG.
   The owner of a dangerous dog is subject to the requirements of this chapter
upon the occurrence of any of the following:
   (A)   The owner knows of a dangerous incident involving the animal;
   (B)   The owner is notified by the Animal Care and Control Officer that the
animal is a dangerous dog; or
   (C)   The owner is notified by the municipal court that the court has upheld
the Animal Care and Control Officer's determination that the animal is a
dangerous dog.
(Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.59 REQUIREMENTS FOR OWNER OF DANGEROUS DOG.
   (A)   Not later than 30 days after learning that he or she is the owner of
dangerous dog, the owner shall comply with the following requirements
applicable based on the animal’s classification:
      (1)   Level 1 classification. For a dangerous dog classified as Level 1,
the owner shall:
         (a)   Confine the animal in a secure enclosure that does not interfere
with the public’s legal access to the owner’s premises;
         (b)   Not permit the animal to be outside the secure enclosure unless
the animal is restrained by a substantial chain or leash, no longer than six
feet in length, with a capable person in immediate direct physical control of
the chain or leash;
         (c)   Have the animal microchipped and fitted with a tag or collar
designated by the Animal Care and Control Department;
         (d)   Allow the Animal Care and Control Department to photograph the
animal; and
         (e)   Register the dangerous dog with the Animal Care and Control
Department.
      (2)   Level 2 classification. For a dangerous dog classified as Level 2,
the owner shall:
         (a)   Confine the animal in a secure enclosure that does not interfere
with the public’s legal access to the owner’s premises;
         (b)   Not permit the animal to be outside the secure enclosure unless
the animal is restrained by a substantial chain or leash, no longer than six
feet in length, with a capable person in immediate direct physical control of
the chain or leash;
         (c)   Have the animal microchipped and fitted with a tag or collar
designated by the Animal Care and Control Department;
         (d)   Have the animal sterilized and provide proof of sterilization to
the Animal Care and Control Department;
         (e)   Allow the Animal Care and Control Department to photograph the
animal;
         (f)   Register the dangerous dog with the Animal Care and Control
Department;
         (g)   Obtain, maintain and provide the Animal Care and Control
Department proof of personal liability insurance in the amount of $50,000 to
cover an attack by the animal; and
         (h)   Complete a responsible pet ownership or animal training program
as prescribed by the Animal Care and Control Department.
      (3)   Level 3 classification. For a dangerous dog classified as Level 3,
the owner shall:
         (a)   Confine the animal in a secure enclosure that does not interfere
with the public’s legal access to the owner’s premises and post clearly visible
signs on the secure enclosure identifying the presence of a dangerous dog,
which signs shall be readable from any public sidewalk or street adjacent to
the property where the animal is being kept;
         (b)   Not permit the animal to be outside the secure enclosure unless
the animal is muzzled, in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or
interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting any
person or animal, and restrained by a substantial chain or leash, no longer
than six feet in length, with a capable person over the age of 18 in immediate
direct physical control of the chain or leash;
         (c)   Have the animal microchipped and fitted with a tag or collar
designated by the Animal Care and Control Department;
         (d)   Have the animal sterilized and provide proof of sterilization to
the Animal Care and Control Department;
         (e)   Allow the Animal Care and Control Department to photograph the
animal;
         (f)   Register the dangerous dog with the Animal Care and Control
Department;
         (g)   Obtain, maintain and provide the Animal Care and Control
Department proof of personal liability insurance in the amount of $250,000 to
cover an attack by the animal; and
         (h)   Complete a responsible pet ownership or animal training program
as prescribed by Animal Care and Control Department.
      (4)   Level 4 classification. For a dangerous dog classified as Level 4,
the owner shall:
         (a)   After a hearing on an application filed under §
90.61, comply with the municipal court of the city ordering that the animal be
humanely destroyed or permanently removed from the city; and
         (b)   Pay all costs or fees, as ordered by the municipal court of the
city, related to the seizure, acceptance, impoundment, and destruction of the
dangerous dog.
   (B)   Once in compliance with division (A) of this section, the owner of a
dangerous dog shall continue and maintain compliance with division (A) of this
section at all times, unless subject to declassification in §
90.67.
(Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24; Am. Ord. OR-2402-25, passed 1-13-25)
§ 90.60 DANGEROUS DOG ORDER OF DESTRUCTION.
   (A)   If the municipal court orders the humane destruction of a dangerous
dog, the Animal Care and Control Department shall maintain custody of the
dangerous dog, and the municipal court shall:
      (1)   Find that the criteria for an order of destruction are met and
order that ownership be relinquished to the Animal Care and Control Department.
      (2)   Order that the animal be humanely destroyed after a period of ten
calendar days from the date the order is issued.
      (3)   In an order for the humane destruction of a dangerous dog, the
municipal court shall order that the owner pay for any applicable costs or fees
related to the seizure, acceptance, impoundment, or destruction of the animal.
The City Council may prescribe the amount of the fees at an amount established
in the Master Fee Schedule, as amended from time to time.
   (B)   The Animal Care and Control Department may order that a Level 3
dangerous dog be humanely destroyed if the animal commits another specific
behavior that qualifies for a Level 2 or Level 3 classification. The Animal
Care and Control Department shall notify the owner in writing of the order. The
notice shall include the following:
      (1)   A statement of the criteria that support an order that a dangerous
dog be humanely destroyed;
      (2)   That the animal be humanely destroyed and proof of such destruction
be provided to the Animal Care and Control Department within ten days; and
      (3)   That the owner has the right to appeal the order in accordance with
§
90.57(B).
   (C)   An order for the humane destruction of a Level 3 dangerous dog under
this section may be appealed in the same manner as a dangerous dog
determination under §
90.57(B).
   (D)   At the conclusion of the appeal hearing for an order for humane
destruction of a Level 3 dangerous dog under this section, the municipal court
shall:
      (1)   Find that the animal was designated as a Level 3 dangerous dog and
committed another specific behavior that qualifies for a Level 2 or Level 3
designation and order that the animal be humanely destroyed within ten days of
the order.
      (2)   Find that the criteria for an order of destruction are not met and
order the return of the animal to the owner.
   (E)   In an order for the humane destruction of a Level 3 dangerous dog, the
municipal court shall order that the owner pay for any applicable costs or fees
related to the seizure or impoundment of the animal during the appeal.
   (F)   Upon filing an appeal under subsection (C), the owner shall
immediately deliver the animal to the Animal Care and Control Officer, and the
city shall provide for the impoundment of the animal in secure and humane
conditions pending an order of disposition from the municipal court of the
city.
   (G)   If the owner fails to deliver the animal as required by subsection
(F), the court shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure of the animal. The
Animal Care and Control Department shall seize the animal or order its seizure
and shall provide for the impoundment of the animal in secure and humane
conditions. The owner may be ordered to pay any cost or fee assessed by the
city related to the seizure, acceptance, impoundment, or destruction of the
animal. The City Council may prescribe the amount of the fees at an amount
established in the Master Fee Schedule, as amended from time to time. The
animal shall remain impounded pending an order of disposition from the
municipal court of the city.
(Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24; Am. Ord. OR-2402-25, passed 1-13-25)
§ 90.61 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   (A)   Any person may make a sworn application to the municipal court of the
city that the owner of a dangerous dog has failed to comply with §§
90.59 and
90.65, or that a dangerous dog has attacked a person. Upon the filing of a
sworn application under this section, the municipal court of the city shall
schedule a hearing on the application in accordance with §
90.62.
   (B)   A sworn application under this section must include:
      (1)   Name, address, and telephone number of complainant and other
witnesses;
      (2)   Date, time, and location of the incident forming the basis of the
report;
      (3)   Description of the animal(s) involved in the incident;
      (4)   Name, address, and telephone number of the animal owner, if known;
      (5)   A statement of facts upon which the application is based;
      (6)   A statement addressing whether the animal has exhibited dangerous
propensities in past conduct, if known;
      (7)   Any other relevant facts or circumstances; and
      (8)   A Texas state notary stamp and signature.
   (C)   Upon the filing of a sworn application under this section, the
municipal court of the city shall order the Animal Care and Control Department
to seize the dangerous dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure.
The Animal Care and Control Department shall seize the dangerous dog or order
its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the dangerous dog in
secure and humane conditions. The owner may be ordered to pay any cost or fee
assessed by the city related to the seizure, acceptance, impoundment, or
destruction of the dangerous dog. The City Council may prescribe the amount of
the fees at an amount established in the Master Fee Schedule, as amended from
time to time. The dangerous dog shall remain impounded pending an order of
disposition from the municipal court of the city.
   (D)   If, after a hearing on an application filed under this section, the
municipal court of the city finds that the owner of the dangerous dog has
failed to comply with §§
90.59 and
90.65 or that the dangerous dog has attacked a person, the municipal court of
the city shall order the Animal Care and Control Department to humanely destroy
the dangerous dog, or that the dangerous dog be permanently removed from the
city. No dangerous dog shall be ordered returned to its owner more than one
time. The municipal court may also order the owner of the dangerous dog to pay
all costs or fees assessed by the city related to the seizure, acceptance,
impoundment, and destruction of the dangerous dog due to the sworn complaint
filed under this section.
   (E)   If, after a hearing on an application filed under this section, the
municipal court of the city finds that the owner of the dangerous dog has
failed to comply with §§
90.59 or
90.65 the municipal court of the city shall order that the owner has forfeited
ownership of the animal, and that ownership of the animal is vested in the
city. The Animal Care and Control Department may dispose of the animal in
whatever manner it deems necessary, including humanely destroying the animal.
The court may also order the owner of the dangerous dog to pay all costs or
fees assessed by the city related to the seizure, acceptance, impoundment, and
destruction of the dangerous dog due to the sworn complaint filed under this
section.
   (F)   If, after a hearing on an application filed under this section, the
municipal court finds that the owner of the dangerous dog has not failed to
comply with §§
90.59 or
90.65 or that the dangerous dog has not attacked a person, the municipal court
shall order that the Animal Care and Control Department immediately release the
dangerous dog to the owner, and the owner shall not be responsible for the
costs of seizure or impoundment of the dangerous dog due to the sworn complaint
filed under this section.
   (G)   A dangerous dog ordered to be humanely destroyed or permanently
removed from the city shall remain impounded until the dangerous dog is
humanely destroyed or until the owner reclaims the dangerous dog under §
90.65(A).
   (H)   Notwithstanding any other law or local regulation, a dangerous dog
shall not be destroyed during the pendency of an appeal under §
90.62.
   (I)   If the owner of a dangerous dog seized due to a sworn application
filed under this section cannot be located within 15 days after the seizure and
impoundment of the dangerous dog, the dangerous dog shall be considered
abandoned and the city shall be deemed the owner of the dangerous dog. The
municipal court shall order the humane destruction of a dangerous dog abandoned
under this section upon application of the Animal Care and Control Department,
without a hearing.
(Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24; Am. Ord. OR-2402-25, passed 1-13-25)
§ 90.62 HEARING.
   (A)   The municipal court of the city, on receiving notice of appeal under §
90.56(B) or a sworn application under §
90.61(A), shall set a time for a hearing to determine whether the animal is a
dangerous dog or whether the owner of the animal has complied with §
90.65 or the dangerous dog has attacked a person. A hearing under this section
must be held not later than the tenth day after the date on which the animal is
seized or delivered.
   (B)   The municipal court shall give written notice of the time and place of
the hearing to:
      (1)   The owner of the animal or the person from whom the animal was
seized or who delivered the animal;
      (2)   The person who made the report or filed the application; and
      (3)   The Animal Care and Control Department.
   (C)   Any interested party, including the City Attorney, is entitled to
present evidence at the hearing.
   (D)   At a hearing under this section, the municipal court shall determine
the estimated costs to house and care for the impounded animal during any
appeal process and shall set the amount of bond for an appeal adequate to cover
those estimated costs.
   (E)   An owner or the person who made the report or filed the application
may appeal the decision of the municipal court of the city at a hearing under
this section in the manner described by §
90.63.
   (F)   An animal that is the subject of a proceeding under this chapter shall
remain impounded throughout the pendency of any appeal of a determination or
order.
   (G)   Any order to destroy a dog is stayed for a period of ten calendar days
from the date the order is issued, during which period the dog’s owner may file
a notice of appeal. The municipal court may not order the destruction of a dog
during the pendency of an appeal under §
90.63.
(Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24; Am. Ord. OR-2402-25, passed 1-13-25)
§ 90.63 APPEAL OF DANGEROUS DOG ORDER.
   (A)   A party to an appeal under §
90.56(B) or a hearing under §
90.62 may appeal a decision that a dog is a dangerous dog or other order
concerning a dangerous dog to a county court or county court at law in the
county in which the municipal court is located and is entitled to a jury trial
on request.
   (B)   As a condition of perfecting an appeal, not later than the tenth
calendar day after the date the decision is issued by the municipal court, the
appellant must file a notice of appeal and, if applicable, an appeal bond in
the amount determined by the municipal court from which the appeal is taken.
   (C)   Notwithstanding V.T.C.A., Government Code § 30.00014, or any other
law, a person filing an appeal from a municipal court under division (A) of
this section is not required to file a motion for a new trial to perfect an
appeal.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other law, a county court or a county court at law
has jurisdiction to hear an appeal filed under this section.
   (E)   A decision of a county court or county court at law under this section
may be appealed in the same manner as an appeal for any other case in a county
court or county court at law.
(Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.64 NOTICES.
   All required notices shall be personally delivered or deposited with the
United States Postal Service, sent certified mail, return receipt requested.
When the city mails a notice in accordance with this section and the United
States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the
validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered delivered.
(Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.65 DANGEROUS DOG ORDERED REMOVED FROM THE CITY.
   (A)   The owner of a dangerous dog that is ordered to be permanently removed
from the city by order of the municipal court must provide to the Animal Care
and Control Department the plan for removal of the dangerous dog from the city
and the name, address, and phone number for the place where the dangerous dog
will be relocated outside of the city before the dangerous dog will be released
to the owner. Upon receipt of the required information, the Animal Care and
Control Department shall release the dangerous dog to the owner to be removed
from the city. A dangerous dog ordered to be permanently removed from the city
must be removed from the city within ten days of the date of the order.
   (B)   If the owner does not provide the information required by division (A)
of this section to the Animal Care and Control Department and reclaim the
dangerous dog within ten days of the order of the municipal court of the city,
the dangerous dog shall be deemed abandoned by the owner and the city shall be
deemed the owner of the dangerous dog. A dangerous dog ordered to be removed
from the city under this section must be removed from the city within ten days
of the date of the order. Upon application by the Animal Care and Control
Department, without a hearing, the municipal court shall order that a dangerous
dog deemed to be abandoned under this section be humanely destroyed.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a person to harbor, keep, or have possession
of a dangerous dog previously ordered to be removed from the city under this
section within the corporate limits of the city.
   (D)   The Animal Care and Control Department or any Animal Care and Control
Officer enforcing this section shall seize any dangerous dog that has been
previously ordered to be removed from the city and is found to be at any
location within the corporate limits of the city. Upon seizure, the city shall
provide for the impoundment of the dangerous dog in humane and sanitary
conditions.
   (E)   Upon application by the Animal Care and Control Department, without a
hearing, the court shall order that a dangerous dog that was previously ordered
to be removed from the city and later found to be in the city be humanely
destroyed.
(Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.66 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   The Animal Care and Control Department shall annually register a
dangerous dog if the owner:
      (1)   Presents proof satisfactory to Animal Care and Control Department
showing compliance with all the applicable requirements contained in §
90.59;
      (2)   Presents proof of current rabies vaccination of the dangerous dog,
if required by this chapter; and
      (3)   Pays the annual registration fee(s) $100 for Level 1, $200 for
Level 2, or $300 dollars for Level 3 classification, or in the amount
established in the Master Fee Schedule, which shall be adopted by City Council,
as amended from time to time.
   (B)   The Animal Care and Control Department shall provide to the owner
registering an animal a registration tag. The owner of the dangerous dog shall
attach the current registration tag to the collar that is worn by the dangerous
dog. The current registration tag shall be displayed on the dangerous dog in
this manner at all times. The registration of a dangerous dog shall be valid
for one year from the date of issuance.
   (C)   If an owner of a dangerous dog sells or moves the dangerous dog to a
new address, whether in the city or not, the owner, not later than the tenth
day after the date of the sale or move, shall notify the Animal Care and
Control Authority of the new address.
   (D)   If the owner of a dangerous dog sells or gives a dangerous dog to
another person, the owner shall notify the other person at the time of the sale
or gift that the animal has been determined to be a dangerous dog.
   (E)   A person who buys or receives a dangerous dog and continues to keep
the animal in the city must register the animal within ten days after receiving
the animal. The new owner shall be issued a registration tag upon compliance
with the requirements of division (A) of this section.
   (F)   An owner of a dangerous dog shall notify the Animal Care and Control
Department of any attack the dangerous dog makes on a person or another animal
within five days of the attack.
   (G)   In the event a dangerous dog dies, the owner of the animal shall
provide proof to the Animal Care and Control Department or present written
verification by a licensed veterinarian sufficient to verify the identity of
the deceased animal as a dangerous dog.
(Ord. OR-2402-25, passed 1-13-25)
§ 90.67 DECLASSIFICATION OF LEVEL 1, 2, OR 3 DANGEROUS DOG.
   (A)   Declassification of Level 1 or Level 2 dangerous dogs will occur, and
the restrictions required by §
90.59 may be removed when the following conditions have been met:
      (1)   Level 1 or Level 2 dangerous dog has been classified for one year
without further incident;
      (2)   There have been no violations of the specified regulations by the
owner; and
      (3)   If ordered by the Animal Care and Control Department or the
municipal court at the time of classification:
         (a)   The owner provides the Animal Care and Control Department with
written certification of satisfactory completion of obedience training for the
dangerous dog with the owner; and
         (b)   The owner provides the Animal Care and Control Department with
written verification from a licensed veterinarian that the dangerous dog has
been sterilized.
   (B)   Declassification will not occur, and the restrictions required by §
90.59 will not be fully removed. If a Level 3 dangerous dog meets the
conditions set out below, the restrictions required by § 90.59 shall be reduced
so that the owner no longer has to: (1) maintain and provide the Animal Care
and Control Department proof of personal liability insurance in the amount of
$250,000 to cover an attack by the animal; and (2) post clearly visible signs
on the secure enclosure identifying the presence of a dangerous dog, which
signs shall be readable from any public sidewalk or street adjacent to the
property where the animal is being kept. The owner of a Level 3 dangerous dog
shall continue to comply with all other restrictions required by § 90.59. After
the reduction of restrictions on a Level 3 dangerous dog under this section, if
a violation of any of the conditions set out below should occur, the reduction
will be removed, and the owner of the Level 3 dangerous dog shall be required
to comply with all requirements for a Level 3 dangerous dog under § 90.59 as if
the animal were newly designated. The following are the conditions for
reduction of restrictions for a Level 3 dangerous dog:
      (1)   Level 3 dangerous dog has been classified for two years without
further incident;
      (2)   There have been no violations of the specified regulations by the
owner; and
      (3)   If ordered by the Animal Care and Control Department or the
municipal court at the time of classification:
         (a)   The owner provides the Animal Care and Control Department with
written certification of satisfactory completion of obedience training for the
dangerous dog with the owner; and
         (b)   The owner provides the Animal Care and Control Department with
written verification from a licensed veterinarian that the classified animal
has been sterilized.
(Ord. OR-2402-25, passed 1-13-25)
§ 90.68 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance that an owner or other person
harbors, keeps, or maintains a dangerous dog in the city unless the owner
complies with the requirements of this subchapter and, with respect to dogs,
all state statutes regulating dangerous dogs.
(Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.69 OFFENSES.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous
dog and the dangerous dog makes an unprovoked attack on another person outside
the animal's enclosure and causes bodily injury to the other person.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous
dog and performs an act prohibited or fails to perform an act required by this
subchapter.
   (C)   A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dog that
attacks another domestic animal or livestock and that attack causes bodily
injury or death to the other domestic animal or livestock.
   (D)   A person commits an offense if the person is the owner and the animal
attacks a person or another animal and the owner fails to notify the Animal
Care and Control Department within five days of the attack.
   (E)   An offense under division (A), (B), (C), or (D) of this section is a
class C misdemeanor punishable as provided in §
10.99 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. Each day that a violation is
committed or continues is a separate offense.
   (F)   If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the
municipal court may order that the animal be humanely destroyed immediately, or
that the animal be permanently removed from the city. If a person is found
guilty of an offense under this section for a second time, the municipal court
may order that the animal be humanely destroyed immediately or that the animal
be permanently removed from the city.
(Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.70 DEFENSES.
   (A)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under §
90.69 that the person is a veterinarian, a peace officer, a person employed by
a recognized animal shelter, or a person employed by the state or a political
subdivision of the state to deal with stray animals and has temporary
ownership, custody, or control of the animal in connection with that position.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under §
90.69 that the person is an employee of the institutional division of the Texas
Department of Criminal Justice or a law enforcement agency and trains or uses
the dog for law enforcement or corrections purposes.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under §
90.69 that the person is a dog trainer or an employee of a guard dog company
under V.T.C.A., Occupations Code Ch. 1702.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under §
90.69 that the person injured was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting
the animal.
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under §
90.69 that the person injured was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
   (F)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under §
90.69 that the animal was protecting or defending a person, while in the
person's control, from an unjustified attack or assault.
(Ord. OR-2395-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be fined no more than $2,000 for all violations involving
public health and sanitation, and shall be fined not more than $500 for all
other violations of this chapter. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. OR-1787-10, passed 10-11-10; Am. Ord. OR-1805-11, passed 6-27-11; Am.
Ord. OR-2143-19, passed 8-26-19)
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Hazardous conditions; abatement; reports to State Fire Marshal
   
91.02   Maintaining hazardous conditions
   
91.03   Dangerous arrangement of stoves and the like
   
91.04   Notice prerequisite to prosecution
   
91.05   Permit fees
International Fire Code
   
91.15   Adoption of the International Fire Code
   
91.16   Establishment and duties of the fire prevention division
   
91.17   Definitions
   
91.18   Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable or
combustible liquids in outside, aboveground tanks is prohibited
   
91.19   Establishment of safety rules for the storage of liquified petroleum
gas
   
91.20   Establishment of limits of districts in which the storage of explosives
and blasting agents is to be prohibited
   
91.21   Establishment of limits of districts in which the storage of compressed
natural gas is to be prohibited
   
91.22   Establishment of limits of districts in which the storage of stationary
tanks of flammable cryogenic fluids are to be prohibited
   
91.23    Establishment of limits of districts in which the storage of hazardous
materials is to be prohibited or limited
   
91.24   Amendments to the International Fire Code
   
91.25   Appeals
   
91.26   New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS; ABATEMENT; REPORTS TO STATE FIRE MARSHAL.
   (A)   The Fire Marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in
any building or property adjacent and without any complaint, shall have a right
at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon
all buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his or her duty, as
the Fire Marshal deems necessary, to enter upon and make or cause to be entered
and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public
buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he or she
shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by
reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause is especially liable
to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property,
or so occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and
whenever he or she shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves,
ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances or any kind whatsoever, including
chimneys, flues and pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous
arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage
of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals,
vegetable products, ashes, combustible, inflammable and refuse materials or
other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or
promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firefighters or occupants,
he or she shall by written order direct the same to be removed or remedied, and
such order shall within five days from the date of the order be complied with
by the owner or occupant of the building or premises. Provided, however, if the
owner or occupant deems himself or herself aggrieved by the order, he or she
may, within five days from the date of the order, appeal to the City Manager
specifying in writing the grounds upon which the appeal is based. The City
Manager shall investigate the cause of the complaint and the grounds of the
appeal and, unless by his or her authority the order is revoked, the order
shall remain in force and be complied with by the owner or occupant as
originally entered by the Fire Marshal or as amended or revised by the City
Manager, the compliance to be within five days of the date of the action
thereon by the City Manager.
   (B)   At the end of each month, the Fire Marshal shall report to the State
Fire Marshal all existing hazardous conditions, together with a separate report
on each fire in the city during the month.
(‘78 Code, § 8-27) (Ord. 235, passed 10-12-71; Am. Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03;
Am. Ord. OR-1740-09, passed 4-13-09)
§ 91.02 MAINTAINING HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS.
   Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure or premises who
shall keep or maintain the same when, for want of repair, or by reason of age
or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, it is especially liable to fire,
and which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others, or is
especially liable to fire and which is so occupied that fire would endanger
other persons or their property therein shall be punished by a fine as provided
in §
91.99.
(‘78 Code, § 8-28) (Ord. 235, passed 10-12-71; Am. Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03;
Am. Ord. OR-1740-09, passed 4-13-09) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 DANGEROUS ARRANGEMENT OF STOVES AND THE LIKE.
   Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure or premises who
shall keep or maintain the same with an improper arrangement of a stove, range,
furnace or other heating appliance of any kind whatever, including chimneys,
flues and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be dangerous in
the matter of fire or health or safety of persons or property of others; or who
shall keep or maintain any building, other structure or premises with an
improper arrangement of a lighting device or system, or with a storage of
explosives, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products,
ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, refuse or with any other condition
which shall be dangerous in character to the persons, health or property of
others; or which shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting, augmenting or
causing fires; or which shall create conditions dangerous to firefighters, or
occupants of the buildings, structure or premises other than the maintainer
thereof, shall be punished by a fine as provided in §
91.99.
(‘78 Code, § 8-29) (Ord. 235, passed 10-12-71; Am. Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03;
Am. Ord. OR-1740-09, passed 4-13-09) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 NOTICE PREREQUISITE TO PROSECUTION.
   No prosecution shall be brought under §
91.02 or §
91.03 until the written order provided for in §
91.01 be given, and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with the
same as therein provided. For the purpose of this section notice shall be
deemed received if sent via U.S. mail to the last known address on file with
Mansfield Fire Department.
(‘78 Code, § 8-31) (Ord. 235, passed 10-12-71; Am. Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03;
Am. Ord. OR-1740-09, passed 4-13-09) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.05 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   The following fees are established for permits and other activities of
the City Fire Department, Fire Prevention Bureau:
TYPE OF PERMIT FEE
TYPE OF PERMIT                         FEE
Above ground storage tank              $100 (per tank)
                                       $50 for a private fire line permit (if
                                       applicable)
                                       AND:
                                       1-20 heads: $50
Automatic sprinkler systems            21-150 heads: $100
                                       151-500 heads: $200
                                       501-1,000 heads: $300
                                       Cost per head over 1,000: $1
                                       (Also see standpipe permit)
Blasting, licensed pyrotechnics        $125
Chemical extinguishing system          $75 per system
Daycare permit                         $75 annually
Elevator installation                  $50 per elevator
                                       1-10 devices: $50
                                       11-25 devices: $75
Fire alarm installation                26-99 devices: $150
                                       100-199 devices: $200
                                       200+ devices: $300
                                       Cost per device over 400: $1
Gate installation                      $50 per physical gate location
LP gas installation                    $100 per tank
Private fire lines                     $50 per installation
Reinspection fee                       $100
Standpipe systems                      $50 per system
Smoke control system                   $100 per installation
Special egress control device          $100 for first 10 devices
installation                           $50 for each additional 10
Spray booth installation               $75 per booth
Trench burning (other outdoor burning  $50 single-day
prohibited)                            $200 multi-day (7 day max)
Underground storage tank installation/ $100 per tank
removal
Underground storage tank miscellaneous $50 per location
equipment or system
 
   (B)   No permit penalty. The fee is doubled if work is begun without a
permit and is tripled for subsequent violations by the same contractor within
three years. This penalty does not preclude additional penalties in the form of
citations or other legal remedies available.
   (C)   Other fees.
 
After hours inspection fee              $45 per hour with two hour minimum paid
(6:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m., Monday - Friday in advance
or weekends)
Site assessment fee                     $100 per site/request**
Re-inspection fees                      $30 per occurrence
                                        After two inspections
                                        Actual cost of duplication for
Photograph/video copy fees              photographs or $5 for video tape, plus
                                        $5 handling fee and $2.50 mailing fee
 
   *   These fees are referenced by other ordinances. The fee may be collected
under either ordinance, but are not to be duplicated.
   **   Permit fees are waived for these permits for governmental and for non-
profit organizations or groups.
(Ord. 1247, passed 2-22-99; Am. Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1740-09,
passed 4-13-09; Am. Ord. OR-2379-24, passed 9-9-24; Am. Ord. OR-2416-25, passed
8-25-25)
INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE
§ 91.15 ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
   The City of Mansfield hereby adopts the International Fire Code, published
by the International Code Council, the 2018 Edition, save and except such
portions as are hereafter amended. The same are hereby adopted and incorporated
as fully as if set out at length herein and from and after the passage of the
ordinance adopting this section, the provisions thereof shall be controlling
within the limits of the City of Mansfield. The adoption of the International
Fire Code does not extend to the appendices thereto unless specifically adopted
elsewhere in this subchapter. Not less than three copies of the International
Fire Code, 2018 Edition will be kept on file or available in the office of the
City Secretary.
(‘78 Code, § 8-40) (Ord. 401, passed 12-17-79; Ord. 487, passed 4-11-83; Ord.
862, passed 4-23-90; Ord. 933, passed 3-23-92; Am. Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03;
Am. Ord. OR-1740-09, passed 4-13-09; Am. Ord. OR-2271-22, passed 9-26-22)
§ 91.16 ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES OF THE FIRE PREVENTION DIVISION.
   (A)   The City of Mansfield hereby establishes a fire prevention division as
described in Section 103 of the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition. The fire
prevention division is charged with enforcement of the International Fire Code,
as amended, as well as other ordinances and laws over which the fire prevention
division has responsibility. The fire prevention division has the authority to
enforce any provision of the current adopted Building Code, Plumbing Code, Fuel
Gas Code, Mechanical Code or Electrical Code related to fire or life safety
features of the referenced codes. Any interpretation of the Building, Plumbing,
Mechanical or Electrical Codes are the sole responsibility of the authority
having jurisdiction over the code in question. Corrective notices, citations or
other corrective actions as allowed by law may be issued for violations of the
referenced codes. The fire prevention division shall be operated under the
supervision of the Fire Chief.
   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall be appointed by the City
Manager, or his or her designee.
   (C)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall appoint a Fire Marshal, who
shall be responsible for the provisions of the International Fire Code and
related duties and functions as described by law or policy. The Fire Marshal is
designated as the authority having jurisdiction over the Fire Code as amended,
and is the “code official” for the International Fire Code. The Chief may
detail such members of the department to the fire prevention division as may be
necessary. All members of the Mansfield Fire Department are authorized to
request compliance with any provision of the codes as described in division
(A), except that only those members of the division who have been specifically
granted authority by the Chief and Fire Marshal, and who have completed formal
training and have a certification as an inspector or peace officer may issue a
citation, or take enforcement action. The Fire Marshal, inspectors,
investigators and any peace officer employed by or working under the direction
of the Mansfield Police Department, Mansfield Fire Department, or the Mansfield
Independent School District Police Department (for those M.I.S.D. facilities
located within the corporate limits of the City of Mansfield) may issue
citations for any violations of the International Fire Code as amended.
Personnel assigned to the fire prevention bureau may take any action as allowed
by law to remedy a violation of the code.
(‘78 Code, § 8-41) (Ord. 401, passed 12-17-79; Ord. 487, passed 4-11-83; Ord.
862, passed 4-23-90; Ord. 933, passed 3-23-92; Am. Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03;
Am. Ord. OR-1740-09, passed 4-13-09; Am. Ord. OR-2271-22, passed 9-26-22)
§ 91.17 DEFINITIONS.
   It is the specific intent that these definitions be considered as a part of
Section 202 of the International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, without being
duplicated as an amendment to that specific section elsewhere in this
subchapter.
   (A)   Wherever the word JURISDICTION is used in the International Fire Code
or amendments thereto, it shall mean the City of Mansfield and the Extra
Territorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) where specific sections of this code as amended
are applicable in the ETJ.
   (B)   The terms FIRE MARSHAL, CODE OFFICIAL, FIRE CODE OFFICIAL, FIRE CODE
AUTHORITY and CODE AUTHORITY are interchangeable in this code and shall mean
the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
   (C)   Whenever the term INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE is used, it shall mean the
2018 International Fire Code and all supplements, attachments and amendments as
adopted herein.
   (D)   FALSE ALARM is the reporting, signaling or activation by any means of
an alarm for which no such fire or emergency actually exists. This includes
communicating or circulating a report of a present, past or future bombing,
fire, offense, or other emergency that is known to be false or baseless and
that would: (1) ordinarily cause action by any official or volunteer agency
organized to deal with emergencies; (2) place a person in fear of imminent
serious bodily injury or death; or (3) prevent or interrupt the occupation of a
building, room, place of assembly, place to which the public has access or any
mode of conveyance.
   (E)   FIREWORKS. A combustible or explosive composition, substance, or
combination of substances, or a device prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation.
FIREWORKS include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or toy
guns in which explosives are used; firecrackers, torpedoes, sky rockets, roman
candles, sparklers or other devices of like construction; any device containing
an explosive or flammable compound; and any tablet or other device containing
an explosive substance. FIREWORKS do not include auto flares, paper caps
containing an average of twenty-five hundredths of a grain of explosive content
per cap or less: and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices for use
of such caps. This definition supplements the definition found in Section
5602.1 of the International Fire Code.
   (F)   HIGH-RISE BUILDING. A building having floors used for human occupancy
located more than 65 feet (19,812 mm) above the lowest level of Fire Department
vehicle access.
   (G)   SELF SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY. Real property designed and used for the
purpose of renting or leasing individual storage spaces to customers for the
purpose of storing and removing personal property on a self-service basis.
   (H)   STANDBY PERSONNEL. Qualified fire service personnel, approved by the
Fire Chief. When utilized, the number shall be as directed by the Fire Chief.
Charges for utilization shall be as normally calculated by the jurisdiction.
(‘78 Code, § 8-42) (Ord. 401, passed 12-17-79; Ord. 487, passed 4-11-83; Ord.
862, passed 4-23-90; Am. Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1740-09, passed
4-13-09; Am. Ord. OR-2271-22, passed 9-26-22)
§ 91.18 ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE OR
COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS IN OUTSIDE, ABOVEGROUND TANKS IS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The limits referred to in Section 5704.2.9.6.1 of the International
Fire Code, 2018 Edition, in which storage of flammable or combustible liquids
in outside, aboveground tanks is prohibited, are hereby established as follows:
      (1)   Flammable liquids.
         (a)   Motor fuels. The entire City of Mansfield, except agriculture or
farm properties in excess of ten acres where the fuel is incidental to the
operation of farm equipment, or installations complying with the provisions of
the International Fire Code Section 2306 as amended and that are in an area
zoned as a C-2, C-3, I-1, I-2 zoning district, within a planned development
district which specifically authorizes such use, when the requirements of the
International Fire Code as amended are met.
         (b)   Other flammable liquids. The entire City of Mansfield, except
that flammable liquids incidental to a commercial or manufacturing process may
be allowed in outside, aboveground tanks provided the construction,
installation, and placement of the tank and the handling and use of the liquid
conforms to the requirements of the International Fire Code as amended, and
other applicable standards, and further provided that such tanks are located in
an area zoned as a C-2, C-3, I-1, I-2 zoning district, or are within a planned
development district which specifically authorizes such use.
      (2)   Combustible liquids.
         (a)   Motor fuels. The entire City of Mansfield, with the following
exceptions:
            1.   Subdivision development and construction sites when the fuel
storage is in compliance with the requirements of the International Fire Code
Section 2306 as amended.
            2.   Agriculture or farm property in excess of ten acres when the
fuel is incidental to the operation of farm equipment.
            3.   Installations within the limits allowed under the provisions
of Section 2306 as amended and complying with the provisions of Section 2306 as
amended provided the installation is in an area classified as a C-2, C-3, I-1,
I-2 or has approval for such installation as part of a PD zoning district.
            4.   Fuel associated with road projects that are under the control
of the Texas Department of Transportation.
            5.   Existing aboveground diesel storage tanks that were in place
prior to the adoption of this section, that do not exceed a maximum capacity of
550 gallons, that were in compliance with the codes at the time they were
originally installed and are in compliance with other provisions of this code
for above ground fuel storage and dispensing operations. It is the specific
intent of this clause to only allow continued use of existing tanks. No tank
may be added to any site within the city, nor may any existing tank be replaced
with any other tank, unless the tank meets the provisions of this code.
            6.   Provided that the storage of diesel and other class II motor
fuels in outside, aboveground tanks under these exceptions is conditioned that
the construction, installation, and placement of the tank and the handling and
use of the fuel conforms to the requirements of the International Fire Code and
other applicable standards.
         (b)   Other combustible liquids. The entire City of Mansfield, with
the following exception: Property located within the following zoning
districts: C-2, C-3, I-1, I-2 and where specifically authorized in planned
development districts.
   (B)   It is the intention of this section to entirely prohibit bulk plants
and refineries for flammable liquids within the corporate limits of the City of
Mansfield.
(‘78 Code, § 8-43) (Ord. 401, passed 12-17-79; Ord. 487, passed 4-11-83; Ord.
862, passed 4-23-90; Ord. 933, passed 3-23-92; Ord. 954, passed 3-8-93; Am.
Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1470-09, passed 4-13-09; Am. Ord. OR-
2271-22, passed 9-26-22) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.19 ESTABLISHMENT OF SAFETY RULES FOR THE STORAGE OF LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM
GAS.
   (A)   The storage and use of liquified petroleum gases shall be in
accordance with the International Fire Code, N.F.P.A. Standard #58 and any
rules adopted by the Railroad Commission of Texas. The city recognizes that LP
gas is regulated in the state by the Railroad Commission and adopts by
reference the safety rules promulgated by the Railroad Commission of Texas
(NFPA # 58). Where a conflict exists between these regulations, the more
restrictive shall apply.
   (B)   Liquified petroleum gas is prohibited in the city with the following
exceptions:
      (1)   Fixed tanks are prohibited in multi-family zoning districts.
Exception: A single tank with a capacity not to exceed 250 gallons is permitted
for the purpose of heating swimming pools provided natural gas is not available
to the site. The tank must be located a minimum of ten feet from any dwelling
unit.
      (2)   Single-family zoning districts are permitted one 250-gallon tank,
provided the tank complies with the spacing provisions of this code. If the
tank is placed where it is a minimum of ten feet from any adjacent structure or
property line, the amount may be increased to 500 gallons.
      (3)   Commercial zoning districts are permitted tanks of up to 1,000-
gallon capacity, provided they meet the provisions of this code.
      (4)   Industrial zoning districts are permitted to use containers with
any quantity permitted by this code.
      (5)   Planned development districts are permitted to have tanks in any
quantity authorized by the PD provided the tank installation conforms with the
provisions of this code. Exception: LPG tanks installed prior to the effective
date of this subchapter that were in compliance with applicable codes at the
time of their installation are allowed to continue in use. Any tank covered by
this exception may not be replaced with a tank in violation of this section.
   (C)   Existing non-conforming uses involving the sale of LPG and tank sizes
will be allowed to continue. No additional tanks may be installed unless they
comply with the provisions of this code.
   (D)   It is the specific intent of this section to prohibit the bulk storage
of LP gas within the City of Mansfield except as herein established.
   (E)   Quantities referred to in this section are aggregate quantities on
each tract of land. It is the responsibility of the property owner and the
installer of any LPG tank to ensure compliance with these regulations and any
tank installed in violation of these provisions must be immediately removed.
('78 Code, § 8-44) (Ord. 401, passed 12-17-79; Ord. 487, passed 4-11-83; Ord.
862, passed 4-23-90; Ord. 933, passed 3-23-92; Am. Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03;
Am. Ord. 1544, passed 10-10-05; Am. Ord. OR-1740-09, passed 4-13-09) Penalty,
see §
91.99
§ 91.20 ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH THE STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES
AND BLASTING AGENTS IS TO BE PROHIBITED.
   The limits referred to in Section 5601.2.3 of the International Fire Code,
in which the storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited are
established as the entire city except land located in the C-3, I-1, I-2 zoning
districts or within a planned development district which specifically
authorizes such use and the Fire Department has issued the applicable permit.
(‘78 Code, § 8-45) (Ord. 401, passed 12-17-79; Ord. 487, passed 4-11-83; Am.
Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1740-09, passed 4-13-09; Am. Ord. OR-
2271-22, passed 9-26-22) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.21 ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH THE STORAGE OF COMPRESSED
NATURAL GAS IS TO BE PROHIBITED.
   The limits referred to in §
91.19 for the storage of liquified petroleum gas shall also apply to the
storage of compressed natural gas. CNG is prohibited except in those areas as
are hereby established: the entire City of Mansfield except those areas and
quantities as established under §
91.19 for liquified petroleum gases.
(Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. ORD-1470-09, passed 4-13-09) Penalty, see
§
91.99
§ 91.22 ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH THE STORAGE OF STATIONARY
TANKS OF FLAMMABLE CRYOGENIC FLUIDS ARE TO BE PROHIBITED.
   The presence of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is
prohibited in the entire City of Mansfield.
(Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. ORD-1470-09, passed 4-13-09) Penalty, see
§
91.99
§ 91.23 ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH THE STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS
MATERIALS IS TO BE PROHIBITED OR LIMITED.
   Limits on storage of hazardous materials. The presence of hazardous
materials in excess of the exempt amounts as defined in the International Fire
Code is prohibited in the entire city except properties located within the
following zoning districts: C-2, C-3, I-1, I-2 and where specifically
authorized in planned development districts.
(Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. ORD-1470-09, passed 4-13-09) Penalty, see
§
91.99
§ 91.24 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
   The International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, is amended as listed in Exhibit
“A” amendments to the 2018 International Fire Code. Exhibit A is attached to
Ordinance OR-2132-19 which will be kept on file or available in the office of
the City Secretary.
(Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1470-09, passed 4-13-09; Am. Ord. OR-
2271-22, passed 9-26-22)
§ 91.25 APPEALS.
   Whenever the Fire Marshal disapproves an application or refuses to grant a
permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do
not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal in writing from
the decision of the Fire Marshal to the Fire Chief within ten days from the
date of the decision appealed. The Fire Chief will review the circumstances and
either render an opinion or establish a Board of Appeals in compliance with
Appendix A, attached to Ordinance OR-2132-19, of the International Fire Code,
which after hearing all facts in the case, shall render a written judgment.
(Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1470-09, passed 4-13-09; Am. Ord. OR-
2271-22, passed 9-26-22)
§ 91.26 NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH MAY REQUIRE PERMITS.
   The Fire Chief or his or her designee and Fire Marshal shall act as a
committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an
opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies for which
permits may be required in addition to those already enumerated in the
International Fire Code.
(Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1470-09, passed 4-13-09)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this code hereby
adopted or who fails to comply therewith, or who shall build in violation of
any detailed statement or specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such order as affirmed
or modified by the Board of Appeals or by a court of competent jurisdiction,
within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation
and non compliance be guilty of a misdemeanor, and punished by a fine not in
excess of $2,000. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue; all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time; and, when not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions
are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions, or any other official action
authorized by law.
('78 Code, § 8-49) (Ord. 401, passed 12-17-79; Ord. 487, passed 4-11-83; Ord.
519, passed 11-28-83; Ord. 773, passed 4-11-88; Ord. 862, passed 4-23-90; Ord.
933, passed 3-23-92; Ord. 954, passed 3-8-93; Am. Ord. 1430, passed 6-23-03;
Am. Ord. OR-1470-09, passed 4-13-09)
CHAPTER 92: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Business injurious to health; offensive substances on premises
   
92.03   Throwing refuse on public or private premises
   
92.04   Nuisances defined; prohibited; notice; abatement
   
92.05   Vegetation
   
92.06   Junkyards and wrecking yards prohibited
   
92.07   Abatement
   
92.08   Injunctive remedy
   
92.09   Court procedure at instance of aggrieved citizen
   
92.10   Fee scheduled adopted by reference
Regulation of Smoking
   
92.20   Definitions
   
92.21   Smoking prohibited in public places
   
92.22   Regulation of smoking in eating establishments, nightclubs, adult
entertainment establishments, billiard halls, bingo parlors, and bowling
centers
   
92.23   Regulation of smoking in the workplace
   
92.24   Where smoking is not regulated
   
92.25   Posting of signs; placing receptacles
   
92.26   Exemptions
   
92.27   Culpability
   
92.28   Restricted smoking materials; purpose
   
92.29   Sale, delivery, offer, or gift
   
92.30   Use or possession of restricted smoking material
   
92.31   Use or possession of restricted smoking paraphernalia
   
92.32   Location of sale of restricted smoking material and restricted smoking
paraphernalia
   
92.33   Defenses to prosecution
   
92.34   Sale or distribution of electronic vaping device and liquid nicotine to
minors prohibited
   
92.35   Possession of electronic vaping device and liquid nicotine by minors
prohibited
Public Swimming Pool/Spa
   
92.40   Designation of regulatory authority
   
92.41   State regulations and guidelines
   
92.42   Definitions
   
92.43   Permit required
   
92.44   Review of plans and requirements
   
92.45   Inspections
   
92.46    Reserved
   
92.47   Pool/spa/interactive water feature closures and records
   
92.48   Suspension and revocation of permit
   
92.49   Public pool/spa manager certification
 
   
92.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE FEE. The city's minimum administrative fee of $200 that shall
be assessed when the city abates or causes to be abated a nuisance. This fee
shall not include the actual costs incurred in abating or causing to be abated
a nuisance, but the administrative cost to the city of processing the
abatement. Without amending this chapter, the city may impose an administrative
fee of more than $200 if the city's cost of implementing this chapter is
greater than $200.
   ANTIQUE VEHICLE. A passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old.
   AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD. An establishment or place of business that is
maintained, used or operated for storing, keeping, buying or selling wrecked,
scrapped, ruined or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts.
   BRUSH. Scrub vegetation or dense undergrowth.
   COLLECTOR. The owner of one or more antique or special interest vehicles who
collects, purchases, acquires, trades or disposes of special interest or
antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to restore,
preserve and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic
interest.
   COSTS. The actual cost the city incurs in abating or causing to be abated a
nuisance, including without limitation, the cost of mowing, weeding, removing
objectionable rubbish, junk, unsightly, or unsanitary matter and the like.
   CULTIVATED. Vegetation that is deliberately grown and currently and
continuously maintained by the owner, occupant, or agent of the property.
   DEMOLISHER. Any person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into
processed scrap or scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck or dismantle motor
vehicles.
   EXPENSES. The total of the Administrative Fee and Costs incurred by the city
in abating or causing to be abated a nuisance.
   GARBAGE. All decayable waste from public and private establishments and
restaurants, including vegetable, animal and fish offal and animal and fish
carcasses. The term does not include sewage, body waste or industrial by-
products.
   HEARING OFFICER. The municipal court judge of the city or the judge's
designated representative.
   JUNK. All worn out, worthless and discarded material, including odds and
ends, old iron or other metal, glass and cordage.
   JUNKED VEHICLE. A vehicle that is self-propelled and:
      (1)   Does not have lawfully attached to it:
         (a)   An unexpired license plate; or
         (b)   A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and
      (2)   Is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
      (3)   Is inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
         (a)   72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
         (b)   30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
(Tex. Transp. Code § 683.071)
   JUNKYARD. A business that stores, buys, or sells materials that have been
discarded or sold at a nominal price by a previous owner and that keeps all or
part of the materials outdoors until disposing of them, or an automobile
graveyard.
   MAINTAINED. Watered, pruned, trimmed, treated, and controlled in such a
manner as to enhance the use or enjoyment of one's property, without
interfering with the enjoyment or use of neighboring property or public access.
   MOTOR VEHICLE COLLECTOR. A person who:
      (1)   Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and
      (2)   Acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special interest
vehicle or part of an antique or special interest vehicle for personal use to
restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic
interest.
   NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the health or morals, or indecent
or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as
to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property.
   OWNER. A person having title to real property.
   PERSON. Includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
company, or corporation, as well as an individual.
   REFUSE. All garbage, rubbish, paper and other decayable and nondecayable
waste, including vegetable matter and animal and fish carcasses. The term does
not include sewage from a public or private establishment or residence.
   RUBBISH. All nondecayable waste, except ashes, from public or private
establishments or residences.
   SPECIAL INTEREST VEHICLE. A motor vehicle of any age that has not been
changed from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its
historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist.
   TRASH. All refuse other than garbage, brush and large appliances and trees,
including household trash, discarded clothing, toys, papers, yard trash, small
shrub and tree trimmings and leaves.
   VEGETATION. Any grass, weeds, shrubs, brush, bushes, or vines.
   WEEDS. Vegetation that because of its height is objectionable, unsightly or
unsanitary, but excluding cultivated crops, shrubs, bushes, trees, flowers, and
vines.
   WRECKING YARD. A place where old automobiles, trucks, equipment or machinery
which have formerly been in a workable or operable condition and which are no
longer in such condition are kept and maintained for the purpose of storage or
resale of all, or parts of, the automobiles, trucks, equipment and machinery.
('78 Code, § 9-20) (Ord. 154, passed 6-11-63; Ord. 207, passed 10-22-68; Ord.
257, passed 3-27-73; Ord. 695, passed 9-22-86; Ord. 843, passed 8-28-89; Am.
Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)
§ 92.02 BUSINESSES INJURIOUS TO HEALTH; OFFENSIVE SUBSTANCES ON PREMISES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and constitute a nuisance for any person to carry
on any trade, business or occupation injurious to the health, or which
threatens to become injurious to the health of residents of the city.
('78 Code, § 9-1)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and constitute a nuisance for any person to carry
on any trade, business or occupation which allows any substance to remain on
premises in his or her possession, or controlled by him or her as agent, tenant
or otherwise, which has the effect of being injurious to or offensive to the
senses of residents of the city.
('78 Code, § 9-2)
(Ord. 122, passed 8-1-59) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 THROWING REFUSE ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, throw, deposit or cause to be
swept, thrown or deposited any trash, refuse, junk, garbage or rubbish upon or
along any drain, gutter, alley, sidewalk, street or vacant lot, or upon any
publicly or privately owned premises within the city.
('78 Code, § 9-21) (Ord. 113, passed 7-8-58; Ord. 207, passed 10-22-68; Ord.
843, passed 8-28-89) Penalty, see §
92.99
Statutory reference:
   Illegal disposal of litter, see Tex. Health & Safety Code § 365.012
§ 92.04 NUISANCES DEFINED; PROHIBITED; NOTICE; ABATEMENT.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, a nuisance is defined as, but not
limited to whatever is dangerous to human life or health, whatever renders the
ground, water, air or food a hazard or injury to human life or health, or that
is offensive to the senses that it is or tends to become detrimental to the
public health. Nuisance includes an object, place or condition which
constitutes a possible and probable medium of transmission of disease to or
between human beings or object, place or condition which may be specifically
declared by this section to be a nuisance.
   (B)    Any and all of the following conditions, acts, commissions, omissions
or deeds by any person shall be and are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
      (1)   The act of allowing to exist any filth, refuse or manure which
attracts insects, rodents, snakes or other vermin, or tends to attract insects,
rodents, snakes or other vermin on the premises, in the possession or control
by any person as agent, tenant or otherwise.
      (2)   The act of allowing to exist any full or overflowing privy, vault,
cesspool or other receptacle for filth, night soil and human excrement upon any
premises owned or controlled by any person.
      (3)   The act of allowing the contents of a cesspool to be pumped so as
to flow over any premises for fertilizing or other purposes.
      (4)   The act of allowing any imperfect trap, sink or water closet or any
other drainage appliance or fixture to exist in any house or building within
the city from which there shall rise any foul or offensive gas or odor.
      (5)   The act of casting, draining, throwing or causing to be cast,
drained or thrown or distributed in any public street or highway, gutter, alley
or any public or private ground within the city any kitchen water, water from
exhaust pipes, laundry water, water from service stations and garages, air
conditioners or other wastewater, slop, swill or liquid filth.
      (6)   The keeping of any lot or piece of ground within the limits of the
city on which there is located a pool or pond of unwholesome, impure, stagnant
or offensive water.
      (7)   The allowing of paper, lumber, rocks or junk or other trash or
debris to accumulate or remain on any piece of property in such manner as to
create a harborage or breeding place for rats, vermin or insects, or in such a
manner as to be offensive, injurious to public health or unpleasant and
disagreeable in sight or odor to persons residing or occupying any adjacent
premises or to persons who may be in a public place or public right-of-way.
      (8)   The failure of any owner, tenant or lessee to sweep or cause to be
swept the sidewalks in front of his or her place of business, or the failure to
place or cause to be placed all such paper, trash or debris therefrom in an
approved trash receptacle which shall be placed in such place as set out in
Ch. 50 of this Code regulating garbage in the city.
      (9)   To place, permit or abandon an icebox, refrigerator, deepfreeze or
other airtight container, or container which might trap a child therein without
all the locks of all doors having been removed therefrom, outside of a building
or other structure or upon any publicly or privately owned premises.
      (10)   Any condition or place allowed to exist which constitutes a
breeding place for flies, mosquitoes, bees and other offensive insects.
      (11)   All sewage, human excreta, wastewater, garbage or other organic
waste deposited, stored, discharged or exposed in such a way as to be a
potential instrument or medium in the transmission of disease to or between any
person or persons.
      (12)   Any collection of water in which mosquitoes are breeding within
the limits of the city.
      (13)   Any place or condition harboring rats in the city.
      (14)   A tree, shrub or other similar plant of any description which
creates a hazard or risk of damage or destruction to persons or property,
contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of the codes
and ordinances of the city.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether owner, agent, occupant or
any other person having supervision or control, of any lot, tract or parcel of
land, or a portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, within the city to allow,
suffer or permit a nuisance as defined herein to exist.
   (D)   If any person violates or fails or refuses to comply with this section
within ten days after notice in writing; or by letter addressed to the person
at his or her post office address; or by publication in the official
publication of the city, if personal service may not be had as aforesaid, or
the persons address is not known, the city may enter upon the premises and do
or cause to be done such work as it is necessary to abate or remove the
nuisance and the expense incurred, including the cost of publishing the notice
shall be paid by the city and charged to the owner of the property.
   (E)   The city may pay for the work and cause the expense to be assessed
against the real estate thereof upon which the nuisance is maintained or
permitted. A bill for the actual cost incurred by the city resulting from the
abatement and for a reasonable administrative fee shall be mailed to the owner
of the premises and must be satisfied within 30 days of the date of mailing of
the bill.
   (F)   In the event that the bill has not been satisfied within the specified
period, the Mayor may file a statement with the County Clerk of the expenses
incurred in the abatement of the described condition on the premises. The city
shall have a privileged lien on any lot or lots upon which the expense is
incurred, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements plus 10%
per annum interest on the amount from the date of the payment. For any such
expenditure and interest, suit may be instituted and foreclosure had in the
name of the city, and the statement so made, as aforesaid, or a certified copy
thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended in any such work.
The provisions of this section are cumulative and in addition to the penalties
provided herein for the violation of this section.
(‘78 Code, § 9-22) (Ord. 122, passed 8-1-59; Ord. 843, passed 8-28-89; Ord. OR-
2060-17, passed 9-7-17) Penalty, see §
92.99
Cross reference:
   Garbage and recycling, see
Ch. 50
   Sewer and water service, see
Ch. 51
Statutory reference:
   Accumulations; nuisance, see Tex. Health & Safety Code § 341.013
§ 92.05 VEGETATION.
   (A)   Overgrown vegetation, rubbish and other unsanitary matter prohibited. 
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (4) of this division, it is an
offense for any person owning, leasing, claiming, occupying, or having
supervision or control of any real property within the city, to suffer, permit,
or allow uncultivated grass, weeds, or brush, to grow to a height greater than
ten inches, including along the sidewalk or street adjacent to the premises
between the property line and the curb or, if there is no curb, between the
property line and the driving surface.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of any person owning, leasing, claiming,
occupying, or having supervision or control of any real property within the
city to cut or cause to be cut, grass, weeds and brush, as often as necessary
to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   Except as provided in subsection (4) of this division, all grass,
weeds, vegetation, or brush not regularly cultivated and which exceed ten
inches in height shall be presumed to be objectionable, unsightly, and
unsanitary, and are hereby declared a public nuisance.
      (4)   For tracts of land in excess of five acres, or that are used for
the active production of livestock, it shall be required only that grass, weeds
and vegetation, not regularly cultivated, be mowed to a height of no greater
than ten inches within a minimum of 200 feet of all adjacent property lines and
public or private streets. This minimum may be increased on a case by case
basis when deemed necessary by the Fire Department to insure adequate fire
safety of adjacent property containing structures or equipment.
   (B)   Notice of violation prior to abatement by city. 
      (1)   Notice required. If the owner of land fails to comply with the
requirements of division (A) of this section, a city official may cause the
property owner to be notified to cut the grass, weeds, or brush within ten days
of the date of the notice.
      (2)   Method of notice. The notice shall be given:
         (a)   Personally to the owner in writing;
         (b)   By letter addressed to the owner at the owner’s address as
recorded in the appraisal district records of the Appraisal District in which
the property is located;
         (c)   If personal service cannot be obtained:
            1.   By publication in the city’s official newspaper once;
            2.   By posting the notice on or near the front door of each
building on the property to which the violation relates; or
            3.   By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven
into the ground on the property to which the violation relates.
      (3)   Unclaimed notice. If notice is mailed to a property owner in
accordance with subsection (2) of this division, and the United States Postal
Service returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the
notice is not affected, and the notice is considered delivered.
      (4)   Work to be performed. If the owner does not cut the weeds, grass,
or plants, within ten days of the notice, the city may go on such property or
authorize another to go on such property, and do or cause the work to be done
and charge the expenses incurred to the owner of the property and assess the
expenses against the real estate on which the work is done. The remedy provided
in this section is in addition to any criminal penalties or other remedies
authorized by this chapter or other law.
      (5)   Additional violations. Although it is not required, the city may:
         (a)   Inform the owner by regular or certified mail and a posting on
the property that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind
(failure to mow weeds or high grass) on or before the first anniversary of date
of the notice, the city without further notice may correct the violation at the
owner’s expense and assess the expenses against the property; and
         (b)   If a violation occurs within the one-year period, and the city
has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the
city, without notice, may take corrective action and assess the expenses
against the owner and the property.
      (6)   Contents of notice. The notice shall contain:
         (a)   The name and address of the record owner;
         (b)   An identification, which is not required to be a legal
description, of the property upon which the violation is located;
         (c)   A statement describing the violation and the work necessary to
correct the violation;
         (d)   A statement advising the owner that if the work is not completed
within ten days, the city will complete the work and charge the expenses to the
owner; and
         (e)   A statement that if the city performs the work and the owner
fails to pay the expenses, a priority lien may be placed on the property.
   (C)   Assessment of expenses; lien; appeal.
      (1)   Notice. In assessing the expenses incurred pursuant to division (B)
of this section against the property on which the work is done or improvements
made, the city shall send the owner of the property upon which the work was
done a notice which shall include:
         (a)   Identification of the property;
         (b)   A description of the violation;
         (c)   A statement that the city abated the condition;
         (d)   A statement of the city’s expenses in abating the condition;
         (e)   An explanation of the property owner’s right to request a
hearing within ten days of the date of the letter; and
         (f)   A statement that if the owner fails or refuses to pay the
expenses within 30 days of the date of the notice, the Mayor or his designee
shall place a lien against the property by filing with the County Clerk of the
county in which the property is located a notice of lien and statement of
expenses incurred.
      (2)   Method. The notice shall be sent in the same manner as provided in
division (B)(2) of this section.
      (3)   Hearing. The City Manager or his designated representative will
conduct a hearing if the property owner submits a written request within ten
days of the date of the notice. At the hearing:
         (a)   The owner and the city may testify or present witnesses or
written information related to the city’s abatement of the nuisance.
         (b)   The city has the burden to show that a violation of this chapter
existed, notice was given in substantial compliance with this chapter, and
expenses were incurred to abate the violation.
         (c)   At the close of the hearing, the City Manager or his
representative may find, based upon a preponderance of the evidence, that the
expenses are valid, or that they are erroneous or he may adjust them.
      (4)   Placement of lien. If no hearing is requested, or a hearing is held
and the expenses are determined to be valid or are otherwise appropriately
adjusted, and the owner fails or refuses to pay the expenses within 30 days
after written notification to pay, the Mayor or his designated representative
shall place a lien against the property by filing with the County Clerk of the
county in which the property is located a notice of lien and statement of
expenses incurred.
      (5)   Security. The lien is security for the expenses and interest
accruing at the rate of 10% per annum from the date the work was performed or
the expenses were incurred by the city.
      (6)   Filing. When the statement is filed, the city shall have a
privileged lien on that property, second only to tax liens and liens for street
improvements.
      (7)   Suit. The city may institute suit to recover the expenses, with
interest, and may foreclose on the property. The original or a certified copy
of the statement of expenses is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by
the city in doing the work or making the improvements.
   (D)   Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds without prior notice.
      (1)   Abatement. The city may abate, without prior notice, weeds that
have grown higher than 48 inches, and are an immediate danger to the health,
life, or safety of any person.
      (2)   Notice. Not later than the tenth day after the date the city abates
weeds under this section, the city shall give notice to the property owner in
the same manner provided in division (C)(1) of this section.
      (3)   Hearing. The City Manager or his designated representative shall
conduct an administrative hearing under this section if, not later than the
30th day after the date of the abatement of the weeds, the property owner files
with the city a written request for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted
by the City Manager or his designated representative not later than the 20th
day after the date a request for hearing is filed. At the hearing:
         (a)   The owner and the city may testify or present witnesses or
written information related to the city’s abatement of the nuisance.
         (b)   The city has the burden to show that a violation of this chapter
existed, notice was given in substantial compliance with this section, and
expenses incurred to abate the violation were reasonable.
         (c)   The City Manager or his designated representative may approve
the expenses, deny the expenses, or adjust the amount of the expenses and
approve them as adjusted.
(Ord. 144, passed 8-14-62; Ord. 699, passed 10-13-86; Ord. 905, passed 9-23-91;
Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01; Ord. OR-2059-17, passed 9-7-17) Penalty, see §
§ 92.06 JUNKYARDS AND WRECKING YARDS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   In order to promote and protect the general health, safety and welfare
of persons residing within the city and within 5,000 feet of its limits, and in
order to protect the property and owners of property in such area, it is hereby
declared to be the policy of the city that wrecking yards and junkyards shall
not be permitted in the areas.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to begin, operate or maintain a
wrecking yard or junkyard within the city or in the area contiguous to the city
and within one mile of the corporate limits.
('78 Code, § 9-27) (Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01) Penalty, see §
92.99
Cross reference:
   Junked vehicles, see
Ch. 93
§ 92.07 ABATEMENT.
   In the event that the owner of any lot, tract, parcel of land, or a portion
thereof, situated within the corporate limits of the city shall fail to comply
with §
92.05(C), then the Fire Marshal of the city, or his or her designated
representative, may notify the owner by certified letter addressed to the owner
at his or her post office address or by publication two times in ten
consecutive days in the official newspaper of the city, if personal service may
not be had as aforesaid or the owner's address be not known, of the owner's
failure to comply with §
92.05(C) of this chapter. At the expiration of ten days after notification, the
city may do such work as necessary or cause the same to be done in order that
the premises comply with the requirements set forth in §
92.05(C). The city may pay for the work and cause the expense thereof to be
assessed against the real estate. A bill for the actual cost incurred by the
city resulting from the abatement of the above described condition and for a
reasonable administrative fee shall be mailed to the owner of the premises and
must be satisfied within 30 days of the date of mailing of the bill. In the
event that the bill has not been satisfied within the specified period, the
Mayor of the city may file a statement with the County Clerk of the expenses
incurred in the abatement of the described condition on the premises, and the
city shall have a privilege lien on any lot or lots upon which the expense is
incurred second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements and 10% per
annum interest on the amount from the date the payment is due. For any such
expenditure and interest as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and recovery and
foreclosure had in the name of the city and the statement so made as aforesaid,
or a copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended in the
work performed by the city.
('78 Code, § 9-28) (Ord. 144, passed 8-14-62; Ord. 699, passed 10-13-86; Ord.
905, passed 9-23-91)
Statutory reference:
   Abatement by city, see Tex. Health & Safety Code §§ 342.006 - 342.007
   Health officer, see Tex. Health & Safety Code § 341.082
§ 92.08 INJUNCTIVE REMEDY.
   The committing of any one of the acts declared to be a nuisance shall create
and give a cause of action to any aggrieved or offended resident of the city,
or to the city itself, for the abatement of the nuisance by remedy of
injunction in any court of competent jurisdiction in the state.
('78 Code, § 9-29) (Ord 122, passed 8-1-59)
§ 92.09 COURT PROCEDURE AT INSTANCE OF AGGRIEVED CITIZEN.
   When any one of the acts declared to be a nuisance are committed within the
city, any resident of the city offended by the act may file a sworn complaint
with the Judge of the Municipal Court. The Judge of the Court shall then set
the matter for hearing at a time certain subsequent to ten days after the
filing of the sworn complaint, will notify the party charged, enclose with the
notice a copy of the sworn complaint, will hear the matter at the time set and
thereafter enter his or her order thereon.
('78 Code, § 9-30) (Ord. 122, passed 8-1-59)
§ 92.10 FEE SCHEDULE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Regulatory Compliance fee schedule for the inspection and regulation of
food establishments, public pools, spas and interactive water features within
the city, as may be amended from time to time, is adopted by reference, the
same as if set out in full herein.
(Ord. OR-1929-14, passed 11-24-14; Am. Ord. OR-2347-24, passed 2-26-24)
REGULATION OF SMOKING
§ 92.20 DEFINITIONS.
   ADMINISTRATIVE AREA. Any enclosed indoor area, under the control of an
employer, to which employees, but not the general public, except by specific
invitation, have access to during the course of employment, including, but not
limited to, work areas, employee lounges, employee restrooms, conference rooms,
and employee cafeterias.
   ADULTS ONLY ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business that limits its customers
to individuals 18 years of age or older and that employs no one below the age
of 18. Businesses of this category may include restaurants, bars, sports bars,
billiard halls, bingo parlors, retail tobacco shops or other comparable
businesses.
   AIR BARRIER. A system that creates an air curtain to prevent the drift or
penetration of tobacco smoke from a smoking area to a non-smoking area not
allowing drift or penetration from the ceiling down to 24 inches above the
floor.
   AIR PURIFICATION SYSTEM. An electrically powered hospital grade, hepa media
filter that will clean all of the air in a designated smoking area every 15
minutes as follows: not less than 95% of three-tenths (0.3) micron particulates
efficiency including dust, smoke, pollen, mold spores, bacteria, tobacco smoke,
viruses, and allergens and not less than 95% removal of gases, vaports,
volatile organic compounds (V.O.C.) and odors and contains an air barrier
system or other barrier system if required by a licensed professional engineer,
to prevent air from the smoking area from being drawn across the non-smoking
area.
   BAR. An establishment licensed by the State of Texas for the sale of
alcoholic beverages that derives more than 75% of the establishment’s gross
revenue from the on-premise sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premise
consumption. For the purposes of this definition, gross revenue shall be
calculated using the total amount of gross revenue received from the sale of
alcoholic beverages and from the sale of food by the establishment for the
preceding 12-month period. Such establishment shall make available to the city
or its agents, during reasonable hours, its books and records for inspection if
required by the city.
   BILLIARD HALL. A place of amusement whose chief purpose is providing the use
of billiard/pool tables to the public.
   BINGO PARLOR. A facility regulated under V.C.S., Article 179d - “Bingo
Enabling Act.”
   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and
used for the transportation of persons, and every motor vehicle, other than a
taxi cab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
   BUSINESS. Any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation,
or other business entity formed for profit-making or non-profit purposes,
including but not limited to, banks, laundromats, hotels, motels, retail
establishments, professional corporations, and other entities where legal,
medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are
delivered.
   CITY. The City of Mansfield.
   EATING ESTABLISHMENT. Any place where food is served for on-premises
consumption and which is accessible by the public or a substantial group of the
public.
   ELECTRONIC VAPING DEVICE.  Any electronically or battery powered device
designed to simulate the smoking of tobacco, cigarettes, pipes or cigars, that
provides a vapor derived from liquid nicotine and/or other substances which is
intended to be inhaled by a user thereof. The term includes such devices
generally manufactured to resemble cigarettes, cigars, pipes or other smoking
devices, regardless of the details of the product design, appearance or
marketed name.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person, partnership, corporation, municipal corporation, non-
profit entity, or other entity who employs the services of one or more
individual persons.
   EMPLOYER. Any person who employs the services of an individual person.
   ENCLOSED AREA. An area closed in by a roof and walls with appropriate
openings for ingress and egress.
   HEALTH FACILITY. Any institution that provides medical, surgical, and
overnight facilities for patients, including but not limited to, hospitals,
clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctors’ offices,
dentists’ offices, nursing homes, adult care facilities, convalescent homes,
and residential treatment centers/homes.
   LIQUID NICOTINE.  Any liquid product composed of nicotine, propylene glycol,
vegetable glycerin, flavoring and/or other substances manufactured for use with
an electronic vaping device.
   MAJOR RENOVATION. Changing the amount of floor space in a building by 1/3.
   MINOR. Any person under 18 years of age.
   NET FLOOR AREA. The total floor area of the interior of an eating
establishment, excluding the kitchen, restrooms, storage areas, and offices.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, cooperative, association, corporation,
or venture.
   PHYSICAL BARRIER. A barrier that will form an effective membrane continuous
from outside wall to outside wall, from a smoke barrier to a smoke barrier,
from floor to floor or roof above, or a combination thereof, including
continuity through all concealed spaces, such as above suspended ceilings,
interstitial structural and mechanical spaces. Transfer grilles, louvers and
similar openings shall not be used in these partitions. Self closing, tight
fitting doors are permitted in such barriers.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any enclosed area under the control of an employer
including but not limited to work areas, employee lounges, restrooms,
conference rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias and hallways. A private
residence shall not be considered a PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT .
   PORTABLE AIR PURIFICATION SYSTEM. A portable electrically powered hospital
grade, hepa media filter that will clean all of the air in a designated smoking
area every 15 minutes as follows: not less than 95% of three tenths (0.3)
micron particulates efficiency including dust, smoke, pollen, mold spores,
bacteria, tobacco smoke, viruses and allergens and not less than 95% removal of
gases, vapors, volatile organic compounds (V.O.C.) and odors.
   PRIVATE CLUB. Any building, premise or portion thereof which is permitted by
the state and allowed by special use permit by the city as a private club for
the storing, possession, and dispensing for on-premises consumption of
alcoholic beverages. However, PRIVATE CLUB does not include a premise operated
by an organization which is not available to and not customarily used by the
general public and entry and privileges thereto are established by regulations
that are created by an organization distinct from a Texas Alcohol and Beverage
private club membership.
   PRIVATE FUNCTION. The rental of a ballroom, restaurant, private club, or
other facility for the sole purpose of entertaining, private parties, events,
or other social functions.
   PUBLIC BUSINESS. Any deliberation between a quorum of members of any board,
commission, department, committee or agency within the executive or legislative
department of the State of Texas, or the City Council or any board or
commission of the City of Mansfield at which any public business or public
policy is discussed or considered or at which any formal action is taken.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any enclosed area in which the public is invited or permitted,
including, but not limited to, banks, educational facilities, health
facilities, laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas,
restaurants, marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail
stores, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a PUBLIC PLACE
, nor is a facility while it is being used for a private function, such as a
reception, party, and the like. Private clubs are not considered a PUBLIC PLACE
.
   RESTAURANT. Any place where food is manufactured, packaged, produced,
processed, transported, stored, sold, commercially prepared, vended, or
otherwise handled. The term includes any such place regardless of the duration
of the permit or whether there is a charge for the food. The term includes, but
is not limited to, a coffee shop, cafeteria, sandwich shop, private or public
school cafeteria, and any other eating establishment that gives or offers food
to the public, guests, or employees, including catering facilities. The term
shall not include a cocktail lounge or tavern if the cocktail lounge or tavern
is a “bar” as defined in this section. The term does not include private homes
where food is prepared or served for guests and individual family consumption.
   RESTRICTED SMOKING MATERIAL. Any substance, however marketed, which can
reasonably be converted for smoking purposes whether it is presented as
incense, tobacco, herbs, spices or any blend thereof if it includes any of the
following chemicals or a comparable chemical:
      (1)   Salvia divinorum or salvinorin A; all parts of the plant presently
classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds
thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound,
manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds
or extracts;
      (2)   2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol (also
known as CP47,497) and homologues;
      (3)   (6aS,10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-
6a,7,10 ,10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol) (also known as HU-211 or
Dexanabinol);
      (4)   1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-018);
      (5)   1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-073); or
      (6)   1-pentyl-3-(4-methoxynaphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-081).
Products containing some of the above substances are currently being marketed
under the following commercial names: “K-2", “K-2 SUMMIT”, “K-2 SEX”, “GENIE”,
“DASCENTS”, “ZOHAI”, “SAGE”, “SPICE”, “KO KNOCK-OUT 2", “SPICE GOLD”, “SPICE
DIAMOND”, “YUCATAN FIRE”, “SOLAR FLARE”, “PEP SPICE”, “FIRE N’ ICE”, AND
“SALVIA DIVINORUM”. It is anticipated by the Council that new products will be
marketed under different names but will be subject to this definition if they
contain any of the chemical components set forth above.
   RESTRICTED SMOKING MATERIAL PARAPHERNALIA. Any paraphernalia, equipment or
utensil that is used or intended to be used in ingesting or inhaling illegal
smoking materials and may include:
      (1)   A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe
with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal
bowl;
      (2)   A water pipe;
      (3)   A carburetion tube or device;
      (4)   A smoking or carburetion mask;
      (5)   A chamber pipe;
      (6)   A carburetor pipe;
      (7)   An electric pipe;
      (8)   An air-driven pipe;
      (9)   A chillum;
      (10)   A bong; or
      (11)   An ice pipe or chiller.
   For purposes of interpretation and enforcement, the term USED as found in
this definition shall mean CUSTOMARILY USED .
   RETAIL OR SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment which sells goods or
services to the general public.
   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. A retail store whose primary business is the sale of
tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of products is merely
incidental.
   SELL. To offer for sale, convey, exchange, barter, or trade.
   SERVICE LINE. Any indoor line or area where persons wait for goods or
service of any kind, regardless of whether or not an exchange of money will
occur. Such service includes, but is not limited to, sales, giving of
information, directions, advice, and the transfer of money or goods.
   SMOKING. The combustion of any cigar, cigarette, pipe , tobacco product,
weed, plant, or other combustible substance and the use of any electronic
vaping device as defined herein.
   SPORTS ARENA. Sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas,
swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, and other similar places where members of
the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate
in athletic competition or witness sports events.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any tobacco, cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless
tobacco, snuff, or any other form of tobacco, which may be utilized for
smoking, chewing, inhalation or other manner of ingestion or absorption.
   TOBACCO SHOP. A retail establishment whose annual gross revenues from the
sale of tobacco products and smoking accessories are at least 50% of total
revenue.
   TOBACCO VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic self-serving
device which, upon insertion of money, tokens, or any other form of payments,
dispenses tobacco products.
   VALID IDENTIFICATION. A valid driver’s license or an identification card
issued by the Department of Public Safety which contains a physical description
and a photograph consistent with the person’s appearance. The proof of
identification may include a driver’s license issued by Texas or another state,
a passport, or an identification card issued by a state or the federal
government.
   VENTILATION SYSTEM. A HVAC system designed by a licensed professional
engineer to meet the requirements of this subchapter and all other requirements
of the city’s building code. A ventilation system must provide an air change
every 15 minutes; exhaust the air to the exterior of the building and the air
from the smoking area cannot be drawn across the non-smoking area; and has an
air barrier system, if required by a licensed professional engineer, to prevent
air from the smoking area from being drawn across the non-smoking area.
   WORKPLACE. Any enclosed area of a structure, or portion thereof, intended
for occupancy by employees who provide primarily clerical, professional or
business services of a business entity, or which provide primarily clerical,
professional or business services to other business entities or to the public
at that location.
(‘78 Code, § 9-81) (Ord. 741, passed 5-19-87; Am. Ord. 1309, passed 4-10-00;
Am. Ord. OR-1737-09, passed 2-9-09; Am. Ord. OR-1773-10, passed 6-28-10;
Meeting Minutes 6-28-10; Am. Ord. OR-1910-14, passed 4-29-14)
§ 92.21 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   City-owned buildings.
      (1)   All enclosed buildings owned or leased by the City of Mansfield
shall be designated non- smoking with no designated smoking section, except as
listed in division (A)(2) below.
      (2)   Jail cells located in city facilities used for the incarceration of
prisoners may be designated as a smoking area at the discretion of the Director
of Public Safety. All other areas shall be designated as non-smoking areas.
   (B)   Places where smoking is prohibited. A person commits an offense if he
or she is smoking or possesses a burning tobacco, weed, or other plant product
in any of the following indoor or enclosed areas:
      (1)   Public or private schools.
      (2)   City buildings.
      (3)   Public elevators and stairwells.
      (4)   Buses, taxi cabs, and other means of public transportation.
      (5)   All boarding and waiting areas of public transit depots.
      (6)   Public restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways and any other
common use area.
      (7)   Service lines and waiting queues, whether indoor or outdoor.
      (8)   Retail or service establishments.
      (9)   Businesses, including all areas available to and customarily used
by the general public.
      (10)   Aquariums, galleries, libraries, and museums.
      (11)   Day care centers, except that day care centers that are also
private homes shall be considered private residences when the children or
adults receiving care have gone home.
      (12)   Every publicly or privately owned theater, auditorium or other
enclosed facility which is open to the public for the primary purpose of
exhibiting any motion picture, stage drama, musical recital, athletic event or
any other performance or event, except when smoking is part of a stage
production.
      (13)   Any portion of any publicly or privately owned area to which the
public has access. This division (B)(13) section does not apply to private
residences.
      (14)   Any seating area of any publicly or privately owned outdoor
athletic facility.
      (15)   Health care facilities and hospitals.
      (16)   Hotels and motels, except as provided for in §
92.24(A)(2).
      (17)   Any seating area of any publicly or privately owned outdoor
theater or amphitheater.
      (18)   City parks and recreational facilities.
      (19)   Within 30 feet of any door, operable window/vent or other opening
to an indoor enclosed area of a use listed above.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   An adults only establishment as defined in §
92.20 is exempt from the non-smoking provisions set forth above under the
following circumstances:
         (a)   It must prohibit the entry of customers below the age of 18;
         (b)   It may have no employees or guests below the age of 18;
         (c)   It must prominently display a sign by all public entrances
reflecting that this is an adults only establishment and that no one under 18
years of age is permitted within the establishment and that it permits smoking
in all areas and that there are no non-smoking facilities contained within.
      (2)   A business establishment listed above under division (B) where
smoking would otherwise be prohibited may construct a separate but contiguous
facility of the same business where smoking is permitted. The facility must be
separated from the non-smoking facility by a solid wall which extends from
floor to ceiling, must have a separate entrance and must not share a common
heating and air conditioning system which allows the passage of air from one
facility to the other. It may have no employees or guests below the age of 18.
The smoking portion of the business must display a sign at all public entrances
reflecting that this is an adults only establishment and that no one under 18
years of age is permitted within the establishment and that smoking is
permitted in all areas and that there are no non- smoking facilities contained
within. A business establishment operating pursuant to this section may serve
both the smoking and non-smoking dining areas from a single kitchen provided
that the facility is designed and constructed in a manner that does not permit
smoke from the smoking portion to pass through the kitchen to the non-smoking
area. An establishment operating under this section may serve both the smoking
and non-smoking areas from a single set of restrooms provided that they are
located within the non-smoking portion of the establishment and the facility is
designed and constructed in such a manner as to prevent smoke from the smoking
area being drawn into the non-smoking area when patrons pass from one portion
of the establishment to the other.
      (3)   It is an exception to division (B)(15) above that a hospital
provide a room in which a patient may reside and smoke providing that all
patients assigned to that room are agreeable and the administrator of the
facility concurs with the designation. A room placed in this status shall
prominently display a sign which states: "Smoking is permitted in this room."
      (4)   A person is exempt from the non-smoking provisions set fort above
if the use of an electronic vaping device is at the direction or under a
prescription issued by a licensed physician authorized to prescribe such
devices for the treatment of medical conditions.
      (5)   A city park and/or public recreational facility that is operated by
the governmental unit or that is leased to or operated by an outside private
entity via a contract or agreement with the governmental entity may choose to
designate an unenclosed area within the facility as a permitted smoking
location. The area shall not be enclosed, not located within 30 feet of a
playground or seating area, not located within 30 feet of a door, operable
window/vent or other opening to an enclosed area and not a part of an athletic
field or dugout. The operator or manager of the facility may choose to prohibit
smoking at the facility at the discretion of the operator or manager. It shall
be the duty of the operator or manager to either clearly mark the designated
smoking area or to provide notice that smoking will not be permitted on the
entire premises.
   (D)   Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the
conveyance or public place within which the offense occurred did not have
prominently displayed a reasonably sized notice that smoking was prohibited.
(‘78 Code, § 9-82) (Ord. 741, passed 5-19-87; Am. Ord. 1309, passed 4-10-00;
Am. Ord. OR-1737, passed 2-9-09; Am. Ord. OR-1910-14, passed 4-29-14)
§ 92.22 REGULATION OF SMOKING IN EATING ESTABLISHMENTS, NIGHTCLUBS, ADULT
ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS, BILLIARD HALLS, BINGO PARLORS, AND BOWLING
CENTERS.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if he or she is smoking tobacco or
possesses a burning tobacco, weed or other plant product in an eating
establishment, bar, night club, adult entertainment establishment, billiard
hall, bingo parlor, or bowling center unless it operates in compliance with §
92.21(C).
   (B)   An owner, manager, or operator of an eating establishment, bar, night
club, adult entertainment establishment, billiard hall, bingo parlor, or
bowling center commits an offense if he or she allows smoking in the
establishment unless it operates in compliance with §
91.21(C).
   (C)   Defenses. It is a defense to a prosecution under division (A) above
that the establishment did not have prominently displayed a reasonably sized
notice that smoking was prohibited.
   (D)   Existing businesses and facilities. All businesses and facilities in
operation on the effective date of Ordinance OR-1737-09 shall have 18 months
from February 9, 2009 to be in compliance.
   (E)   Owner/operator responsibility.
      (1)   The owner, manager, or operator of an eating establishment, bar,
night club, adult entertainment establishment, billiard hall, bingo parlor, or
bowling center commits an offense if he or she designates or maintains a
smoking area in violation of this subchapter.
      (2)   The owner or manager of an establishment governed by this
subchapter commits an offense if he or she fails to post and maintain any signs
required by this subchapter.
(‘78 Code, § 9-83) (Ord. 741, passed 5-19-87; Am. Ord. 1309, passed 4-10-00;
Am. Ord. OR-1737-09, passed 2-9-09; Am. Ord. OR-1910-14, passed 4-29-14)
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.23 REGULATION OF SMOKING IN THE WORKPLACE.
   (A)   An employer who owns, occupies, or controls a workplace may:
      (1)   Have and implement a written policy on smoking which conforms to
this subchapter.
      (2)   Make the policy available for inspection by employees and
communicate the policy to all employees at least three weeks prior to its
adoption.
      (3)   Prominently display reasonably sized signs that smoking is
prohibited.
      (4)   Provide facilities in sufficient numbers in such locations as to be
readily accessible for the extinguishment of smoking materials.
      (5)   Not discharge, retaliate, or discriminate against an employee who:
         (a)   Files a complaint or causes a proceeding to be instituted under
or related to this subchapter;
         (b)   Testifies or will testify in a proceeding instituted under this
subchapter; or
         (c)   Exercises on his or her own behalf or the behalf of others any
right afforded by this subchapter.
(‘78 Code, § 9-84) (Ord. 741, passed 5-19-87; Am. Ord. 1309, passed 4-10-00;
Am. Ord. OR-1737-09, passed 2-9-09) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.24 WHERE SMOKING IS NOT REGULATED.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter to the
contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions
of this subchapter:
      (1)   Private residences, including porch and yard areas, except when
used as a child care, adult day care or health care facility.
      (2)   Not more than 10% of hotel and motel rooms rented to guests shall
be designated as smoking rooms. The following standards shall apply:
         (a)   All smoking rooms shall be on the same floor, shall be
contiguous to the other smoking rooms and shall be configured and ventilated in
a manner to restrict the smoke from these rooms from infiltrating into areas
where smoking is prohibited under provisions of this subchapter;
         (b)   Separate ventilation and HVAC systems that prevent the
commingling of air with other rooms, hallways and all other non-smoking areas
shall be required; and
         (c)   The status of rooms as smoking or non-smoking may not be
changed, except to add additional non-smoking rooms.
      (3)   Retail tobacco stores, where a retail store is utilized primarily
for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other
products is merely incidental. Separate ventilation and HVAC systems that
prevent the commingling of air with other businesses, common areas, hallways
and other non-smoking areas shall be required.
      (4)   Enclosed meeting or assembly rooms in restaurants, hotels, motels,
and other public places while the entire room is being used for a private
function provided it has a portable air purification system (defined in §
92.20).
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner,
operator, manager, or other person who controls any establishment described in
this section may designate the entire establishment as a non-smoking
establishment.
(Ord. 1309, passed 4-10-00; Am. Ord. OR-1737-09, passed 2-9-09)
§ 92.25 POSTING OF SIGNS; PLACING RECEPTACLES.
   (A)   Signs. All signs shall be in letters not less than one inch high with
a stroke of not less than 1/8-inch on a contrasting background.
      (1)   A place or conveyance regulated by §
92.21 that is required to be totally non-smoking shall have signs conspicuously
posted at all public entrances which state: "No Smoking - City Ordinance."
      (2)   If a place or conveyance regulated by §
92.21(C) permits smoking, it shall post and maintain the sign required in §
92.21(C).
   (B)   Receptacles. A place, establishment or conveyance regulated by §
92.21(B) or §
92.22 which is partially or totally non-smoking shall have facilities for the
extinguishment of smoking materials located no farther than 30 feet or closer
than 15 feet of all public entrances and within all designated smoking areas.
The owner, manager, or operator of a place, conveyance or establishment commits
an offense if he or she fails to post signs and provide extinguishment
facilities as required by this section.
(‘78 Code, § 9-85) (Ord. 741, passed 5-19-87; Am. Ord. 1309, passed 4-10-00;
Am. Ord. OR-1737-09, passed 2-9-09)
§ 92.26 EXEMPTIONS.
   Any owner or manager of a business, facility, room, structure, or other
establishment existing on the effective date of Ordinance OR-1737-09 which is
subject to §§
92.21,
92.23 and
92.25 may apply for an exemption or modification to any provision of this
subchapter due to unusual circumstances or conditions. Such exemption may be
granted by the City Council, only if the evidence presented by the applicant
for exemption demonstrates that:
   (A)   The applicant cannot comply with the provisions of this subchapter for
which an exemption is requested without incurring expenses for structural or
other physical modifications, other than posting signs, to buildings and
structures; or
   (B)   Due to such unusual circumstances, the failure to comply with the
provision for which the exemption is requested will not result in a danger to
health or annoyance, inconvenience, or discomfort.
(Ord. 1309, passed 4-10-00; Am. Ord. OR-1737-09, passed 2-9-09)
§ 92.27 CULPABILITY.
   There shall be no requirement of a culpable mental state for a violation of
this subchapter.
(Ord. 1309, passed 4-10-00; Am. Ord. OR-1737-09, passed 2-9-09)
§ 92.28 RESTRICTED SMOKING MATERIALS; PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this section is to prohibit the sale or delivery of
restricted smoking materials as defined herein to any individual below 21 years
of age within the city limits of the City of Mansfield and to prohibit the
possession of restricted smoking materials by any individual below 21 years of
age within the city limits of the City of Mansfield. Any form of delivery to
include a simple gift constitutes a violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. OR-1773-10, passed 6-28-10) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.29 SALE, DELIVERY, OFFER, OR GIFT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, deliver to
or to give any restricted smoking material to anyone below 21 years of age.
   (B)   For purposes of interpretation and enforcement, the term SELL as found
in this section shall include "display for sale".
(Ord. OR-1773-10, passed 6-28-10; Meeting Minutes 6-28-10) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.30 USE OR POSSESSION OF RESTRICTED SMOKING MATERIAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person below 21 years of age to have in their
possession or to use restricted smoking materials within the corporate limits
of the City of Mansfield.
(Ord. OR-1773-10, passed 6-28-10) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.31 USE OR POSSESSION OF RESTRICTED SMOKING PARAPHERNALIA.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession any
restricted smoking paraphernalia with the intent to use it, to ingest, inhale
or otherwise consume restricted smoking material if they are below 21 years of
age. If an individual below 21 years of age is found in possession of this type
of paraphernalia it will be a violation of this subchapter if appropriate
forensic testing is done on the paraphernalia and traces of restricted smoking
material are present on the device.
(Ord. OR-1773-10, passed 6-28-10) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.32 LOCATION OF SALE OF RESTRICTED SMOKING MATERIAL AND RESTRICTED SMOKING
PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, deliver or
to give any restricted smoking material or restricted smoking paraphernalia to
any person within 1,000 feet of the following:
      (1)   A church;
      (2)   A public or private elementary or secondary school;
      (3)   A licensed day care center;
      (4)   A public park, recreation center or water park; and
      (5)   A public library.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest
portion of the building or structure used for purpose of selling or delivering
the restricted smoking material or restricted smoking paraphernalia to the
nearest property line of the premises of a church, public or private elementary
or secondary school, licensed day care center, public library, public park,
recreation center or water park.
   (C)   For purposes of interpretation and enforcement, the term SELL as found
in this section shall include "display for sale".
(Ord. OR-1773-10, passed 6-28-10; Meeting Minutes 6-28-10) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.33 DEFENSES TO PROSECUTION.
   (A)   It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section
if the use of the restricted smoking material is at the direction or under a
prescription issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized to prescribe
controlled substances within the State of Texas.
   (B)   It shall be a defense to prosecution under the terms of this section
if an individual charged with a violation can provide proper and complete
historic documentation that the use of such materials is a portion of a
religious undertaking or activity of a religious denomination in which they
have long standing historic membership supported by documentation from clergy
or spiritual leader recognized by the State of Texas.
(Ord. OR-1773-10, passed 6-28-10)
§ 92.34 SALE OR DISTRIBUTION OF ELECTRONIC VAPING DEVICE AND LIQUID NICOTINE TO
MINORS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person sells, gives, transfers or
otherwise causes to be sold or given an electronic vaping device or liquid
nicotine to a minor or to a another person who intends to deliver it to a
minor.
   (B)   If an offense under this section occurs in connection with a sale or
delivery of an electronic vaping device or liquid nicotine at a business by an
employee of the business, the employee who commits the offense shall also be
subject to prosecution in addition to the business.
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that at the time of
the sale or delivery of an electronic vaping device or liquid nicotine, the
minor presented the person with an apparently valid identification showing that
the minor was at least 18 years of age.
   (D)   It is not a defense to prosecution under this section that the minor
purchased the electronic vaping device or liquid nicotine from a vending
machine or other self-service merchandising machine if the machine was located
on the premises of the person.
(Ord. OR-1910-14, passed 4-29-14) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.35 POSSESSION OF ELECTRONIC VAPING DEVICE AND LIQUID NICOTINE BY MINORS
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   A minor commits an offense if the minor purchases, accepts, possesses
or attempts to purchase, accept or possess an electronic vaping device or
liquid nicotine.
   (B)   A minor commits an offense if the minor falsely represents himself or
herself to be 18 years of age or older for purpose of purchasing or receiving
an electronic vaping device and or liquid nicotine.
   (C)   It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section if at the time
of the purchase, acceptance or possession, the minor is:
      (1)   in the presence of an adult parent, guardian or spouse, or other
adult to whom the minor has been entrusted by a court; or
      (2)   In the course and scope of the minor’s employment by a person or
entity in the distribution, wholesale or retail of electronic vaping devices or
liquid nicotine, and the acceptance or possession of the electronic vaping
device or liquid nicotine by the minor is part of the duties of such
employment.
(Ord. OR-1910-14, passed 4-29-14) Penalty, see §
92.99
PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL/SPA
§ 92.40 DESIGNATION OF REGULATORY AUTHORITY.
   The city designates the City of Mansfield Regulatory Compliance Department
as its regulatory authority for the purpose of insuring minimum standards of
environmental health and sanitation within the scope of that department’s
function.
(‘78 Code, § 9-88) (Ord. 879, passed 10-22-90; Am. Ord. OR-1930-14, passed 11-
24-14; Am. Ord. OR-2230-21, passed 12-13-21; Am. Ord. OR-2252-22, passed 5-9-
22)
§ 92.41 STATE REGULATIONS AND GUIDELINES.
   There is hereby adopted by reference of Tex. Health & Safety Code Title 5,
Subtitle A, Ch. 341, §§ 341.064, 341.0645 and 341.0695; Tex. Health & Safety
Code Title 1, Ch. 1, § 1.005, and Tex. Health & Safety Code Title 9, Subtitle
A, Ch. 757; the V.T.C.A; and the Tex. Admin. Code §§ 265.181 through 265.208,
“Standards for Public Pools and Spas”, as amended, and Tex. Admin. Code §§
265.301 through 265.308 “Public Interactive Water Features and Fountains.” A
copy of each shall be kept on file in the official records of the city.
(‘78 Code, § 9-89) (Ord. 879, passed 10-22-90; Am. Ord. OR-1930-14, passed 11-
24-14; Am. Ord. OR-2252-22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. OR-2347-24, passed 2-26-24)
§ 92.42 DEFINITIONS.
   All definitions in Tex. Admin. Code Title 25, Ch. 265, Subch. L, “Public
Swimming Pools and Spas,” and Tex. Admin. Code Title 25, Ch. 265, Subch. M,
“Public Interactive Water Features and Fountains,” as amended, are hereby
adopted. In addition, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE. The City Director of Regulatory Compliance or
their designee.
   CERTIFIED POOL OPERATOR. A person who possesses a valid pool operator’s
certificate from an accredited program approved by the regulatory authority.
   CITY. City of Mansfield.
   DIRECTOR. The City Director of Regulatory Compliance.
   EXTENSIVELY REMODELED. The replacement of or modification to a pool, spa, or
public interactive water feature (PIWF) structure, its circulation system, or
its appurtenances, so that the design, configuration or operation is different
from the original design, configuration or operation. This term does not
include the normal maintenance and repair or the replacement of equipment,
which has been previously approved if the size, type or operation of the
equipment is not substantially different from the original.
   INTERACTIVE WATER FEATURE (PIWF). Any indoor or outdoor installation
maintained for public recreation that includes water sprays, dancing water
jets, waterfalls, dumping buckets, or shooting water cannon in various arrays
for the purpose of wetting the persons playing in the spray streams.
      (1)   May be stand-alone interactive water feature(s) or may share a
water supply, disinfection system, filtration system, circulation system, or
other treatment system that allows water to co-mingle with a pool;
      (2)   May be publicly or privately owned;
      (3)   May be operated by an owner, lessee, operator, licensee, or
concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is charged for use;
      (4)   Include, but are not limited to, interactive water features or
fountains that are open exclusively to members of an organization and their
guests, residents of a multi-family or lodging establishment, residential real
estate development, schools, child care facilities, youth camps, or hotel or
other public accommodations facility;
      (5)   Not to include interactive water features or fountains located on
private property under the control of the property owner or owner’s tenant
serving a single-family or duplex residence that are intended for use by not
more than two resident families and their invited guests; and
      (6)   Are not fountains, installations, amusement rides, or other
attractions, whether decorative or interactive, in which only incidental water
contact occurs.
   PERSON IN CHARGE (PIC). The person who holds the city permit and maintains
responsibility and/or control over the pool, spa, or interactive water feature.
   POOL. Any manmade permanently installed or non-portable structure, basin,
chamber, or tank containing an artificial body of water that is used for
swimming, diving, aquatic sports, or other aquatic activity other than a
residential pool and that is operated by an owner, lessee, operator, licensee
or concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is charged for use. The POOL may
be either publicly or privately owned. The term does not include a spa or a
decorative fountain that is not used as a POOL.
   PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL POOL OR SPA. A pool that is located on private property
under the control of the property owner or the owner’s tenant and that is
intended for use by not more than one single family and their invited guest and
located on property used for the placement of a single-family home or duplex
residence.
   REGISTERED CERTIFIED POOL OPERATOR. A certified pool operator who has
registered with the city’s Regulatory Compliance Department and has received a
registration certificate from the Department.
   REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE. A certificate issued by the regulatory authority
to any person who submits the required application, remits the registration
fee, and provides evidence of being a certified pool operator.
   REGULATORY AUTHORITY. The Director or Representative of the city’s
Regulatory Compliance Department, or their authorized designees.
   SPA. A product or structure that is two feet or more in depth, that is
intended for recreational uses in temperature-controlled water which is
circulated in a closed system, and not intended to be drained and filled with
each use. It may include, but is not limited to, hydro jet circulation, hot
water, cold water, mineral baths, air induction bubbles, or any combination
thereof. A SPA does not refer to a business establishment, such as a day spa or
a health spa. Industry terminology for a SPA includes, but is not limited to,
“hydrotherapy pool”, “whirlpool”, “hot spa”, “hot tub”, and the like. A SPA
does not include a private residential spa.
(‘78 Code, § 9-90) (Ord. 879, passed 10-22-90; Am. Ord. OR-1930-14, passed 11-
24-14; Am. Ord. OR-2230-21, passed 12-13-21; Am. Ord. OR-2252-22, passed 5-9-
22; Am. Ord. OR-2347-24, passed 2-26-24)
§ 92.43 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a public
pool, spa, or interactive water feature in the city without a current and valid
pool, spa or interactive water feature permit. The provisions of this
subchapter shall not apply to a private residential pool.
   (B)   Posting. A valid permit issued to a public swimming pool, spa or
interactive water feature shall be posted on site in a conspicuous location
visible to the users of the swimming pool, spa or interactive water feature.
   (C)   Nontransferable (change of ownership). Permits issued under the
provisions of this chapter are not transferable. Upon change of ownership of a
business, the new business owner will be required to meet current standards as
defined in city ordinances and state law before a permit will be issued. The
new owner shall notify the regulatory authority within ten days after assuming
ownership of the pool, spa, or interactive water feature. There will be a
change of ownership fees charged in an amount as established in the Master Fee
Schedule adopted by City Council, as amended from time to time.
   (D)   Multiple permits. A separate permit shall be required for every public
pool, spa, or interactive water feature.
   (E)   The pool operator’s registration certificate shall be displayed in a
place readily accessible for inspection by the regulatory authority, such as a
bulletin board, display case, or other prominent location.
   (F)   Nonpayment. A permit that lapses for nonpayment of the annual permit
fee will be reinstated upon payment of the permit fee, except such permits
which have lapsed for a period exceeding one month. Such permits shall be
reinstated upon payment of the annual permit fee and late fee, as established
in the Master Fee Schedule adopted by City Council, as amended from time to
time.
   (G)   Denial of permit. A permit may be denied if the regulatory authority,
upon inspection, determines that the applicant has failed to comply with any
provision of this subchapter.
   (H)   Inspections for permits. An inspection shall be required annually to
qualify for a permit. A permit is valid for one year from the date of issuance.
(‘78 Code, § 9-91) (Ord. 879, passed 10-22-90; Am. Ord. OR-1930-14, passed 11-
24-14; Am. Ord. OR-2252-22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. OR-2347-24, passed 2-26-24;
Am. Ord. OR-2391-24, passed 10-28- 24) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.44 REVIEW OF PLANS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Submission of plans. Before a public pool’s and/or spa’s and/or
interactive water feature’s construction or extensive remodeling begins, the
person proposing to construct or remodel shall submit an application to the
regulatory authority for review and approval. For purposes of this subchapter,
the consideration of extensive remodeling shall be the alteration and/or repair
of any structure, building or building system which requires the issuance of a
building permit to complete. The application shall include:
      (1)   The proposed layout and arrangement of mechanical, plumbing,
fencing, electrical, construction materials of work areas, the type and model
of proposed fixed equipment and facilities and all associated buildings or
structures;
      (2)   The construction or remodeling plans shall be under an engineer’s
seal, and specifications stating that the proposed construction or remodeling
complies with the provisions of this subchapter and indicating the proposed
layout, mechanical plans, construction materials of work areas, and the type
and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities;
      (3)   The date on or after which proposed construction is to begin;
      (4)   The phone number and address of the entity primarily responsible
for constructing the pool, spa, or interactive water feature;
      (5)   The phone number and address of the entity primarily responsible
for operating the pool, spa, or interactive water feature;
      (6)   Any other additional information necessary for the regulatory
authority to verify compliance; and
      (7)   A payment must be made to the city’s Regulatory Compliance
Department, in the amount established in the Master Fee Schedule adopted by
City Council, as amended from time to time.
   (B)   All new and extensively remodeled public pools or extensively
remodeled public pool features will need to have metal fencing that may not
contain residential patios or any climbable structure, including furniture,
within three feet of the fence and must conform to all current state statutes.
All pool yards or spa yards must be completely enclosed on all four sides in a
manner which prevents entering from a patio or operable window directly into
the pool or spa yard. The enclosure must conform to Tex. Admin. Code Title 25,
§ 265.192 and Tex. Health & Safety Code Ch. 757.
   (C)   All new interactive water features may be constructed in residential
real estate development and child care facilities provided that they utilize a
pass through system that does not recirculate expended water. A variance to
this requirement may be granted by the regulatory authority to facilities with
on-site staff primarily responsible for pool and spa operations that can meet
the testing requirements of this subchapter.
   (D)   No work shall begin until the regulatory authority has received the
engineer’s certificate of preconstruction, conducted a plan review, and has
confirmed with the appropriate city departments that a building permit may be
issued. Work shall commence and conclude within the time allowed by such
permits. Deviations from approved plans shall not be permitted. If work has not
commenced within 180 days from the written date approved by the city, the
regulatory authority may rescind the permit.
   (E)   Approval. The regulatory authority shall approve plans and
specifications that meet the requirements of these rules. No public pool, spa,
or interactive water feature shall be constructed or extensively remodeled
except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the regulatory
authority.
   (F)   Post construction, a licensed professional engineer shall inspect the
completed new or renovated pool, spa and/or interactive water feature
construction and certify by original signature and engineer’s seal that the
structure has been installed or remodeled in accordance with Tex. Admin. Code
Title 25, Ch. 265, Subch. L, “Public Swimming Pools and Spas,” as amended.
(‘78 Code, § 9-92) (Ord. 879, passed 10-22-90; Am. Ord. OR-1930-14, passed 11-
24-14; Am. Ord. OR-2230-21, passed 12-13-21; Am. Ord. OR-2252-22, passed 5-9-
22; Am. Ord. OR-2347-24, passed 2-26-24; Am. Ord. OR-2391-24, passed 10-28-24;
Am. Ord. OR-2427-25, passed 11-10-25) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.45 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Preoperational inspections. The regulatory authority shall inspect a
newly constructed or remodeled public pool, spa. or interactive water feature
prior to operation to determine compliance with approved plans and
specifications and with the requirements of this subchapter. Requested
inspections must be made a minimum of three working days prior to the desired
opening date.
   (B)   Inspections. The regulatory authority shall inspect all public pools,
spas, or interactive water features at least once per year. The owner or
operator shall complete a permit application providing the pool, spa, or
interactive water feature owner’s name and address and, if different, the pool
or spa operator’s name and address.
   (C)   Inspection fees. A required fee, as established in the Master Fee
Schedule adopted by City Council, as amended from time to time, shall be paid
for preoperational inspections and, thereafter, on an annual basis. Fees shall
be paid to the city’s Mansfield Regulatory Compliance Department, 1200 E. Broad
Street, Mansfield, Texas 76063. Inspection fees shall be based on the number of
public pools and/or spas located at a single address.
   (D)   (1)   If a facility is closed for noncompliance of this subchapter
more than once during a pool season, or remains closed for a period longer than
one month due to noncompliance, a reinspection, along with the payment of the
applicable fee established in the Master Fee Schedule adopted by City Council,
as amended from time to time, shall be assessed prior to the reopening the
facility.
      (2)   Maintaining the facility in noncompliance shall be considered a
violation under this subchapter and the regulatory authority shall have the
authority to issue citations for violations of this subchapter.
(Ord. OR-1930-14, passed 11-24-14; Am. Ord. OR-2230-21, passed 12-13-21; Am.
Ord. OR-2252-22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. OR-2347-24, passed 2-26-24; Am. Ord.
OR-2391-24, passed 10-28-24)
§ 92.46 RESERVED.
§ 92.47 POOL/SPA/INTERACTIVE WATER FEATURE CLOSURES AND RECORDS.
   (A)   A public pool, spa, or interactive water feature shall be closed if
any of the following conditions occur:
      (1)   Disinfectant level below the minimums set by the Texas Department
of State Health Services;
      (2)   pH below 7.0 or a pH above 7.8;
      (3)   Inability to see bottom drain (poor visibility);
      (4)   Chlorine levels above 8.0 ppm;
      (5)   Gates or fencing of the enclosure not in good repair;
      (6)   Submerged suction outlet fittings (drain covers) that are missing,
broken, cracked, unsecured, or expired;
      (7)   Fecal or vomit accident;
      (8)   Broken glass or sharp objects in aquatic venue or on deck area;
      (9)   Absence of all required lifesaving equipment on deck or the absence
of safety equipment required;
      (10)   Cyanuric acid (CYA) levels are equal to or greater than 300 ppm;
         (a)   Whenever CYA levels are equal to or greater than 100 ppm action
shall be taken as set by the Texas Department of State Health Services. Failure
to conduct the required action(s) shall result in closure;
      (11)   Pool lights that are dislodged or leaking;
      (12)   Pool lights that are inoperable when needed;
      (13)   Unprotected overhead electrical wires within 20 feet (6.1 m)
horizontally of the aquatic venue;
      (14)   Non-GFCI protected electrical receptacles within 20 feet (6.1 m)
of the inside wall of the aquatic venue;
      (15)   Failure to maintain an emergency lighting source;
      (16)   Bonding of pool equipment, metallic fixtures and fittings, or
pool/spa water if known to be compromised;
      (17)   The absence of properly operated filtration, circulation, or
sanitation systems; or
      (18)   An incident or condition that presents an immediate and obvious
risk to the public or staff’ health and safety, or any item determined to be a
public health hazard by the regulatory authority.
   (B)   Upon the occurrence of any of the aforementioned conditions, the
regulatory authority will immediately post a closed sign and the pool, spa or
interactive water feature access gate shall be locked until all violations have
been corrected.
   (C)   For visible or reported fecal, vomit or blood accident in the
facility, the most current CDC guidelines “Fecal Incident Response
Recommendations for Aquatic Staff” shall be followed.
   (D)   Extended closures. Owners of facilities that have been closed to the
public for more than one year shall reapply for a permit to operate before
reopening the facility or venue.
   (E)   Daily records for each permitted public pool, spa, or interactive
water feature shall be kept on premises, be available upon request by the
regulatory authority, and shall include information pertaining to:
      (1)   Disinfectant - three times per day;
      (2)   pH - three times per day;
      (3)   Alkalinity - one time per week;
      (4)   Chemicals added - as noted by name, amount and date; and
      (5)   Other information needed to ensure the facility’s proper operation.
   (F)   Pools and spas that do not have on-site staff primarily responsible
for pool and spa operations must be tested for disinfectant levels and pH a
minimum of one time a day and the results must be recorded in the pool or spa
log kept on premises and be made available upon request by the regulatory
authority.
   (G)   Facilities must maintain and provide the regulatory authority, a
certification letter of a complete Electrical and Annual Ground Fault Circuit
Interrupter (GFCI) Inspection Report conducted within the previous 12-month
period on the pool spa, or interactive water feature electrical components by a
registered licensed electrician. The electrician’s report must certify that the
public swimming pool spa, or interactive water feature meets all electrical
requirements of this subchapter. If a valid record of the completed GFCI
Inspection Report is not provided during an inspection this shall result in
immediate closure of the facility and issuance of a citation. Any items noted
for correction by the electrician in the certified report must be repaired
prior to opening a swimming pool or spa for the season.
   (H)   Water chemistry test methods shall be capable of measuring chemical
ranges as set forth in Tex. Admin. Code Title 25, Ch. 265 without dilution of
pool, spa, or interactive water feature.
   (I)   Pool water must be maintained with sufficient clarity to permit a
distinct view of the main drain from outside the pool, regardless of whether
the pool is operational.
   (J)   A replacement drain cover with fasteners meeting the manufacturer’s
specifications must be kept on site. The replacement drain cover shall be
identical to the drain cover(s) in use. The installation date of the drain
cover(s) in use must be logged and available upon request by the regulatory
authority. A Virginia Graeme Baker Pool and Spa Act certificate with expiration
date and date of installation of drain cover(s) shall also be kept on file.
(Ord. OR-1930-14, passed 11-24-14; Am. Ord. OR-2252-22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord.
OR-2347-24, passed 2-26-24)
§ 92.48 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Notice of suspension. The regulatory authority may temporarily suspend
the permit of a public pool, spa, or interactive water feature for
noncompliance with state pool, spa, or interactive water feature standards, by
issuing a written notice for suspension. When a permit is suspended, pool, spa,
or interactive water feature operations shall immediately cease. The regulatory
authority will immediately post a closed sign and the pool, spa, or interactive
water feature access gate shall be locked until any and all violations have
been corrected.
   (B)   Reinstatement of permit after suspension. Whenever a notice of
suspension is issued by the regulatory authority, the holder of the permit or
the person in charge will be given an opportunity to correct the violation(s)
prior to final revocation of the permit. The regulatory authority may end the
suspension any time if the reasons for suspension no longer exist.
   (C)   Revocation of permit. The regulatory authority may, after providing
notice of pending revocation and an opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit
for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or
for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its
duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder
of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the
permit is subject to revocation and that the permit shall be revoked at the end
of the ten days following service of such notice. Unless a written request for
a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit
within such ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final.
   (D)   Service of notices. A notice provided for in these rules is properly
served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in charge
of pool and/or spa and/or interactive water feature operations, or when it is
sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address
listed on the permit application. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the
records of the regulatory authority.
   (E)   Hearings. The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted
by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it. Based upon
the recorded evidence of such hearings, the regulatory authority shall make a
final finding, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order
considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be
furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority within five
days of the completion of the hearing.
   (F)   Right of appeal. Any permit holder who wishes to dispute the decision
of a hearing may appeal the decision to the regulatory authority.
   (G)   Application after revocation. Final revocation of a pool and/or spa
and/or interactive water feature permit shall not prevent the holder of the
revoked permit from making written application for a new permit to the
regulatory authority.
   (H)   Closed pool, spa, or interactive water feature. Prior to reopening,
the owner or operator shall provide the application and fee required by §
92.44(A) if a pool or spa:
      (1)   Closes voluntarily at the request of the regulatory authority on
more than two occasions in one calendar year; or
      (2)   Closes on court order on more than two occasions in one calendar
year.
(‘78 Code, § 9-94.1) (Ord. 879, passed 10-22-90; Am. Ord. OR-1930-14, passed
11-24-14; Am. Ord. OR-2347-24, passed 2-26-24)
§ 92.49 PUBLIC POOL/SPA MANAGER CERTIFICATION.
   (A)   Requirement. All facilities permitted under this chapter shall have at
least one registered certified pool operator employed and ready to maintain the
pool, spa, or interactive water feature. All public commercial establishments
with a pool permitted under this chapter shall employ at least one on-site
staff member that is a registered certified pool operator.
   (B)   Registration certificate. A registration certificate for a certified
pool operator shall be issued by the regulatory authority to any person who
submits the required application, pays the required fee as established in the
Master Fee Schedule adopted by City Council, as amended from time to time, and
provides evidence of being a certified pool operator.
   (C)   Termination of certified pool, spa, or interactive water feature
operator. In the event that a registered certified pool operator is terminated
or transferred, a new registered certified pool operator must be designated
within 60 days from the termination or transfer date. This requirement is
applicable even if pool, spa, or interactive water feature maintenance
operations are contracted to an outside company.
   (D)   Term of registration. Unless otherwise revoked by the regulatory
authority, a registration certificate expires on the same expiration date
listed on the approved certification from an accredited program.
   (E)   Placement.
      (1)   Non-transferability of registration. A registration certificate is
not transferable.
      (2)   Posting of certificate. The registration certificate must be posted
in a place readily accessible for inspection by the regulatory authority, such
as a bulletin board, display case, or other prominent location.
   (F)   Class C and D pools and spas.
      (1)   If a registered certified pool operator is not employed on-site at
the public pool and/or spa, the owner or person in control of the pool and/or
spa shall post a sign visible from the deck of the pool and/or spa stating the
telephone number of the registered certified pool operator.
      (2)   The letters in such signs shall be of a minimum height of a one
inch and shall be of a color contrasting to their background.
         (a)   At minimum, such signs shall state: “TO REPORT MECHANICAL,
SAFETY, OR WATER QUALITY PROBLEMS WITH THIS FACILITY, CALL {'{'}INSERT CONTACT
INFORMATION{'}'} DURING HOURS OF OPERATION.”
         (b)   Such signs shall state information regarding where to report
health code violations.
         (c)   Such signs shall be of a weather-resistant construction and
shall be posted where they are readily visible to a reasonably observant
person.
      (3)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of
a swimming pool and/or spa with no registered certified pool operator employed
on-site and fails to post or maintain signs required by this subchapter.
(‘78 Code, § 9-95) (Ord. 879, passed 10-22-90; Am. Ord. OR-1930-14, passed 11-
24-14; Am. Ord. OR-2252-22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. OR-2347-24, passed 2-26-24;
Am. Ord. OR-2391-24, passed 10-28-24) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Upon conviction for violation of any provisions of §§
92.01 through
92.09, relating to the maintaining of a public nuisance as described herein, or
in permitting or allowing the public nuisance to exist, the violators shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $200, or the maximum permitted by state law,
whichever is greater, and each day that the nuisance shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense. (‘78 Code, § 9-47)
   (B)   Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates
any of the provisions of, §§
92.20 through
92.35 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the
Municipal Court of the City of Mansfield, Texas, shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed the sum of $500 for each offense, and each and every day any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   (1)   It is an offense for a person, firm, company, or corporation to
violate, disobey, omit, neglect or refuse to comply with or resist the
enforcement of any of the provisions of §§
92.40 through
92.48. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
      (2)   An offense under division (C)(1) of this section is a Class C
Misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000 for each offense.
(Ord. 257, passed 3-27-73; Ord. 465, passed 5-10-82; Ord. 519, passed 11-28-83;
Ord. 695, passed 9-22-86; Ord. 741, passed 5-19-87; Ord. 773, passed 4-11-88;
Ord. 843, passed 8-28-89; Ord. 879, passed 10-22-90; Ord. 922, passed 1-27-92;
Am. Ord. 1309, passed 4-10-00; Am. Ord. OR-1737-09, passed 2-9-09; Am. Ord. OR-
1773-10, passed 6-28-10; Am. Ord. OR-1910-14, passed 4-29-14; Am. Ord. OR-1930-
14, passed 11-24-14)
CHAPTER 93: JUNKED VEHICLES
Section
   
93.01   Definitions
   
93.02   Applicability of provisions
   
93.03   Declaration of public nuisances
   
93.04   Notice
   
93.05   Hearing
   
93.06   Abatement of nuisance
   
93.07   Junked vehicles not to be reconstructed after removal
   
93.08   Notice to Department of Transportation
   
93.09   Relocation of junked vehicles
   
93.10   Disposal of junked vehicles
   
93.11   Application of chapter
   
93.12   Maintaining a nuisance
   
93.13   Enforcement
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANTIQUE VEHICLE. A passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old.
   JUNKED VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that is self-propelled and:
      (1)   Is:
         (a)   Wrecked, dismantled, or partially dismantled or discarded; or
         (b)   Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
            1.   Seventy-two consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public
property; or
            2.   Thirty consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private
property.
   The term JUNKED VEHICLE shall also include:
      (1)   A motor vehicle, aircraft, or watercraft for which the following
shall apply:
         (a)   A motor vehicle displays an expired license plate or does not
display a license plate;
         (b)   An aircraft that does not have lawfully printed on the aircraft
an unexpired federal aircraft identification number registered under Federal
Aviation Administration aircraft registration regulations in 14 C.F.R. Part 47;
or
         (c)   A watercraft that does not have lawfully on board an unexpired
certificate of number and is not a watercraft described by Tex. Parks &
Wildlife Code § 31.055.
   MOTOR VEHICLE COLLECTOR. A person who owns one or more antique or special
interest vehicles and acquires, collects or disposes of an antique or special
interest vehicle, or part of an antique or special interest vehicle, for
personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for
historic interest.
   SPECIAL INTEREST VEHICLE. A motor vehicle of any age that has not been
changed from original manufacturer’s specifications and, because of its
historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist.
(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01; Am. Ord. OR-2058-17,
passed 9-7-17; Am. Ord. OR-2363-24, passed 5-13-24)
Cross reference:
   Nuisance definitions, see §
92.01
§ 93.02 APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part
that meets the following conditions:
   (A)   Is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it
is not visible from the street or other public or private property.
   (B)   Stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection
with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an
antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the
collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if
any, are as follows:
      (1)   Maintained in an orderly manner.
      (2)   Not a health hazard.
      (3)   Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including
a fence, rapidly growing trees or shrubbery.
(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98)
§ 93.03 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible from
a public place or public right-of-way, which meets the following conditions is
a public nuisance:
   (A)   Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public.
   (B)   Tends to reduce the value of private property.
   (C)   Invites vandalism.
   (D)   Creates fire hazards.
   (E)   Constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and
safety of minors.
   (F)   Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing
development of the city.
(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)
§ 93.04 NOTICE.
   (A)   Prior to any official action being taken to abate and remove a junked
vehicle constituting a public nuisance from private property, public property
or public right-of-way, not less than ten days notice shall be given, except as
hereinafter provided, to the following parties:
      (1)   The last known registered owner of the junked vehicle as shown on
the certificate of title.
      (2)   Any lienholder of record.
      (3)   The owner or occupant of the property upon which the junked vehicle
is located or the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public
right-of-way on which the junked vehicle is located.
   (B)   The notice shall be mailed, by certified mail with five-day return
requested, and if the vehicle is reasonably accessible, also by posting a copy
of such notice to the front windshield, and shall state the following:
      (1)   The nature of the public nuisance.
      (2)   That it must be removed and abated not later than the tenth day
after the date on which the notice was mailed.
      (3)   That any request for a hearing must be made in writing before the
ten day period expires.
      (4)   That failure to abate the nuisance, request a hearing or attend the
hearing, if requested, constitutes a waiver by the owner and lienholders of all
right, title and interest in the vehicle and their consent to disposal for the
junked vehicle under the terms of the Texas Transportation Code concerning the
disposal of junked vehicles.
   (C)   If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the
junked vehicle is unknown, notice may be placed on the junked vehicle, or, if
the owner is located, hand delivered.
   (D)   If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States Post
Office, the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is
considered as delivered, however, official action to abate the nuisance shall
be continued to a date not earlier than 11 days after the date of the return of
the notice.
(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)
Cross reference:
   Fire Marshal, see §§
33.15 et seq.
§ 93.05 HEARING.
   (A)   The owner of the vehicle or occupant of the premises may, within the
ten-day period after the service of notice required by §
93.04(B) to abate the nuisance, request the clerk of the municipal court of the
city, either in person or in writing and without the requirement of bond, to
set a date and time to appear before the judge of the municipal court for a
public hearing to determine whether the person is in violation of this
division. If a hearing is requested within ten days after service of notice to
abate the nuisance, the junked vehicle shall not be abated by the city until
ordered to do so by the judge of the municipal court.
   (B)   At the public hearing, the hearing officer shall hear and consider all
relevant evidence, objections or protests and shall receive testimony from
owners, witnesses, city employees and interested persons relative to such
alleged public nuisance. The hearing may be continued from time to time.
   (C)   At the hearing the junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless
demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable.
   (D)   Following the public hearing, the hearing officer shall consider all
evidence and determine whether the vehicle, or any part thereof, constitutes a
public nuisance as alleged. If the hearing officer finds that a public nuisance
does exist and that there is sufficient cause to abate the nuisance, and that
notice requirements provided in this division have been met, the hearing
officer shall make a written order setting forth his findings and ordering that
the nuisance be abated.
   (E)   If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, the
order requiring removal of the nuisance must include the vehicle's:
      (1)   Description;
      (2)   Vehicle identification number;
      (3)   License plate number; and
      (4)   A statement that the vehicle will be disposed of in accordance with
the Texas Transportation Code.
(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)
§ 93.06 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   If no hearing is requested prior to the expiration of ten days after the
notice required by §
93.04(B) was served or in the event the hearing officer orders abatement of the
nuisance, the city or any duly authorized person may abate such public nuisance
by removal and disposal of the junked vehicle after the issuance of an order
meeting the requirements of §
93.05(E).
(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)
§ 93.07 JUNKED VEHICLES NOT TO BE RECONSTRUCTED AFTER REMOVAL.
   After any junked vehicle has been removed under the authority of this
chapter, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable again.
(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.08 NOTICE TO DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION.
   No later than the fifth day after the date of removal of a junked vehicle
pursuant to this chapter, notice must be given to the State Department of
Transportation. The notice must identify the vehicle.
(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)
§ 93.09 RELOCATION OF JUNKED VEHICLES.
   After the city has sent notice in accordance with §
93.04, the relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another
location in the city has no effect on the proceeding if the junked vehicle
constitutes a public nuisance at the new location.
(Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)
§ 93.10 DISPOSAL OF JUNKED VEHICLES.
   Any junked vehicles taken into custody by the city or any duly authorized
person pursuant to a provision of this chapter shall be disposed of in
accordance with applicable provisions of the Texas Transportation Code, Ch.
683.
(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)
§ 93.11 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part
that is:
   (A)   Completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is
not visible from the street or other public or private property; or
   (B)   Stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection
with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an
antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the
collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if
any, are:
      (1)   Maintained in an orderly manner;
      (2)   Not a health hazard; and
      (3)   Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including
a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery.
(Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)
§ 93.12 MAINTAINING A NUISANCE.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance
described by §
93.03.
   (B)   An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable by the
provisions of §
93.99.
(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.13 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Removal with permission of owner or occupant. If, within ten days
after receipt of notice from the Fire Marshal or his designated representative
to abate the nuisance as herein provided, the owner or occupant of the premises
shall give his written permission to the Fire Marshal or his designated
representative for removal of the junked motor vehicle from the premises, the
giving of such permission shall be considered compliance with provisions of
this chapter.
   (B)   Right of removal from streets preserved. Nothing in this chapter shall
affect ordinances that permit immediate removal of a vehicle left on public
property which is abandoned or which constitutes an obstruction to traffic.
(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be fined not more than $200 for each offense. Each day
that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1187, passed 1-26-98; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 10-8-01)
CHAPTER 94: FOOD ESTABLISHMENT REGULATIONS
Section
   
94.01   Adoption of state rules on food service sanitation
   
94.02   Definitions
   
94.03   Regulations, permits, and preoperational inspections
   
94.04   Inspections and posting of scores
   
94.05   Competency of inspectors
   
94.06   Certified food protection manager and food handler requirements
   
94.07   Employee health
   
94.08   Time as a public health control
   
94.09   Hair restraints
   
94.10   Physical facilities
   
94.11   Outdoor areas; surface characteristics
   
94.12   Suspension of a food establishment permit
   
94.13   Revocation of a food establishment permit
   
94.14   Examination and condemnation of food
   
94.15   Appeal
   
94.16   Fee schedule
   
94.17   Mobile food establishments
   
94.18   Types of mobile food vendors
   
94.19   Seasonal food establishments
   
94.20   Farmers' markets
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 ADOPTION OF STATE RULES ON FOOD SERVICE SANITATION.
   The City of Mansfield hereby adopts by reference the provisions of the
current Texas Food Establishment Rules (TFER) set forth in Tex. Admin. Code
Title 25, Chapter 228, and the most recently adopted U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) Food Code, as may be amended, which establish regulations
regarding food, food establishments, mobile food units, food trucks, and
temporary food establishments, save and except the deletions and additions set
forth below. The TFER and FDA Food Code are made part of this chapter as if
fully set forth herein. Copies of the TFER and FDA Food Code are on file in the
office of the City Secretary, being marked and designated as the TFER,
published by the Texas Department of State Health Services and the FDA Food
Code, including any updated supplements. In the case that there is a conflict
between TFER and the FDA Food Code, the more restrictive regulation shall
apply, as may be allowed by law.
(Ord. OR-2235-21, passed 12-13-21; Am. Ord. OR-2236-22, passed 1-10-22; Am.
Ord. OR-2249-22, passed 4-25-22; Am. Ord. OR-2428-25, passed 11-10-25)
§ 94.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED. Acceptable to the regulatory authority, as hereinafter defined,
based on a determination of conformity with principles, practices, and
generally recognized standards that protect public health.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE. The city’s Manager of Regulatory Compliance
Department, or his or her authorized designee.
   CENTRAL PREPARATION FACILITY. A facility used in conjunction with a mobile
food vendor in which:
      (1)   Food is prepared, stored, and/or wrapped;
      (2)   Fresh water and ice are supplied;
      (3)   The mobile food vendor’s waste water is emptied into a proper waste
disposal system; and/or
      (4)   The mobile food vendor is cleaned, including washing, rinsing, and
sanitizing of those food contact surfaces or items not capable of being
immersed in a utensil-washing sink located in the mobile food vendor.
   CERTIFIED FOOD PROTECTION MANAGER. An individual that has obtained
certification by successfully completing and passing a Texas Department of
State Health Services (DSHS) approved certified food manager training program.
   COMPLIANCE PLAN. A plan under which a food establishment is placed on should
an inspection result in a score of 79 or below. Based on the inspection score,
the food establishment shall be subject to periodic reinspection, reinspection
fees, and must achieve minimum score requirements to be removed from the plan.
Upon removal from the plan the food establishment shall be subject to routine
inspections based on their priority rating.
   CONCESSION STAND. A food establishment operated on a seasonal basis for the
purpose of providing food at sporting events associated with an independent
school district, city, privately owned school, university, or community
college.
   CORE ITEM. A provision of Tex. Admin. Code Ch. 15 or this chapter that is
not designated as a priority item or a priority foundation item and includes an
item that usually relates to general sanitation, operation controls, sanitation
operating procedures, facilities or structures, equipment design, or general
maintenance.
   COTTAGE FOOD. Foods produced by a cottage food production operation as
defined by Tex. Admin. Code Title 25, § 229.661(b)(3).
   COTTAGE FOOD PRODUCTION OPERATION. An individual operating out of the
individual’s residence in which they produce cottage food.
   FARMERS’ MARKET. An area at which two or more vendors offer produce and
other agricultural products for retail sale, sample, or consumption. It shall
not include stands that only sell whole, uncut produce.
   FARMERS’ MARKET VENDOR. Any person who offers or sells produce or other
agricultural products at a farmers’ market.
   FOOD. A raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage, or
ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human
consumption, to also specifically include chewing gum.
   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. An operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves,
vends, or otherwise provides food for human consumption.
   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT—CONVENIENCE. A retail food establishment that sells a
limited selection of foods, not to include fresh produce, fresh meats, or fresh
seafood, exclusively for off-premise consumption. Any food establishment with a
seating area accessible to the general public that contains at least one table
and/or one chair is presumed to prepare foods for on-premise consumption.
   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT—GROCERY. Any retail food establishment that sells fresh
produce, fresh meats, or fresh seafood for either on-premise or off-premise
consumption.
   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT—RESTAURANT. A retail food establishment that prepares
and/or sells food for either on-premise or off-premise consumption.
   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT—TO-GO. A retail food establishment that prepares and/or
sells food exclusively for off-premise consumption. Any food establishment with
a seating area accessible to the general public that contains at least one
table and/or one chair is presumed to prepare foods for on-premise consumption.
   FOOD HANDLER. An individual working with unpackaged food, food equipment or
utensils, or food contact surfaces.
   IMMINENT HEALTH HAZARD. A significant threat or danger to health due to a
practice, circumstance, or event which creates a situation that would likely
lead to injury or a foodborne illness, as determined by the regulatory
authority, as hereinafter defined. These include but are not limited to lack of
hot water, no electrical power, sewage back up, no water service, rodent or
insect infestation as determined by the regulatory authority, or a food
establishment receiving a score of 69 or below during an inspection.
   INSPECTOR. A person conducting inspections of food establishments as a
representative of the regulatory authority, as defined herein.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. A vehicle mounted, self-contained food establishment,
designed to be readily moveable and used to store, prepare, display, serve or
sell food. MOBILE FOOD VENDORS must completely maintain their mobility at all
times. Shall also refer to “food trucks, hot trucks, cold trucks, and ice cream
trucks.”
   NONCOMMERCIAL FOOD SERVICE EQUIPMENT. Equipment that is not designed
specifically for food service and/or is labeled “for household use only.”
   NSF-APPROVED. An independent, third-party organization, such as the National
Sanitation Foundation, has determined that the equipment or product complies
with the relevant standards and/or protocol set by said organization.
   PERSON IN CHARGE (PIC). The person present at a food establishment at the
time of the inspection who is responsible for the food establishment’s
operations.
   PRIORITY FOUNDATION ITEM. Application of a provision of Tex. Admin. Code
Title 25, Ch. 228 or this chapter that supports, facilitates, or enables one or
more priority items. This term shall include an item that requires the
purposeful incorporation of specific actions, equipment or procedures by
industry management to attain control of risk factors that contribute to
foodborne illness or injury.
   PRIORITY ITEM. Application of a provision of Tex. Admin. Code Title 25, Ch.
228 or this chapter that contributes directly to the elimination, prevention,
or reduction of hazards associated with foodborne illness or injury to an
acceptable level. This term shall include items with a quantifiable measurement
to show control of hazards, including but not limited to cooking, reheating,
cooling, and handwashing.
   REGULATORY AUTHORITY. The city’s Department of Regulatory Compliance or its
authorized designee.
   SEASONAL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. A food service establishment that operates at a
fixed location for a period greater than 14 consecutive days, but not less than
365 days, and is restricted to limited food preparation, unless approved by the
regulatory authority.
   TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. A food establishment operated for a temporary
event not to exceed 14 consecutive days.
   TIME AS A PUBLIC HEALTH CONTROL. Using time only to monitor food instead of
temperature.
   TIME/TEMPERATURE CONTROLLED FOR SAFETY FOOD (TCS FOOD). A food that requires
time/temperature control for safety to limit pathogenic microorganism growth or
toxin formation.
(Ord. OR-2235-21, passed 12-13-21; Am. Ord. OR-2236-22, passed 1-10-22; Am.
Ord. OR-2249-22, passed 4-25-22; Am. Ord. OR-2348-24, passed 2-26-24)
§ 94.03 REGULATIONS, PERMITS, AND PREOPERATIONAL INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment
within the city limits without having been issued a valid food establishment
permit, the fee for which is based on the type of food establishment being
operated, as established in the Master Fee Schedule adopted by City Council, as
amended from time to time. Only a person who complies with the requirements in
this chapter shall be entitled to receive or retain a permit, and
notwithstanding the fact that all inspections necessary for obtaining a food
establishment permit have been completed, such permit shall not be issued until
after the building or suite in which the establishment is to be located has
been issued a certificate of occupancy by the city. Permits are not
transferable from one person, place or entity to another person, place, or
entity. A valid permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place of every food
establishment visible to the public. Permits shall remain in effect until the
last day of the month of issuance unless sooner revoked for cause, or as
otherwise provided herein.
   (B)   A temporary food establishment may apply for a temporary food
establishment permit, which shall be in effect for a period of time not to
exceed 14 consecutive days, in conjunction with an approved special event.
   (C)   Mobile food vendors shall be considered food establishments and shall
comply with all pertinent regulations contained herein, including obtaining an
annual mobile food vendor permit. A mobile food vendor shall obtain either a
valid city or Tarrant County mobile food vendor permit to operate within the
boundary of the city limits. Mobile food vendors shall operate from a central
preparation facility or other permitted food establishment and shall report to
such location daily for supplies and for cleaning and servicing operations. Use
of a private residence as a central preparation facility is prohibited. Mobile
food vendor applications must provide a valid driver’s license, proof of
insurance for the mobile food unit, notarized central preparation facility
letter, and the latest central preparation facility inspection report from the
regulatory authority. Mobile food vendors must be inspected by the Fire Marshal
or their designee before selling food at any event or any location.
   (D)   A temporary food establishment operated by or solely for the benefit
of a nonprofit organization is exempt from the permit fee requirement. However,
such food establishment is not exempt from the remaining permit requirements of
this chapter, or from compliance with the rules.
   (E)   A farmers’ market permit shall be issued upon receipt and review of
such an application to determine compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, and with required fees. When review of such an application reveals
that the applicable requirements of this chapter have been met, a permit shall
be issued to the applicant by the regulatory authority. Any person desiring to
operate a food establishment shall make application for a permit through the
city’s Regulatory Compliance Department. The application shall include the name
and address of each applicant and the location and type of food establishment.
An application for a temporary food establishment shall include the inclusive
dates of the proposed temporary food establishment and the location of the
event. Applications for a temporary food establishment shall be submitted no
later than seven days prior to the event. If applications are accepted after
seven days prior to the event, at the regulatory authority’s sole discretion,
they may be subject to additional fees. The application shall be accompanied by
a nonrefundable permit fee, as established in the Master Fee Schedule adopted
by City Council, as amended from time to time, on file and available for
inspection in the office of the City Secretary.
   (F)   The Mansfield Independent School District shall be exempt from the
permit fee.
   (G)   Every permit holder or PIC shall at all times have available on the
premises for inspection the certified food manager certificate, posted in a
conspicuous place, and food handler certificates for all employees of the food
establishment.
   (H)   A food establishment permit that has lapsed for non-payment of the
annual food establishment permit fee will be reinstated upon payment of a
reinstatement fee; excluding permits lapsed for more than three months, which
may not be reinstated without the appropriate plan review application, plan
review fee, and food establishment permit fee.
   (I)   Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled,
and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment,
or a change of ownership occurs, properly prepared plans and specifications for
such construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the
regulatory authority for review and approval before construction, remodeling or
conversion is commenced. The plans and specifications shall include a proposed
menu, proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans, and
construction materials of work areas, finish schedules and the type and model
of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. No food establishment shall be
constructed, extensively remodeled, or converted except in accordance with said
approved plans and specifications. Plans shall be submitted to the Building
Safety Department using the city’s self-service portal. Deviation from the
approved plans and specifications shall result in a food establishment permit
denial, suspension, or revocation.
   (J)   If a food establishment is required to install a grease trap or grease
interceptor, the trap or interceptor shall be located outside. A variance to
this requirement may be granted to a food establishment located in the Historic
Downtown District. A licensed professional engineer will be responsible for
determining the size of the grease trap to be installed to service a food
establishment. A copy of the licensed professional engineer’s calculations for
the grease trap shall be provided with the plans. The calculation for
determining the size of the grease trap to be installed shall be in accordance
with the adopted international codes and local and state regulations and be
subject to review and approval by the regulatory authority.
   (K)   Equipment.
      (1)   Equipment labeled “for household use only” shall not be used in a
food service establishment.
      (2)   If a facility is using noncommercial food service equipment on
February 26, 2024, they shall be considered legally nonconforming, until such
time that the establishment or equipment a) is being extensively remodeled, b)
the equipment is being replaced, or c) if the equipment is insufficient to meet
current food temperature or service standards. At such a time as described, the
facility will be required to replace the noncommercial food service equipment
with NSF-approved commercial food service equipment as defined by this chapter.
      (3)   Noncommercial food service equipment shall be documented during
inspections and monitored for conformance with current food temperature or
service standards.
(Ord. OR-2235-21, passed 12-13-21; Am. Ord. OR-2236-22, passed 1-10-22; Am.
Ord. OR-2249-22, passed 4-25-22; Am. Ord. OR-2348-24, passed 2-26-24; Am. Ord.
OR-2390-24, passed 10-28-24)
§ 94.04 INSPECTIONS AND POSTING OF SCORES.
   (A)   The regulatory authority shall inspect the food establishment prior to
the issuance of the food establishment permit to determine compliance with any
approved plans and specifications, compliance with other requirements of this
chapter and whether a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the building
in which the establishment is to be located. Upon making such findings, the
regulatory authority may issue a food establishment permit, subject to annual
renewal, continued compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and the
existence of a valid certificate of occupancy for the building in which the
establishment is located.
   (B)   The regulatory authority shall inspect a food establishment at a
frequency which is determined by a prioritization schedule based upon
assessment of the food establishment’s history of compliance and potential risk
factors of causing foodborne illness according to 25 Tex. Admin. Code §
228.244, as amended, and evaluated by the regulatory authority.
   (C)   The manager or his or her designee shall classify the food
establishments as high, medium, or low priority, according to risk factors
deemed relevant to the operation by 25 Tex. Admin. Code § 228.244, as amended.
High priority and medium priority establishments must be inspected at a minimum
of twice per year. Low priority establishments must be inspected at least once
per year.
   (D)   Inspection frequency of a food establishments may be increased, at the
regulatory authority's discretion, and as often as necessary for the
enforcement of this chapter and for any conditions listed in this chapter such
as:
      (1)   Prior nonconformance with this chapter or with state or federal
regulations, including priority items or priority foundation items, as defined
in 25 Tex. Admin. Code § 228.2;
      (2)   Prior violations of this chapter or with state or federal
requirements, including core items as defined in 25 Tex. Admin. Code § 228.2;
      (3)   Prior complaints investigated and found to be valid by the
regulatory authority;
      (4)   Hazards associated with the particular foods that are prepared,
stored, or served at the food establishment;
      (5)   The type of operations, including the methods and extent of food
storage, preparation, and service;
      (6)   If the primary population served is a highly susceptible
population; and
      (7)   Any other risk factors deemed relevant to the operation by the
regulatory authority.
   (E)   Food establishments shall receive a deduction of three to four points
for each violation of a priority item, deduction of two points for each
violation of a priority foundation item, and deduction of one point for each
violation of a core item, as defined by this chapter, as found by an inspector
during an inspection.
      (1)   Food establishments that score between 70 to 79 points will be
placed on a compliance plan and inspected quarterly until inspections with a
score of 85 points or more is achieved consecutively three times. Failure to
meet a score of 85 points on an inspection during the compliance plan will
extend the compliance plan period until such time the food establishment can
meet this requirement. All compliance plan inspections are subject to a
reinspection fee for each inspection.
      (2)   Food establishments that score 69 points or less shall constitute
an imminent health hazard and the food establishment shall immediately cease
operations and remain closed until the regulatory authority conducts a
reinspection. The inspector who documents the violation shall provide his or
her cell phone number and his or her supervisor’s cell number to coordinate a
reinspection over the weekend, if necessary, but in no event shall a
reinspection occur earlier than 24 hours following the closure, unless
conditions exist that make such re-inspection not feasible. A reinspection
occurring sooner than 24 hours following the closure may occur only at the
discretion of the regulatory authority. Inspections on the weekend for closure
will be considered an emergency inspection. The inspector shall endeavor to
perform a reinspection as soon as possible. It shall be the responsibility of
the permit holder to contact the regulatory authority at the provided phone
numbers and schedule a reinspection and pay the reinspection fee prior to the
reinspection being conducted. The food establishment shall remain closed until
a reinspection of the food establishment results in a score of 80 points or
more.
      (3)   Food establishments that score 69 points or less, upon resuming
operations based on the requirements of division (E)(2) above, shall be placed
on a compliance plan and inspected monthly until the food establishment
receives a score of 80 points or more for three consecutive months. Failure to
meet a score of 80 points on an inspection during the compliance plan will
extend the compliance plan period until such time as the food establishment can
meet this requirement. All compliance plan inspections are subject to a
reinspection fee for each inspection.
      (4)   If, during a routine inspection, immediate correction of a priority
foundation item violation, as defined by this chapter, is not achieved, the
regulatory authority shall verify correction of the violation within 14
calendar days. If said priority foundation item violation is not corrected
during the initial inspection and a reinspection must be performed within the
following 14 calendar days, the permit holder will be subject to a reinspection
fee as established in the Master Fee Schedule adopted by City Council, as
amended from time to time, and shall be assessed prior to the inspection.
      (5)   Failure to pay the required reinspection fees outlined in this
chapter shall result in the immediate suspension of the food establishment’s
permit to operate, and the facility shall immediately cease operations and
remain closed until all required fees are paid and an inspection is conducted
which results in the food establishment meeting the minimum score required by
the compliance plan. Citations may be issued for noncompliance.
      (6)   If a facility is placed on a compliance plan more than two times in
one year, the Director of Regulatory Compliance or their designee shall have a
compliance plan meeting in which the establishment will provide a detailed plan
for achieving compliance. Mandatory training for all employees of the facility
will be conducted with the Department of Regulatory Compliance regarding food
code compliance and an emergency reinspection fee shall be charged per the
Master Fee Schedule adopted by City Council, as amended from time to time.
   (F)   Based upon the scoring process outlined in division (E) above a letter
grade for each food establishment shall be determined by the regulatory
authority. The grade of each food establishment shall be evidenced by the
posting of an inspection card as outlined in the following division (F)(1).
      (1)   Grade cards shall be provided by the regulatory authority and shall
be posted in a conspicuous place, so as to be clearly visible to the general
public and to the patrons entering the food establishment.
         (a)   The grade of each food establishment shall be evidenced by the
posting of an grade card in the form of a matrix barcode (QR code) provided by
the regulatory authority.
         (b)   Grade cards shall be posted in a location as directed and
determined at the discretion of the regulatory authority to ensure proper
notice to the general public and to patrons.
         (c)   The grade card shall be posted in a location which is accessible
to all food establishment patrons to scan with a mobile device. The QR code
will direct patrons to an online posting in which the most recent inspection
score and letter grade for the food establishment will be available and that is
managed by the regulatory authority.
         (d)   In the event that a mobile or other device is unavailable in
order to use the QR code function, food establishments will have readily
available and furnish a copy of their most recent inspection report, upon
request, to the public for viewing.
         (e)   In conjunction with the QR code grade card, a placard provided
by the regulatory authority with a categorized designation will be provided by
the regulatory authority based on the food establishment inspection score.
         (f)   Placards shall be posted in a conspicuous place so as to be
clearly visible to the general public and patrons entering the food
establishment.
      (2)   In the event that a food establishment is operated in the same
building or space as a separately licensed or permitted business, or in the
event that a food establishment shares a common patron entrance with such a
separately licensed or permitted business, or in the event of both, the
regulatory authority shall post the letter grade card in the initial patron
contact area, or in a location determined at the discretion of the regulatory
authority.
      (3)   The grade card shall not be altered, defaced, marred, camouflaged,
hidden or removed. It shall be unlawful to operate a food establishment unless
the letter grade card is in place as set forth in this chapter. Removal or
alteration of the letter grade card is a violation of this chapter and may
result in the suspension or revocation of the food establishment permit.
      (4)   In the event the grade card is lost or stolen, it is the
responsibility of the owner and/or manager to notify the regulatory authority
for a replacement card.
      (5)   In the event the food establishment is closed by the regulatory
authority, the grade card shall be removed from view and replaced with a sign,
provided by the regulatory authority, advising the public of the closure. The
sign must remain visible until such time the regulatory authority allows the
reopening to occur.
   (G)   Denial of access by a food establishment to the regulatory authority
shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the food establishment's permit.
   (H)   Inspectors shall have the authority to issue citations for any
violations of this chapter.
(Ord. OR-2235-21, passed 12-13-21; Am. Ord. OR-2236-22, passed 1-10-22; Am.
Ord. OR-2249-22, passed 4-25-22; Am. Ord. OR-2348-24, passed 2-26-24; Am. Ord.
OR-2390-24, passed 10-28-24)
§ 94.05 COMPETENCY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)    All inspectors shall be a registered professional sanitarian or a
sanitarian-in-training in Texas.
   (B)   Inspectors shall remain proficient and knowledgeable of current
ordinances and professional standards.
   (C)   The Director of the Regulatory Compliance Department shall have the
discretion to make an except to division (A) above to employ an inspector who
demonstrates proficiency in the profession and meets the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) Voluntary National Retail Food Regulatory Program
Standards basic curriculum and field training elements.
(Ord. OR-2235-21, passed 12-13-21; Am. Ord. OR-2236-22, passed 1-10-22; Am.
Ord. OR-2249-22, passed 4-25-22; Am. Ord. OR-2348-24, passed 2-26-24)
§ 94.06 CERTIFIED FOOD PROTECTION MANAGER AND FOOD HANDLER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)    There shall be a certified food protection manger on each shift and
available for food service workers that may have questions about food service
operations at each permitted food establishment. Certification must be obtained
by passing an examination approved by the Texas Department of State Health
Services and the regulatory authority. Temporary food establishments and food
establishments that serve, sell, or distribute only prepackaged, non-time and
temperature controlled for safety foods and beverages are exempt from this
section.
   (B)   A certified food protection manager is required for each section of
each food establishment. The regulatory authority may require additional
certified food protection managers in sufficient number to ensure that all
areas of food preparation and food service are under the direction of such
certified personnel.
   (C)   Upon termination or transfer of a certified food protection manager,
the food establishment shall employ another certified food protection manager
within 30 days of such termination or transfer.
   (D)   All food employees shall be required to successfully complete a food
handler class approved by the Texas Department of State Health Services within
30 days of hire.
   (E)   Temporary food establishments, concession stands, and snow cone stands
must have at least one certified food handler on duty during all hours of
operation. A food handler certificate must be submitted to the regulatory
authority upon submission of the temporary food establishment permit
application.
   (F)   A permitted food establishment that handles only pre-packaged food and
does not prepare or package food is only required to obtain a food handler
certification. One certified food handler per food establishment must be on
duty at all times during business hours, to meet the intent of safe food
practices of this chapter.
   (G)   In the event of a change of ownership of a food establishment, the new
owner/operator of a food establishment shall provide proof to the regulatory
authority that the appropriate number of certified food protection managers
will be on duty within 30 days of the change of ownership.
   (H)   A food establishment shall provide proof of food protection manager
certification to the regulatory authority prior to being issued a food
establishment permit.
   (I)   A food establishment shall, within 30 days of the effective date of
resignation, termination, or permanent transfer of any previously certified
food protection manager, employ another certified food protection manager. The
regulatory authority shall have the discretion to grant an extension of time to
obtain a new certified food protection manager upon a written, printed, or
electronic request.
   (J)   The certificate of each certified food protection manager must be
displayed in a conspicuous place.
(Ord. OR-2235-21, passed 12-13-21; Am. Ord. OR-2236-22, passed 1-10-22; Am.
Ord. OR-2249-22, passed 4-25-22; Am. Ord. OR-2348-24, passed 2-26-24)
§ 94.07 EMPLOYEE HEALTH.
   Responsibility of permit holder, PIC, and food handlers. The permit holder
shall require food handlers to report to the PIC information about their health
and activities as they relate to diseases that are transmittable through food.
A food handler shall report the information in a manner that allows the PIC to
reduce the risk of foodborne disease transmission, such as the date of onset of
symptoms and an illness, or diagnosis of a communicable disease by a medical
professional.
(Ord. OR-2235-21, passed 12-13-21; Ord. OR-2236-22, passed 1-10-22; Ord. OR-
2249-22, passed 4-25-22)
§ 94.08 TIME AS A PUBLIC HEALTH CONTROL.
    A food establishment that uses time as a public health control shall submit
written procedures on a form provided by the regulatory authority before using
such control.
(Ord. OR-2235-21, passed 12-13-21; Ord. OR-2236-22, passed 1-10-22; Ord. OR-
2249-22, passed 4-25-22)
§ 94.09 HAIR RESTRAINTS.
   (A)    Except as provided in division (B) below, all food handlers,
regardless of title, position, or establishment's own policy, shall wear hair
restraints such as hats, visors, hair coverings or nets, beard restraints, and
clothing that covers body hair, that are designed and worn to effectively keep
their hair from contacting exposed food; clean equipment, utensils, and linens;
and unwrapped single-service and single-use articles.
   (B)   This section does not apply to food handlers such as counter staff who
only serve wrapped or packaged foods or beverages, bartenders, hostesses and
wait staff if they present minimal risk of contaminating exposed food, clean
equipment, utensils, linens and unwrapped single-service and single-use
articles.
   (C)   If during the process of conducting an inspection, an inspector
observes a food handler wear a hair restraint in an ineffective manner, the
food employee will be asked to provide an effective means to restrain their
hair from food and the violation will be noted on the inspection.
(Ord. OR-2235-21, passed 12-13-21; Ord. OR-2236-22, passed 1-10-22; Ord. OR-
2249-22, passed 4-25-22)
§ 94.10 PHYSICAL FACILITIES.
   (A)    Floors and floor coverings of all food preparation, food service,
food storage, warewashing areas, walk-in refrigeration units, dressing rooms,
locker rooms, and toilet rooms shall be durable, smooth, nonabsorbent, light
colored, and easy to clean.
   (B)   Terrazzo, ceramic, or quarry tile may be installed as an approved
floor covering. Floors shall be coved at the juncture of the floor and wall,
with a three-eighths-inch minimum radius coving which shall extend up the wall
at least four inches in all areas.
   (C)   Polished/sealed concrete used as flooring shall have a finished
product thickness sufficient for the flooring to be smooth and easily
cleanable. Floors shall be coved at the juncture of the floor and wall with a
three-eighths-inch minimum radius coving which shall extend up the wall at
least four inches in all areas.
   (D)   Epoxy resin and other poured monolithic floors, and other durable
seamless flooring systems shall be installed to a finished product thickness,
sufficient for the flooring to be smooth and easily cleanable. Floors shall be
coved at the juncture of the floor and wall with a three-eighths-inch minimum
radius coving which shall extend up the wall at least four inches in all areas.
   (E)   All food establishments, including food warehouses, with dry storage
areas not exposed to excessive moisture may install sealed concrete, vinyl
composition tile, or an equivalent material as approved by the regulatory
authority. A more moisture-resistant flooring may be required if the dry
storage area is subject to moisture.
   (F)   Prohibited floor covering. The use of cardboard, sawdust, wood
shavings, peanut hulls, or similar materials as a floor covering is prohibited.
   (G)   Floors shall be smooth, durable, and nonabsorbent, and shall be
maintained in a condition that facilitates thorough and rapid cleaning. Floors
shall be free of cracks, chips, holes, and deterioration. The regulatory
authority shall require repair or replacement of any floor which fails to meet
the requirements of this section. Any flooring in an existing food
establishment that prepares food as listed above and needs repairing shall be
repaired or replaced to meet the minimum requirements for flooring for their
food service operations.
   (H)   Utility line installation. Exposed utility service lines and pipes
shall be installed in a way that does not obstruct or prevent cleaning of the
floor. In all new or extensively remodeled establishments, installation of
exposed horizontal utility lines or pipes on the floor is prohibited.
   (I)   Walls and ceilings.
      (1)   Maintenance. Walls and ceilings, including doors, windows,
skylights, and similar closures, shall be clean and maintained in good repair.
      (2)   Construction. The walls, including non-supporting partitions, wall
coverings, and ceilings of walk-in refrigerating units, refrigeration storage
areas, food preparation areas, dry storage areas, food storage areas,
equipment-washing and utensil washing areas, toilet rooms, and vestibules shall
be light colored, smooth, nonabsorbent, and easily cleanable, such as
fiberglass reinforced paneling (FRP), stainless steel ceramic, quarry or
terrazzo tile or equivalent to ceiling height and must be approved by the
regulatory authority.
      (3)   The regulatory authority shall require durable and easily cleanable
FRP, or material of greater quality, in areas exposed to excessive splash in
food establishments not involved in food preparation.
      (4)   Ceilings shall be light in color, smooth, nonabsorbent, durable and
easily cleanable. Ceiling materials may be washable drop-in panels, vinyl-
coated panels, taped and bedded sheetrock with light-colored epoxy or enamel
paint, or an equivalent material as approved by the regulatory authority.
      (5)   Fibrous acoustical drop-in panels shall be prohibited in all food
preparation, tableware and utensil warewashing areas, service areas, dry
storage, toilet rooms, mop sink area, and any other area subject to moisture.
      (6)   Exposed construction. Studs, joists, and rafters shall not be
exposed in those areas listed in food preparation areas. If exposed in other
rooms or areas, they shall be finished to provide an easily cleanable surface.
   (J)   Hand sinks shall be located within 20 unobstructed linear feet of a
food preparation, warewashing, or food dispensing area. A door or doorway is
considered an obstruction and hand sinks must be installed on both sides of a
door or doorway of these areas.
   (K)   This section shall not apply to any existing food establishments in
operation with a valid food establishment permit in existence on the date of
the adoption of this chapter. Food establishments that contain physical
features that are not in compliance with this section and that present clear
threat to public health, safety, or welfare shall be required to bring said
physical feature into conformance with this section. All new or extensively
remodeling food establishments shall comply with the physical facility
standards set forth in this section and all other applicable regulations within
the city’s code of ordinances. EXTENSIVE REMODELING shall mean the repair or
alteration of 50% or more of the existing square footage of an existing
building, a change of occupancy, an addition, or the relocation of an existing
building. This shall include the addition of new facilities requiring a permit
or extensive modification of facility scope or menu to a separate facility
type, use, or permit.
(Ord. OR-2235-21, passed 12-13-21; Am. Ord. OR-2236-22, passed 1-10-22; Am.
Ord. OR-2249-22, passed 4-25-22; Am. Ord. OR-2348-24, passed 2-26-24)
§ 94.11 OUTDOOR AREAS; SURFACE CHARACTERISTICS.
    The outdoor walking and driving areas shall be surfaced with concrete,
asphalt, or other materials that have been effectively treated to minimize
dust, facilitate maintenance, and prevent muddy conditions. These surfaces
shall be leveled to prevent pooling of water, kept free of litter, and
maintained in good repair.
(Ord. OR-2235-21, passed 12-13-21; Ord. OR-2236-22, passed 1-10-22; Ord. OR-
2249-22, passed 4-25-22)
§ 94.12 SUSPENSION OF A FOOD ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT.
   (A)    The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing
suspend a food establishment permit if the holder of such permit does not
comply with the requirements of this chapter, or the operation of the food
establishment does not comply with the requirements set forth herein, or, if
the operation of the food establishment otherwise constitutes an imminent
health hazard. If a food establishment is experiencing an imminent health
hazard according to the regulatory authority, the food establishment may be
closed for operations until the imminent health hazard has been eliminated.
Suspension is effective upon service of the notice in accordance with this §
94.13, herein, as amended. When a permit is suspended, food service operations
shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder thereof
shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within 20 days after receipt by
the regulatory authority of a written request for hearing.
   (B)   Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder thereof or the PIC shall be
notified in writing that an opportunity for a hearing shall be provided if a
written request for hearing is filed with the regulatory authority within ten
days after receipt of notice. If no written request for hearing is filed within
a ten-day period, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may
terminate the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist.
(Ord. OR-2235-21, passed 12-13-21; Ord. OR-2236-22, passed 1-10-22; Ord. OR-
2249-22, passed 4-25-22)
§ 94.13 REVOCATION OF A FOOD ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT.
   (A)    The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for
hearing, revoke a food establishment permit for serious or repeated violations
of any of the requirements of this section or for interference with the
regulatory authority in the performance of its duties.
   (B)   Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify, in
writing, the permit holder or the PIC of the specific reason(s) for which the
food establishment permit is to be revoked and that the permit shall be revoked
at the end of the ten days after service of such notice unless a written
request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period. If no request for
hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit
becomes final.
   (C)   The holder of the revoked permit may make written application for a
new permit.
(Ord. OR-2235-21, passed 12-13-21; Ord. OR-2236-22, passed 1-10-22; Ord. OR-
2249-22, passed 4-25-22)
§ 94.14 EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF FOOD.
   (A)    Any food subject to a hold order shall be tagged, labeled, or
otherwise identified as such by an inspector. Food establishments are
prohibited from using, serving, or moving any food subject to a hold order. An
inspector's hold order shall permit storage of the food under the conditions
specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the
public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and
accomplished.
   (B)   A hold order shall state that a request for a hearing may be filed
within ten days after issuance thereof and that if no hearing is requested the
food shall be destroyed. On the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the
hold order may be vacated, or the owner or PIC of the food may be directed by
written order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance
with the provisions of this section.
(Ord. OR-2235-21, passed 12-13-21; Ord. OR-2236-22, passed 1-10-22; Ord. OR-
2249-22, passed 4-25-22)
§ 94.15 APPEAL.
   (A)    All appeals from final suspension or revocation of a food
establishment permit shall be made in writing to the City Manager. The appeal
shall be filed in writing within ten days of the occurrence of the suspension
or revocation. The City Manager shall consider the appeal within 30 days after
notice of the appeal. The City Manager shall have the power to reverse a
decision of the regulatory authority by making a finding that such a reversal
will not adversely affect the health and/or welfare of the public. A decision
of the City Manager regarding an appeal shall be rendered in writing.
   (B)   All decisions of the City Manager shall be subject to review by the
City Council at one of its regularly scheduled meetings if the appellant files
a further appeal in writing with the City Secretary not more than 30 days after
the City Manager renders a decision reversing or upholding a decision of the
regulatory authority. The decision of the City Manager will be final unless
appealed to the City Council within 30 days, and unless reversed by the City
Council. The City Council’s failure to take action on any such appeal, or
failure to set such an appeal as an agenda item for consideration at a
regularly scheduled meeting, shall constitute approval of the decision by the
City Manager.
(Ord. OR-2235-21, passed 12-13-21; Ord. OR-2236-22, passed 1-10-22; Ord. OR-
2249-22, passed 4-25-22)
§ 94.16 FEE SCHEDULE.
   All fees referenced herein shall be as established from time to time by the
City Council and set forth in the City of Mansfield Master Fee Schedule.
(Ord. OR-2235-21, passed 12-13-21; Ord. OR-2236-22, passed 1-10-22; Ord. OR-
2249-22, passed 4-25-22; Ord. OR-2390-24, passed 10-28-24)
§ 94.17 MOBILE FOOD VENDORS.
   (A)   Permit. A completed permit application form shall include the valid
license plate number of the mobile food vendor and a notarized form with the
name and address of the commissary where products are purchased. A valid
driver's license and proof of insurance will also be required at the time of
application submittal.
   (B)   Permit holder. The permit holder is the person to whom the regulatory
authority issues a permit for a mobile food vendor set forth herein.
   (C)   A mobile food vendor is not permitted on private property except as
provided in this section.
   (D)   A mobile food vendor:
      (1)   Must be permitted by the regulatory authority. A mobile food vendor
shall obtain either a valid city or Tarrant County mobile food vendor permit to
operate within the boundary of the city limits;
      (2)   Must receive a permit from the Fire Department;
      (3)   Shall be permitted to operate only in those zoning districts where
the use is permitted as a matter of right or approved by a specific use permit
in accordance with applicable provisions of the city’s zoning ordinance (
Chapter 155);
      (4)   May not be located within 50 feet of a lot with a building that
contains both a residential and commercial use;
      (5)   May not be operated between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
      (6)   May not be located within 20 feet of a general or limited
restaurant use;
      (7)   May operate as part of a special event permit that has been
approved by the city’s Planning and Zoning Department and/or the city’s Parks
and Recreation Department;
      (8)   May not operate within city parks unless vendors have written
agreement from the city and are part of an approved special event;
      (9)   May not operate on any street, median, or sidewalk of the city or
residential property, except for ice cream trucks; and
      (10)   Mobile food vendors are subject to inspection in the field. The
Regulatory Compliance Department and the Fire Marshal’s office will perform
inspections prior to being approved to operate and during operation at a
special event.
   (E)   The noise level of mechanical equipment or outside sound equipment
used in association with a mobile food vendor may not exceed 70 decibels when
measured at the property line that is across the street from or abutting a
residential use.
   (F)   A drive-in or drive through service is not permitted.
   (G)   Exterior lighting, if provided, shall be directed downward, and must
be hooded or shielded so that the light source is not directly visible.
   (H)   A mobile food vendor is limited to signs attached to the exterior of
the mobile food vendor. The signs must be secured and mounted flat against the
mobile unit and may not project more than six inches from the exterior of the
mobile unit. Signs shall otherwise comply with the provisions of the city’s
zoning ordinance (
Chapter 155).
   (I)   During business hours, the permit holder shall provide a trash
receptacle for use by customers. The permit holder shall always keep the area
around the mobile food vendor clear of litter and debris.
   (J)   A permanent water or wastewater connection is prohibited.
   (K)   Electrical service may be provided only by temporary service or other
connection provided by an electric utility or an onboard generator.
   (L)   Inspection. Each mobile food vendor must be inspected by the
regulatory authority before a permit will be issued. All applicants for a
permit must contact the regulatory authority at least 48 hours prior to
scheduling an inspection appointment. The warmer, refrigeration and freezer
units must be operational, fully stocked and have visible, accurate, and
numerically-scaled thermometers at the time of inspection and at all times
thereafter. Cleaning supplies and sanitizer must always be present in the
vehicle at the time of inspection and thereafter. In addition, mobile food
vendors (e.g., food trucks) are required to register with the Fire Marshal’s
office (no fee). A fire inspection will be scheduled to check Type I hoods,
fire extinguishers for current tags, and a visual inspection of the propane
delivery system. A current certificate from this jurisdiction’s health
authority is required prior to fire inspection. Vehicles not in compliance will
not be permitted to operate in the Mansfield city limits. A citation could be
issued for continued noncompliance.
(Ord. OR-2235-21, passed 12-13-21; Am. Ord. OR-2236-22, passed 1-10-22; Am.
Ord. OR-2249-22, passed 4-25-22; Am. Ord. OR-2348-24, passed 2-26-24)
§ 94.18 TYPES OF MOBILE FOOD VENDORS.
   (A)   Produce vendors. Vends nuts, uncut fruits and vegetables only.
   (B)   Ice cream trucks. Vends pre-wrapped and sealed ice cream, canned soft
drinks, pre-packaged candy, chips and pickles.
   (C)   Mobile cold trucks. Vends pre-packaged, prepared, TCS food and/or
(formally PHF) potentially hazardous and non-TCS food in individual packages
for immediate consumption.
   (D)   Mobile hot trucks. Prepares and vends TCS food and non-TCS foods on
site. On this unit, food is cooked, wrapped, packaged, processed, or portioned
for service, sale or distribution.
   (E)   General requirements. Specific requirements for mobile food vendors
are determined by the type of unit as outlined in this chapter. In addition to
the specific requirements for each type of mobile food vendor, each unit must
satisfy all of the following:
      (1)   Business/firm name and phone number on both sides of the unit in at
least three-inch letters.
      (2)   A copy of the most recent inspection report must be on the unit at
all times.
      (3)   All mobile food establishments must operate from a base of
operation, such as an approved commissary or other fixed food establishments
permitted and inspected by a city.
      (4)   The operator of the permitted mobile food vendor must report daily
to the commissary for supplies, cleaning and servicing of the unit. Mobile food
vendors must be stored at the commissary when not in use.
      (5)   Mobile food vendors are prohibited from remaining at the same
location for a period of ten minutes after the last sale.
      (6)   Time/temperature foods must be hermetically sealed, dated, and
labeled as to type of food and location of preparation. All TCS foods must be
disposed of at the end of each day of operation. No home-prepared foods will be
allowed.
      (7)   If food is purchased at a permitted food establishment, the
establishment must be licensed with the appropriate state agency as a food
manufacturer. These foods must meet the same packaging and labeling
requirements as listed above.
      (8)   All condiments must be dispensed in single-service containers,
packages or in an approved commercially filled dispenser-type container.
      (9)   Single-service cups must be dispensed in a sanitary manner.
      (10)   No direct food handling of any type will be permitted by mobile
cold truck vendors or customers.
      (11)   All cold TCS foods must be kept at an internal temperature of 41
degrees Fahrenheit or below. All hot TCS foods must maintain an internal
temperature of 135 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. Mechanical hot-holding and
cold-holding units must have accurate, numerically-scaled thermometers
conspicuously placed inside the units.
   (F)   Specific requirements.
      (1)   Ice cream trucks.
         (a)   Must be an enclosed or covered truck or van with a smooth,
easily cleanable floor.
         (b)   Must have an enclosed freezer with a visible, accurate, and
numerically-scaled thermometer to store ice cream.
         (c)   All ice cream must be pre-wrapped, sealed, labeled and obtained
from an approved source or commissary.
         (d)   Pre-packaged candy, chips and soft drinks may be sold in single-
service units.
         (e)   Signs in front and rear of the unit bearing the words "Caution -
Watch for Children" must be present in three-inch letters on a contrasting
background.
         (f)   Vehicles must have one revolving amber strobe light that is
visible from a distance of 500 feet in the daylight and shall be placed on top
of the vehicle. The light should be used only when slowing down or stopping in
the right lane with flashing amber lights working.
         (g)   All sales shall be conducted from the curb side of the vehicle.
         (h)   Everything that is necessary for the operation of the truck must
be on the truck.
         (i)   Unit must be maintained in good repair and in a clean condition.
         (j)   No sales shall be conducted before sunrise or after sunset.
         (k)   Ice cream truck vendors, drivers and servers shall be subject to
and comply with the regulations set out in
Chapter 111 “Peddlers and Solicitors” of the City of Mansfield Municipal Zoning
Code of Ordinances. Occupants of the vehicle must display a valid
identification card, issued by the City of Mansfield, visible to the public, at
the times the vehicle is in service to conduct transactions. Ice cream truck
vendors, drivers, and occupants are exempt from §
111.11(C) and (D). In addition, cardholders must comply with the regulations
set forth in the City of Mansfield Municipal Zoning Code of Ordinance.
      (2)   Mobile cold trucks.
         (a)   Must be an enclosed commercial unit operated from a truck with
proper storage and display space.
         (b)   Must provide proper equipment (such as NSF-approved mechanical
holding ovens, NSF-approved surfaces for food contact and cold storage areas)
to keep TCS food at 135 degrees Fahrenheit or above for hot foods or 41 degrees
Fahrenheit or below for cold foods. An accurate, numerically-scaled thermometer
must be displayed inside both hot and cold storage units.
         (c)   Only pre-wrapped, bottled, canned or otherwise packaged food in
individual servings for immediate consumption may be sold.
         (d)   All food must be properly labeled and obtained from an approved
commissary. The label on all foods must declare the common name of the food,
list of ingredients, contents by weight or volume, packaging date and the name
and address of manufacturer or packer.
         (e)   Only non-TCS food beverages dispensed from covered urns or other
protected equipment may be served.
         (f)   If ice is used to keep food cold, it must be drained into a
retention tank to be properly disposed of at the commissary location. No block
ice allowed.
         (g)   Everything that is necessary for the operation of the truck must
be on the truck.
         (h)   All condiments must be dispensed in single-service containers,
packages, or an approved commercially filled dispenser-type container.
         (i)   An accurate, numerically-scaled metal stem thermometer is
required to check food temperatures.
         (j)   Unit must be maintained in good repair and in a clean condition.
         (k)   An approved commissary is required, which is permitted and
inspected by the appropriate regulatory authority, at which those foods to be
sold are obtained and prepared; and also for servicing the unit.
         (l)   A spray bottle of sanitizer (appropriate mixture of approved
sanitizer) must be available. All chemicals, cleaners, and the like, must be
stored away from food and food contact items.
         (m)   Appropriate chemical test kits must be present on the truck.
         (n)   A container of liquid hand sanitizer must be available for the
operator.
      (3)   Mobile hot trucks.
         (a)   Must be an enclosed commercial van designed for the
transportation, storage and preparation of TCS food and non-TCS foods.
         (b)   Must provide proper equipment (such as a stainless steel three-
compartment sink, and stainless-steel hand wash sinks) and must be supplied
with both hot and cold potable water under pressure.
         (c)   Wastewater retention tank is required and must be at least 15%
greater capacity than the potable water supply.
         (d)   Water for hand washing and dish washing must be heated via an
electrical, on demand system to generate water at a minimum temperature.
         (e)   NSF-approved mechanical refrigerators, freezers, stoves, ovens
and hot holding units are required to maintain TCS food at or above 135 degrees
Fahrenheit for hot foods or at or below 41 degrees Fahrenheit for cold foods.
Units used to store TCS foods must be provided with visible, accurate, and
numerically-scaled thermometers.
         (f)   Unit must be provided with adequate ventilation, exhaust fans
and proper lighting and shields.
         (g)   All food must be obtained from an approved source or commissary.
         (h)   Only non-TCS food beverages that are dispensed from covered urns
or other protected equipment may be served.
         (i)   The serving of ice for beverages can be dispensed from an
automatic dispenser or served by the mobile hot truck operator(s) only.
         (j)   Everything that is necessary for the operation of the truck must
be on the truck.
         (k)   An accurate, numerically-scaled metal stem thermometer is
required to check food temperatures.
         (l)   Other items that must be present are liquid hand soap,
disposable paper towels, approved sanitizer, chemical test kit, fire
extinguisher and a first aid kit.
         (m)   Operator must have a valid food protection manager
certification. All other employees must have a valid food handler
certification.
         (n)   Unit must be maintained in good repair and in a clean condition.
      (4)   Limited service pushcarts.
         (a)   An enclosed mobile food vendor capable of being maneuvered by
one person.
         (b)   Pre-packaged frozen desserts must be maintained frozen by means
of dry ice or a mechanical freezer.
         (c)   Everything that is necessary for the operation of the unit must
be located on the unit. No additional ice bins, ice chests, tables, and the
like, are allowed. The unit must be a stand-alone, self-contained unit with a
visible, accurate, and numerically scaled thermometer.
         (d)   Units must be maintained in good repair and in a clean
condition.
         (e)   Further requirements for push carts may be found in the City of
Mansfield Code of Ordinances under §
155.099. In the event of conflict between the provisions of this chapter and
those found in §
155.099, the more restrictive provisions shall prevail.
(Ord. OR-2249-22, passed 4-25-22)
§ 94.19 SEASONAL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   General requirements. The regulatory authority may impose additional
requirements to protect against health hazards related to the conduct of
seasonal food establishments, may prohibit the sale of some or all TCS food,
and when no health hazards will result, may waive or modify requirements of
this section. Seasonal food establishments shall comply with the requirements
of this chapter, including but not limited to, concession stands, snow cone
stands, and farmers' markets.
   (B)   Concession stands. Concession facilities are seasonal food service
establishments generally associated with athletic and recreational facilities.
The degree of regulation of a concession facility shall depend upon the type
and volume of foods conveyed, and the status of the facility.
(Ord. OR-2249-22, passed 4-25-22)
§ 94.20 FARMERS' MARKETS.
   (A)   Farmers' markets. All farmers' markets and each vendor attending a
farmers' market shall comply with the requirements of this chapter, unless
otherwise restricted by applicable state or federal law.
      (1)   Farm stands and farmers selling food from their farm must meet the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   Responsibility; assignment. The farmers' market permit holder shall
be the PIC, or shall designate a PIC, and shall ensure that a PIC is present at
the farmers' market during all hours of operation. The PIC shall provide proof
of successfully passing an ANSI-accredited certified food protection manager’s
course upon request.
      (3)   Farmers' market vendors that offer, sell, or distribute TCS food
shall have a PIC that can provide proof upon request of successfully passing a
Texas Department of State Health Services (DSHS) recognized certified food
handler course. Food vendors that offer, sell, or distribute only prepackaged
non-TCS food and plants, nuts in the shell, or whole, raw fruits and vegetables
that are intended for hulling, peeling, or washing by the consumer before
consumption are exempt from the certified food handler requirement.
      (4)   The PIC of the farmers' market shall maintain, and provide upon
request, a list of all farmers' market vendors. The list shall be maintained
for a least 90 calendar days from the date of the end of the market. This list
shall include:
         (a)   The name, address, and phone number of each vendor;
         (b)   The date(s) the vendor operated at the farmers' market;
         (c)   A list of the food offered by vendor for each date operated at
the farmers' market;
         (d)   A copy of any applicable permit(s) held by the vendor; and
         (e)   The address or location of each food item’s origin, including
where the food was grown, cultivated, or otherwise obtained by the vendor.
   (B)   Food.
      (1)   Preventing contamination.
         (a)   Food display. Except for plants, nuts in the shell, and whole,
raw fruit and vegetables that are intended for hulling, peeling, or washing by
the consumer before consumption, food on display shall be protected from
contamination by use of packaging; counter, service line, or sneeze guards that
comply with National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) or equivalent standards; be
completely enclosed display cases accessible only to farmers' market vendor
staff; or by other means approved by the regulatory authority.
         (b)   A farmers' market shall have written procedures for employees to
follow when responding to vomiting or diarrheal events that involve the
discharge of vomitus or fecal matter onto surfaces at the food establishment.
The procedures shall address the specific actions employees must take to
minimize the spread of contamination and the exposure of employees, consumers,
food, and surfaces to vomitus or fecal matter. This procedure shall be
available to the regulatory authority upon demand. Applicable equipment needed
by the procedure shall be always available on-site.
         (c)   Approved source. Only food from an approved source as defined in
this chapter or food prepared in a cottage food production operation may be
offered at a farmers' market.
         (d)   Prohibited items. Fish, foraged food, game animals, gleaned
food, and non-pasteurized dairy items are prohibited at a farmers' market. Raw
cheeses from approved sources are allowed.
         (e)   Temperature requirements. Food temperatures must be in
compliance with this chapter. Equipment used to hold food shall maintain
required temperatures for the duration of the farmers' market.
            1.   Meats and poultry shall be maintained at or below 41 degrees
Fahrenheit for the duration of the market, and while being transported to the
market.
            2.   Eggs and refrigerated dairy items shall be maintained at or
below 45 degrees Fahrenheit during transport to the market and for the duration
of the market.
         (f)   Sampling. Sampling shall meet the requirements of Tex. Health
and Safety Code § 437.020, as amended.
      (2)   Equipment, utensils, and facilities.
         (a)   Functionality of equipment. Equipment used to keep food frozen
or refrigerated shall comply with this code and shall be able to maintain
required temperatures for the duration of operations.
         (b)   Tables used within the vending area shall be made of non-porous
material and easily cleanable.
      (3)   Equipment, numbers, and capacities. Where required, at least one
hand washing facility, which shall include a container with a spigot that
provides potable, clean, warm water; a wastewater container; soap; disposable
towels; and a waste receptacle shall be located within 25 linear feet of each
vendor approved to conduct sampling operations.
         (a)   A hand wash facility is not required for vendors with only pre-
packaged products and plants, nuts in the shell, and whole, raw fruits and
vegetables that are intended for hulling, peeling, or washing by the consumer
before consumption.
         (b)   Each farmers' market vendor shall provide a refuse receptacle.
Receptacles shall be non-porous and insect and rodent resistant. All refuse
shall be disposed of offsite from the farmers' market to prevent pests and
shall be disposed of no less than once per day.
         (c)   There shall be a sufficient number of receptacles to hold all
the refuse that accumulates. The regulatory authority may require more frequent
collection, more dumpsters, or larger dumpsters to accommodate the refuse that
accumulates at the farmers' market.
      (4)   Physical facilities.
         (a)   Floor construction. Floors and floor coverings of all vending
areas shall be located on a concrete or asphalt surface providing adequate
drainage.
         (b)   Vending areas shall be covered, free of pests, and capable of
providing shelter for vendors and customers.
      (5)   Plan review. Each person desiring to operate at a farmers' market
shall submit the following to the regulatory authority at least five business
days prior to the proposed start date of the farmers' market:
         (a)   A farmers' market permit application;
         (b)   A floor plan or diagram of the farmers' market location and
layout, including the area reserved for vendors;
         (c)   An equipment list;
         (d)   A list of food proposed to be offered or vended;
         (e)   Proof of food origin by providing a copy of a current
manufacturer’s license, providing a copy of a storage license, or providing a
description of the approved source at where food will be obtained;
         (f)   A copy of approved food label(s), where applicable; and
         (g)   A description of solid and liquid waste disposal methods.
   (C)   Farmers' market inspection.
      (1)   All foods must be commercially produced prepackaged items from a
license facility or commissary. Product sampling is prohibited. The does not
apply to food that has been prepared or packaged under conditions meeting the
requirements of this chapter and served within facilities meeting the
requirements of this chapter. This includes all cottage food production
operations.
      (2)   A manufacturing permit from the Texas Department of State Health
Services (DSHS) and copies of product labels shall be provided to the
regulatory authority.
      (3)   Person(s) operating as a farmers' market vendor shall comply with
the Texas Health and Safety Code and the requirements of this section.
      (4)   The regulatory authority may inspect each farmers' market vendor
booth offering food products as is necessary for the enforcement of this
section.
      (5)   The farmers' market manager of a certified farmers' market shall be
responsible for ensuring that all booths are operating with a current and valid
permit and for ensuring that all shared or common facilities and operations
comply with this chapter.
      (6)   In the case of repeated violations of this section, the regulatory
authority may impose restrictions on the food products at a farmers' market
vendor booth.
      (7)   A farmers' market vendor may not set up food sampling operations as
unattended self-service displays for customers.
      (8)   A farmers' market vendor shall correct all violations at the time
of inspection unless an extension is allowed by the regulatory authority. No
extension shall be granted where the violation poses an imminent health hazard
to the public.
      (9)   Farmers' market vendors operating at a certified farmers' market
without a valid permit or with a suspended permit constitutes an offense under
this chapter.
      (10)   The regulatory authority may impose additional requirements to
protect against health hazards related to the conduct of a farmers' market
booth.
      (11)   Cottage food. Cottage food sold at the farmer’s market shall be
labeled and such labels must include name and complete address of cottage food
production operation, major allergens, batch number (if applicable), and the
following statement “This food is made in a home kitchen and is not inspected
by the Texas Department of State Health Services or a local health department.”
(Ord. OR-2249-22, passed 4-25-22)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
    Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof, shall be
fined in an amount not exceeding $2,000. Each continuing day’s violation under
this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed
under this chapter shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the
violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it,
pursuant to local, state and federal law.
(Ord. OR-2235-21, passed 12-13-21; Ord. OR-2236-22, passed 1-10-22; Ord. OR-
2249-22, passed 4-25-22)
CHAPTER 95: LIBRARY
Section
Library Board
   
95.01   Created
   
95.02   Purpose
   
95.03   Composition; appointment; term; filling of vacancies
   
95.04   Powers and duties
Use of Library Materials; Regulations; Enforcement
   
95.15   Fees and charges
   
95.16   Intentional damage to materials
   
95.17   Unlawful retention of materials
   
95.18   Failure to pay fees and charges
   
95.19   Notice
LIBRARY BOARD
§ 95.01 CREATED.
   Pursuant to the City Charter, § 6.08, there is hereby created a board known
as the Mansfield Public Library Advisory Board.
(‘78 Code, § 9.5-11) (Ord. 432, passed 12-8-80; Ord. OR-1818-11, passed 9-26-
11; Ord. OR-2022-16, passed 10-1-16; Ord. OR-2022-16, passed 10-1-16)
§ 95.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Library Advisory Board is to advise city administration
and the City Council on matters related to the development and maintenance of
public library service in the city, and the operation of the Mansfield Public
Library.
(‘78 Code, § 9.5-12) (Ord. 432, passed 12-8-80; Ord. OR-1818-11, passed 9-26-
11; Ord. OR-2022-16, passed 10-1-16)
§ 95.03 COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT; TERM; FILLING OF VACANCIES.
   (A)   The Library Advisory Board will be made up of nine residents of the
city appointed by the City Council.
   (B)   Members of the Library Advisory Board will serve two-year terms, with
appointments staggered so they do not expire at once.
   (C)   Library Advisory Board members may be removed at any time by the City
Council, whether or not their terms have expired.
   (D)   Vacancies on the Library Advisory Board will be filled by the City
Council for the duration of the unexpired term, whether made vacant by removal,
resignation or for any other reason.
(‘78 Code, § 9.5-13) (Ord. 432, passed 12-8-80; Ord. 528, passed 3-26-84; Ord.
1528, passed 4-11-05; Ord. OR-1818-11, passed 9-26-11; Ord. OR-2022-16, passed
10-1-16)
§ 95.04 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Library Advisory Board will:
   (A)   Act as the liaison between the public and the library;
   (B)   Advocate for the continuing development of public library service in
the city;
   (C)   Recommend policies and programming regarding public library service to
city administration and the City Council;
   (D)   Review the annual library budget prior to its submission to the City
Council;
   (E)   Assist in planning public library services and facilities.
(‘78 Code, § 9.5-14) (Ord. 432, passed 12-8-80; Ord. OR-1818-11, passed 9-26-
11; Ord. OR-2022-16, passed 10-1-16)
USE OF LIBRARY MATERIALS; REGULATIONS; ENFORCEMENT
§ 95.15 FEES AND CHARGES.
   Fees and charges as set forth in this section may be charged to a person who
borrows library materials or uses library services. The types and amounts of
fees and charges will be determined by the City Council.
   (A)   Overdue materials. Late fees may be charged on library books,
magazines, audio/visual media and other materials that are retained beyond
their due dates, not to exceed the suggested retail prices of the materials in
question. Such fees are as follows:
      (1)   No charge for late books, DVDs, audio books, and kits.
      (2)   No charge for each late interlibrary loan item.
      (3)   $1.00 a day each for late portable WiFi hotspots.
   (B)   Lost or destroyed materials. Charges for lost or destroyed materials
will be their full suggested retail price, provided that the materials are
commercially available, or the full suggested retail price of suitable
substitutes.
   (C)   Damaged materials. Damaged materials will be repaired and remain in
use if practicable. If materials are judged to be damaged beyond repair and
further use, they will be considered destroyed and the patron may be charged
for them. Patrons must surrender such materials to the library, but may have
them returned to them upon paying for them.
   (D)   Other fees and charges. Other fees and charges are as follows:
      (1)   $.10 a page for black and white printing from a computer.
      (2)   $.25 a page for color printing from a computer.
      (3)   $.10 a page for black and white photocopies.
      (4)   $.25 a page for color photocopies.
      (5)   $1.00 per page to send a fax.
      (6)   $2.00 each to replace a library card.
      (7)   $3.00 each to replace a DVD case.
      (8)   $6.00 each to replace an audio book case.
      (9)   $3.00 each for interlibrary loan items not picked up.
      (10)   $10.00 for kids backpack replacement.
      (11)   $12.00 for memory kit bag replacement.
   (E)   Fees and charges may be adjusted by the City Librarian for cause, on
an individual basis, as necessary.
(‘78 Code, § 9.5-21) (Ord. 1083, passed 7-10-95; Ord. OR-1818-11, passed 9-26-
11; Ord. OR-2022-16, passed 10-1-16; Am. Ord. OR-2379-24, passed 9-9-24; Am.
Ord. OR-2416-25, passed 8-25-25)
§ 95.16 INTENTIONAL DAMAGE TO MATERIALS.
   It will be unlawful to intentionally injure, deface, damage or destroy,
whether by neglect or intent, any materials owned by, or subject to the control
of the Mansfield Public Library. Anyone doing so will be held responsible for
the cost of replacement or repair of said materials. Library card privileges
may be suspended until payment is made.
(‘78 Code, § 9.5-31) (Ord. 1083, passed 7-10-95; Ord. OR-1818-11, passed 9-26-
11; Ord. OR-2022-16, passed 10-1-16) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.17 UNLAWFUL RETENTION OF MATERIALS.
   It will be unlawful for any person who borrows library materials to fail to
return any materials owned by, or subject to the control of the Mansfield
Public Library, within 15 days after the library has given notice to return
them, provided notice is given after expiration of the time for which the
materials were lent under the rules of the library. Failure to return library
materials will result in suspension of library card privileges.
(‘78 Code, § 9.5-32) (Ord. 1083, passed 7-10-95; Ord. OR-1818-11, passed 9-26-
11; Ord. OR-2022-16, passed 10-1-16) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.18 FAILURE TO PAY FEES AND CHARGES.
   If fees and charges owed to the library have not been paid, or arrangements
have not been made with the City Librarian 15 days after the patron has been
notified, the patron’s library card privileges will be suspended. Such notice
shall advise the patron that owing such fees and charges is unlawful and that
his or her library card privileges have been suspended until payment or
arrangements have been made.
(‘78 Code, § 9.5-33) (Ord. 1083, passed 7-10-95; Ord. OR-1818-11, passed 9-26-
11; Ord. OR-2022-16, passed 10-1-16) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.19 NOTICE.
   All notices required to be sent under this chapter, whether by telephone,
text or electronic mail, will be given to the patron at the telephone number or
email address reflected in the most recent record held by the library. The
notice will be deemed given to the patron when delivered by telephone or sent
electronically via text message or email.
(‘78 Code, § 9.5-34) (Ord. 1083, passed 7-10-95; Ord. OR-1818-11, passed 9-26-
11; Ord. OR-2022-16, passed 10-1-16)
CHAPTER 96: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
General Provisions
   
96.01   Definitions
   
96.02   Purpose
   
96.03   Rental application process
   
96.04   Eligibility
   
96.05   Policy
   
96.06   Parks and recreation sponsorship program
Regulations
   
96.20   Limitation of activities by permit
   
96.21   Vandalism - damage or removal of property
   
96.22   Driving of vehicles or riding of animals in parks
   
96.23   Animals and pets
   
96.24   Curfew in parks
   
96.25   Glass containers prohibited
   
96.26   Fishing
   
96.27   Trail use
   
96.28   Splash pads and aquatic facilities
   
96.29   Off-leash dog areas
Administration and Enforcement
   
96.35   Department of Parks and Recreation established; Director
   
96.36   Regulations and acts declared a governmental function
   
96.37   Parks and Recreation Board
Cross-reference:
   For provisions concerning Park Land Dedication and Dedication Fees, see
Ch. 156
Statutory reference:
   General authority as to parks and recreation, see Tex. Local Gov't Code §§
331.001
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 96.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AQUATIC FACILITY. Any structure or area within a park designated by the
Director or designee for aquatic activities, including, but not limited to,
splash pads, swimming pools, wading pools, lap lanes, or family aquatic
centers.
   BICYCLE.  A device that a person may ride and that is propelled by human
power and has two tandem wheels at least one of which is more than 14 inches in
diameter. The term does not include bicycles in the service of the city.
   CITY. The City of Mansfield, Texas.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of Mansfield, Texas.
   DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Has the meaning given that term in the Animal Control
chapter of the City of Mansfield Code of Ordinances.
   DEPARTMENT. The city Department of Parks and Recreation.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Parks and Recreation or his or
her authorized representative.
   FACILITIES.  To include playgrounds, recreation centers, athletic fields,
pavilions, amphitheaters, rest rooms, concession stands, press boxes and any
other building or structure located on a park.
   OFF-LEASH AREA. An enclosed area designated by the Director in which certain
dogs are allowed to run at large without being secured by a leash or other
restraint.
   PARK. Those areas of land that may from time to time be purchased, leased or
otherwise placed under the control of the city and used by the Parks and
Recreation Department for athletic, recreational or open-spaced purposes,
either singly or in cooperation with the Mansfield Park Facilities Development
Corporation or any other agency, corporation or individual. To include all land
which may be selected, ordained or acquired by the city for use as parks,
recreation facilities, parkways, esplanades, median strips or grounds.
   PARK BOARD. The Parks and Recreation Board established pursuant to §
96.37 of this chapter.
   PARKING AREA. Any designated portion of any park or any park road or drive
that is set aside for the parking of vehicles.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person on foot or any person in a mechanically-propelled
wheelchair or other low-powered, mechanically-powered vehicle designed
specifically for use by a physically-disabled person.
   PERMIT. Written permission from the Park Board or Director to carry out a
given activity in a park.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company,
organization, or other legal entity.
   VEHICLE. Includes any wheeled device of conveyance, propelled by motor or
engine, including but not limited to cars, trucks, motorcycles, mini-bikes,
golf carts, all-terrain vehicles, trailers, tractors, trains, and segways. The
term does not include vehicles in the service of the city or motorized
wheelchairs and scooters utilized for assisting disabled persons.
   VESSEL. Includes any device of human conveyance on the water, whether
propelled by motor, wind, or human power. The term includes, but is not limited
to, any boat, yacht, cruiser, canoe, kayak, raft, paddleboat or other water
craft.
(‘78 Code, § 12-1) (Ord. 319, passed 11-22-76; Am. Ord. OR-1877-13, passed 6-
24-13; Am. Ord. OR-2197-20, passed 12-14-20)
§ 96.02 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this policy is to provide for proper utilization and
maintenance of city parks and recreation facilities to ensure that they are
maintained and available for the effective utilization by the citizens and the
various associations which organize activities on their behalf. This policy
identifies that certain organizations coordinate and administer, on a volunteer
basis, activities that otherwise would require the efforts of the Parks and
Recreation Department. Accordingly, the rate for usage of facilities factors
the costs to the organizations for providing the services.
   (B)   For the purposes of this policy the organizations are identified as
associations that are recognized and sponsored by the city as organizations
that support and provide services encouraged by the city to our citizens. These
“sponsored associations” include, but are not limited to the youth and adult
associations recognized by the Parks and Recreation Department such as
Mansfield Youth Baseball Association, Mansfield Girls’ Softball Association,
Mansfield Pee Wee Football Association and Mansfield Soccer Association.
(‘78 Code, § 12-21) (Ord. 958, passed 4-26-93; Am. Ord. OR-1877-13, passed 6-
24-13)
§ 96.03 RENTAL APPLICATION PROCESS.
   (A)   Athletic field rental application process. Athletic fields shall be
reserved by permit. An application to receive a permit may be obtained from the
Parks and Recreation Department.
      (1)   Reservation fees/deposits.
         (a)   Reservations fees for all athletic facilities shall be paid in
advance. Upon receipt of all fees due, a receipt and permit will be issued.
Sponsored associations will abide by seasonal contracts signed by the Parks and
Recreation Director or designee.
         (b)   Fees are set as defined and adopted in the annual budget.
      (2)   Practices and games.
         (a)   Athletic facilities rented for practice or games may be reserved
no earlier than two weeks ahead of date(s) requested. No more than two dates
shall be reserved on one permit per individual. If a practice or game is
canceled due to weather conditions, the Parks and Recreation Department must be
contacted the next business day to reschedule the practice, receive a refund or
credit for a future practice or game.
         (b)   Fees are set as defined and adopted in the annual budget.
      (3)   Tournaments, camps and clinics. 
         (a)   Athletic facilities rented for tournaments, camps and clinics
may not be reserved within two weeks prior to the event date. No refunds will
be given after seven days prior to the event date. If the event is canceled due
to weather conditions, the event will be rescheduled or a refund will be given.
All fees and deposits are to be paid no later than one week prior to the
tournament start date. No refunds on deposits will be made until facilities are
inspected by the Parks Department.
         (b)   Fees are set as defined and adopted in the annual budget.
      (4)   Concession stand. Fees are set as defined and adopted in the annual
budget.
      (5)   Additional services.
         (a)   Additional services which are not normally provided by the city,
such as special sound and lighting equipment, additional stage facilities,
extra electrical and utility services and the like must be furnished solely by
the individual or association who agrees to acquire necessary electrical,
health, sound and other permits as may be required and to comply with all codes
and laws of the city. If additional services are provided by the city, fees may
be applicable.
         (b)   Fees are set as defined and adopted in the annual budget.
      (6)   Limitation on reservations. The Parks and Recreation Department
reserves the right to limit reservations in an effort to allow all associations
or individuals the opportunity to use the facilities.
      (7)   Right to cancel reservations/rental. The Parks and Recreation
Department reserves the right to cancel reservations/rentals without advance
notice if facility(ies) are unsafe or otherwise not usable. For information
regarding closings, call 817-453-1467 after 3:00 p.m.
   (B)   Pavilion and amphitheater rental application process. The pavilion and
amphitheater facilities located in the city owned parks shall be used on a
first come/first serve basis unless reserved through the Parks and Recreation
Department. Should an individual, organization or group want to reserve a
pavilion or amphitheater for a specific time and date, a permit may be obtained
from the Parks and Recreation Department.
      (1)   Reservation fees/deposits. Reservation fees and/or deposits for all
pavilion and amphitheater facilities will be accepted at the time the
reservation is made. Upon receipt of all fees due, a receipt and permit will be
issued. All reservations are subject to approval by the Director of Parks and
Recreation or designee.
      (2)   Fees are set as defined and adopted in the annual budget.
   (C)   Mansfield activities center rental application process. The facilities
located in the Mansfield Activities Center shall be rented on a first come/
first serve basis. A permit may be obtained from the Parks and Recreation
Department.
      (1)   Reservation fees/deposits. Reservation fees and/or deposits for all
Mansfield Activities Center facilities will be accepted at the time the
reservation is made. Upon receipt of all fees due, a receipt and permit will be
issued. All reservations are subject to approval by the Director of Parks and
Recreation or designee.
      (2)   Fees are set as defined and adopted in the annual budget.
(‘78 Code, § 12-22) (Ord. 958, passed 4-26-93; Am. Ord. OR-1877-13, passed 6-
24-13; Am. Ord. OR-2197-20, passed 12-14-20)
§ 96.04 ELIGIBILITY.
   Any individual, group, league or team making a rental application for a park
and recreation facility shall not discriminate against any persons on the
grounds of race, color, national origin, religion or sex while using property
owned by the city.
(‘78 Code, § 12-23) (Ord. 958, passed 4-26-93; Am. Ord. OR-1877-13, passed 6-
24-13) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.05 POLICY.
   (A)   The city and its employees shall assume no responsibility for any
property placed on or in its facilities or grounds. Further, the city and
employees of the city are released and discharged from any and all liability
for loss, injury or damage to persons or property, or damages or injuries done
to the premises that may be sustained by the use or occupancy of the facilities
by any individual or group.
   (B)   Any group using the facilities agrees to leave the premises in as good
or better condition than that which existed prior to their usage or risk losing
related deposit.
   (C)   Any group using the facilities shall agree to abide by and conform to
all rules and regulations which may be adopted from time to time by the City
Council. All groups using the facilities shall comply with all laws - federal,
state and local - including all ordinances of the city and all rules,
regulations and requirements of the Police and Fire Departments. The general
policies and rules governing the use of any and all facilities may be changed
at any time without notice by the city.
(‘78 Code, § 12-24) (Ord. 958, passed 4-26-93; Am. Ord. OR-1877-13, passed 6-
24-13; Am. Ord. OR-2197-20, passed 12-14-20) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross reference:
   General offenses, see
Chapter 130
§ 96.06 PARKS AND RECREATION SPONSORSHIP PROGRAM.
   The Parks and Recreation Department may offer a sponsorship program to help
offset the expense of offering programs, services and special events as
approved by the Mansfield Park Facilities Development Corporation.
Participation in the sponsorship program shall be strictly voluntary with the
amounts and levels of sponsorship approved by the Mansfield Park Facilities
Development Corporation. In return, participants in the sponsorship program
shall receive recognition at Parks and Recreation events and facilities,
advertisements for upcoming events and listed as Title Sponsor depending on the
level of sponsorship.
(Ord. OR-1877-13, passed 6-24-13; Am. Ord. OR-2197-20, passed 12-14-20)
REGULATIONS
§ 96.20 LIMITATION OF ACTIVITIES BY PERMIT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any individual to participate in any activity
in any facility when the activity will create a danger to the public health,
safety or welfare, or may be considered a public nuisance. The Director of
Parks and Recreation may designate particular locations within parks and
playground areas for specific activities and when deemed necessary he/she may
limit the conduct of such activities by issuance of a special permit upon
application, which permit shall set out the particular conditions under which
such activities shall be permitted.
   (B)   Overnight camping shall be prohibited on any park without written
permission by the Director of Parks and Recreation unless otherwise permitted
or authorized by ordinance.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any
foods, drinks, confections, merchandise, and any items or services in any park
within the city until the person has obtained an approved rental permit issued
by the Director of Parks and Recreation or designee permitting the sale of the
items in the park. Open air vending is not allowed in the parks, unless
otherwise permitted or authorized by ordinance.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or erect any structure,
sign, bulletin board, post, pole, or advertising device of any kind whatsoever
in any park, or to attach any bill, poster, sign, wire, rod or cord to any
tree, shrub, fence, railing, post or structure within any park.
   (E)   No solicitation of any kind is allowed in the parks without written
approval of the Parks and Recreation Director.
   (F)   Alcohol shall be prohibited on any park without written permission by
the Director of Parks and Recreation, unless otherwise permitted by ordinance.
   (G)   Admission fees. It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to
charge an admission fee to enter any city park or park facility except by
executed agreement or permit issued by the Director or designee.
   (H)   Swimming. It shall be unlawful for any person to swim, bathe or wade
in any water or waterway in or adjacent to any park, except in such water or
waterway as may be designated in accordance with the terms of this chapter,
park rules and regulations, or as authorized by other regulations or permit
issued by the Director or designee.
   (I)   Boating. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring a vessel into or
operate any vessel upon any park waters, except as authorized by other
regulations or by permit issued by the Director or designee.
   (J)   Fires. It shall be unlawful for any person in a city park to start or
maintain any outdoor fire, except for cooking fires which shall be started and
maintained only in a barbecue grill permanently installed in the park. Personal
barbeque grills, propane grills and deep fryers are allowed only in the parking
lot and must be located at least 15 feet from any structure and/or vehicle. No
person starting or maintaining any fire in a park shall leave the fire
unattended without first completely extinguishing the fire, except as
authorized by the Director or designee.
   (K)   Games. It shall be unlawful for any person in a city park to engage in
the sport of archery; launch, discharge, or cause to be launched or discharged
paint, paintballs, lawn darts or any other projectile; or hit a golf ball;
except in areas designated by the Director for such purposes or as authorized
by permit issued by the Director or designee.
   (L)   Models. It shall be unlawful for any person in a city park to engage
in the use of gas or battery-powered model rockets and aviation devices, motor
vehicles or boats, whether radio controlled or not, except in areas designated
by the Director for such purposes or as authorized by permit issued by the
Director or designee.
   (M)   Hammocks. Hammocks may be used in city parks under the following
conditions:
      (1)   Hammock shall be attached to trees only.
      (2)   Trees cannot be altered in any way to allow hammock.
      (3)   Trees used as an anchor point must be a minimum of 12 inches in
diameter.
      (4)   Adequate protection shall be provided between tree and hammock to
prevent tree damage.
      (5)   Hammock shall not be placed more than four feet above the ground.
      (6)   Hammock shall not interfere with other park patron's normal park
activities.
      (7)   Hammock shall not be left unattended.
      (8)   Hammock shall not be within 30 feet of structures, roads, trails or
playgrounds.
      (9)   Hammock shall not be attached to memorial trees.
      (10)   Use area must have a clear flat natural surface.
   (N)   Merchandising, advertising and signs. It shall be unlawful for any
person in a city park to:
      (1)   Expose or offer for distribution, sale or hire any article, thing
or service, nor station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the
transportation, distribution, sale or display of any article, thing or service.
      (2)   Announce, advertise or call the public's attention in any way to
any article, thing or service for distribution, sale or hire.
      (3)   Announce, advertise, or call the public's attention to an event
unless done pursuant to a permit issued under §
96.03. This section shall apply to all events whether or not a fee is charged,
money is solicited, or money is donated to such event.
      (4)   Paste, glue, tack or otherwise place any sign, placard,
advertisement or inscription on park property or erect or cause to be erected
any sign on any public lands, highways or roads adjacent to a park.
(‘78 Code, § 12-9) (Ord. 319, passed 11-22-76; Am. Ord. OR-1877-13, passed 6-
24-13; Am. Ord. OR-2197-20, passed 12-14-20; Am. Ord. OR-2326-23, passed 10-23-
23) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Code enforcement, see
Chapter 35
   Food establishments and food handlers, see
Chapter 94
   Streets and Sidewalks, see
Chapter 98
   General Offenses, see
Chapter 130
§ 96.21 VANDALISM - DAMAGE OR REMOVAL OF PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, cut, break, deface
or in any way injure the trees, shrubs, plants, grass, turf, fountains, seats,
fences, structures, equipment, improvements, ornaments or monuments or other
property located within or upon any of the parks of the city.
(‘78 Code, § 12-10) (Ord. 131, passed 4-11-61; Ord. 319, passed 11-22-76; Am.
Ord. OR-1877-13, passed 6-24-13) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross reference:
   General Offenses, see
Chapter 130
Statutory reference:
   Criminal mischief, see Tex. Penal Code, § 28.03
§ 96.22 DRIVING OF VEHICLES IN PARKS.
   (A)   The lawful maximum reasonable and prudent speed limit on all trails,
roadways, drives and parking areas within any park in the city shall be 15
miles per hour.
   (B)   Where vehicle parking lots or areas have been set aside in any park in
the city, no vehicle shall be driven over or across the curbs, sidewalks, grass
or lawn within the park, and vehicles shall be parked in the parking lots or
areas as designated and not elsewhere without prior approval of the Parks and
Recreation Director.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or propel any vehicle
over or through any park except along or upon park drives or park boulevards
without prior approval of the Parks and Recreation Director or designee.
   (D)   Unauthorized vehicles. It shall be unlawful to leave a vehicle
unattended in a park outside of park hours without written permission from the
Director or designee.
   (E)   Special provisions. The Director may, in his/her reasonable
discretion, through park rules and regulations, set aside or designate areas,
parks, trails, or roads in a park where operating vehicles or bicycles shall
not be allowed.
(‘78 Code, § 12-11) (Ord. 319, passed 11-22-76; Ord. 794, passed 9-26-88; Am.
Ord. OR-1877-13, passed 6-24-13; Am. Ord. OR-2197-20, passed 12-14-20) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 96.23 ANIMALS AND PETS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to:
      (1)   Capture, attempt to capture, hunt, tease, molest, injure, trap or
administer or set out any trap or harmful substance for any wild or domestic
animal, reptile, bird or fish, or remove or have in his/her possession the
young, eggs or nest of any animal, reptile or bird, unless such person first
obtains a permit from the Director of Parks and Recreation or designee or
engages in such activities in a designated park or a designated area within a
park where such activities have been authorized by the Director of Parks and
Recreation or designee.
      (2)   Ride a horse or other animal, except in areas or on paths or trails
designated by park rules and regulations. This prohibition shall not apply to a
duly authorized mounted patrol officer in the performance of his/her official
duties.
      (3)   Permit animal waste caused by an animal owned or possessed by him
or her to remain on park property, unless properly disposed of in a trash
receptacle.
      (4)   Fail to have in his/her possession materials or implements that,
either alone or in combination with each other, can be used immediately in a
sanitary and lawful manner to remove and dispose of waste the animal owned or
possessed by him/her may deposit on park property.
      (5)   Permit an animal owned or possessed by him/her to enter or remain
on a league athletic playing field/facility enclosed by a fence. A "league
athletic playing field/facility" is designed and maintained for league play of
sports activities approved by the Director or the Park Board, such as football,
soccer, tennis, softball and baseball.
      (6)   Permit an animal owned or possessed by him/her to run at large, or
permit any such animal in a park unless it shall at all times be restricted or
kept on a leash no greater than 15 feet in length, or allow an animal owned or
possessed by him to remain unattended on park property.
   (B)   It is an exception to §
96.23(A) that:
      (1)   The animal is a police service animal under the supervision of a
police officer in the performance of his/her official duties; or
      (2)   The animal is a water fowl at a city-owned facility; or
      (3)   The animal is a "service animal" performing duties of assisting the
disabled; or
      (4)   The animal is a dog lawfully allowed in an off-leash area as
defined by this chapter.
(Ord. OR-2197-20, passed 12-14-20) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross reference:
   Animal control, see
Chapter 90
Statutory reference:
   Cruelty to animals, see Tex. Penal Code, § 42.09
§ 96.24 CURFEW IN PARKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person other than law enforcement
personnel or employees of the Department of Parks and Recreation to enter or
remain in any portion of a park, playground or recreational area when the area
is closed to the public. The times during which an area is open to the public
shall be posted by the city. Unless otherwise posted by the city, the hours
during which parks, playgrounds and recreational areas are open to the public
are as follows:
      (1)   High activity parks, defined as parks with lighted amenities for
use after dark, will be open from 5:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
      (2)   Low activity parks, defined as parks with low level or security
level lighting only, will be open from 5:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Elmer W. Oliver
Nature Park winter hours will be 5:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. beginning November
through February.
      (3)   Any lighted section of linear park trail will be open from 5:00
a.m. to 11:00 p.m. Any unlit section of linear park trail will be open from 5:
00 a.m. to 30 minutes after sundown.
   (B)   A special permit may be granted by the city for organized sports or
special events which exceed the posted hours, in which case the area containing
the permitted activity shall remain open to the public until the activity ends,
at which time the area shall be closed to the public.
(‘78 Code, § 12-13) (Ord. 403, passed 2-11-80; Ord. 771, passed 3-14-88; Am.
Ord. OR-1877-13, passed 6-24-13; Am. Ord. OR-1912-14, passed 5-27-14) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 96.25 GLASS CONTAINERS PROHIBITED.
   Its shall be unlawful for any person to possess in any public park within
the corporate limits of the city any glass container.
(‘78 Code, § 12-14) (Ord. 762, passed 12-14-87; Am. Ord. OR-1877-13, passed 6-
24-13) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.26 FISHING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fish in park land areas that
have been designated as no fishing zones by the City Council after
recommendation of the Mansfield Park Facilities Development Corporation.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use trotlines, throw lines,
fish traps, or nets while fishing in designated areas of parks.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to clean fish in any park.
(Ord. OR-2177-20, passed 6-8-20; Am. Ord. OR-2197-20, passed 12-14-20)
§ 96.27 TRAIL USE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than authorized maintenance
and public safety officials, to operate any vehicle on a trail or path not
designated for use by such vehicle.
   (B)   Persons who operate bicycles or in-line skates on designated trails
must follow the speed limits established by §
96.22(A).
   (C)   Persons who operate bicycles or in-line skates on designated paved
trails shall yield right-of-way to pedestrians. Joggers shall yield right-of-
way to walkers.
   (D)   Trail users on the hike and bike trails shall not be more than two
abreast when such action will impede other traffic on the trail. Trail users
shall leave ample room on the trail for other users to pass safely.
(Ord. OR-2197-20, passed 12-14-20)
§ 96.28 SPLASH PADS AND AQUATIC FACILITIES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any animal or pet into
any aquatic facility.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally bring sand or any
other foreign object or substance into an aquatic facility that could be washed
down the drain of an aquatic facility.
(Ord. OR-2197-20, passed 12-14-20)
§ 96.29 OFF-LEASH DOG AREAS.
   (A)   The Director or designee is authorized to establish off-leash areas
for dogs within designated areas of the city's parks and recreational areas.
Signs designating an area as an off-leash area must be conspicuously posted at
each entrance to the site.
   (B)   Dogs must be properly licensed by the City of Mansfield and have
current rabies vaccination with corresponding tags displayed on each dog's
collar.
   (C)   No person shall conduct professional dog training classes/business
within the off-leash area.
   (D)   Areas posted as small dog areas are designated for dogs under 40
pounds only. Small dogs may play in the large dog areas at their own risk, but
it is not recommended.
   (E)   The Park Board or Director may promulgate regulations, not
inconsistent with this section, that govern off-leash areas for dogs. Such
regulations must be conspicuously posted at each entrance to an off-leash area.
The regulations must include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Use of an off-leash area by any dog or person constitutes:
         (a)   Implied consent of the owner, harborer, or person having care,
custody, or control of the dog to comply with all conditions and regulations
stated in this chapter or promulgated by the Park Board or Director and posted
at the off-leash area;
         (b)   Assumption of the risk of injury or damage caused by any dog;
and
         (c)   A waiver of liability to the city by the owner, harborer, or
person having care, custody, or control of the dog, and an agreement and
undertaking to protect, indemnify, defend, and hold the city harmless, for any
injury or damage caused by the dog during any time that the dog is in the off-
leash area.
      (2)   No person may bring into an off-leash area:
         (a)   Animals other than dogs;
         (b)   A dog which is a dangerous animal;
         (c)   A female dog in heat;
         (d)   More than three dogs at one time;
         (e)   A dog that is not wearing tags showing that it is currently
registered and vaccinated in compliance with Ch. 826 of the Texas Health and
Safety Code, § 826.021, and with Ch. 90 of the Mansfield City Code, §
90.22;
         (f)   A sick, injured or diseased dog;
         (g)   A dog that the owner has reason to know has dangerous
propensities; and
         (h)   Dog toys, treats or food (human or dog).
      (3)   Any person who brings a dog into an off-leash area shall:
         (a)   Carry materials and implements for removing and disposing of dog
waste and remove all waste deposited by the dog in the off-leash area, in
compliance with this chapter;
         (b)   Lead the dog on a physical leash and retain the dog in custody
when entering and exiting an off-leash area; electronic leashes are not
allowed;
         (c)   Remove dog's leash, spiked collar, or pinch collar upon entering
the off-leash area;
         (d)   Keep a leash visible for each dog at all times;
         (e)   Remain within the off-leash area with their dog(s) and be in
visual and verbal control of their dog(s) at all times while in the off-leash
area;
         (f)   Stop dog from digging and repair any damage done by their dog
(i.e. holes dug by their dog); and
         (g)   Remove the dog from the off-leash area at the first sign of
aggression by the dog.
      (4)   Children.
         (a)   Children under the age of 12 years are prohibited from entering
the off-leash area;
         (b)   Children between the ages 12-16 years old must be accompanied by
an adult, who agrees to be solely responsible for the child's proper behavior
and safety;
         (c)   No person under 16 years of age shall be permitted to bring a
dog into an off-leash area; and
         (d)   No person shall allow a child under their supervision to run
with or chase dogs inside the off-leash area.
(Ord. OR-2197-20, passed 12-14-20)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 96.35 DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION ESTABLISHED; DIRECTOR.
   There is hereby established a department of city government to be known as
Department of Parks and Recreation. A Director of Parks and Recreation shall be
appointed by the City Manager and shall be responsible to the City Manager for
the conduct and affairs of the Department.
(‘78 Code, § 12-8) (Ord. 319, passed 11-22-76; Am. Ord. OR-1877-13, passed 6-
24-13)
§ 96.36 REGULATIONS AND ACTS DECLARED A GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION.
   All of the regulations and acts of the Parks and Recreation Department
performed and to be performed in accordance with the provisions herein in the
operation and maintenance of the park system of the city are hereby declared to
be governmental and for the benefit of the general public. Any member of the
City Council, the Parks and Recreation Department and any city official or
employee charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter acting
for the city in the discharge of his/her duties hereunder shall not thereby
render him/herself personally liable.
(‘78 Code, § 12-7) (Ord. 319, passed 11-22-76; Am. Ord. OR-1877-13, passed 6-
24-13)
§ 96.37 PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD.
   (A)   Established; membership. There is an established Mansfield Park
Facilities Development Corporation board that also serves as the Parks and
Recreation Board consisting of seven members appointed by the City Council. The
City Council may also appoint an alternate member who may replace an absent
member and will act as the member during Board meetings. No person shall be
eligible for appointment to membership to the Board who is not a resident of
the city. Members of the board shall not receive any salary or compensation for
their services, except that they shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses
incurred in the performance of their official duties as officers. The Mansfield
Park Facilities Development Corporation has established Articles of
Incorporation and Bylaws regarding purpose, board of directors, offices,
financial corporate duties and requirements, and miscellaneous provisions.
   (B)   Term of office. The term of office of members of the Board subject to
the provisions relative to removal therefrom shall be two years, the terms to
begin from the first regular meeting of the City Council in October of each
year. Three members shall be appointed in even years and four members shall be
appointed in odd years. (‘78 Code, § 12-3)
   (C)   Removal; vacancies. Members of the Parks and Recreation Board shall be
subject to removal from office and may be removed from office by the City
Council. Any vacancy in the membership of the Board shall be filled by the City
Council for the unexpired term of the member whose place has, by removal or
otherwise, become vacant. (‘78 Code, § 12-4)
   (D)   Organization. The Parks and Recreation Board shall select a President,
Vice President, Treasurer and Secretary from its membership who shall serve as
the officers of the Board for the period that shall be determined by a majority
of the membership of the Board. The Treasurer and Secretary may, at the option
of the Board, be persons other than members of the Board, and they may be
employees of the city. In the event the offices of Treasurer or Secretary are
not held by members of the Board, such positions will be considered non-voting
ex-officio members. The Secretary shall keep minutes of each meeting and the
minutes shall be of public record. All meetings shall conform to the Texas Open
Meetings Act. (‘78 Code, § 12-5)
   (E)   Powers, jurisdiction, scope of activities. The Parks and Recreation
Board, subject to the authority of the City Council, shall serve in an advisory
capacity concerning the acquisition, maintenance, operation and use of parks,
playgrounds and open-spaces in the city. The Board further shall have the
responsibility on or before each August first of presenting to the Director of
Parks and Recreation a proposed budget for the next fiscal year accompanied by
a five year capital improvement program. (‘78 Code, § 12-6)
(Ord. 319, passed 11-22-76; Am. Ord. OR-1877-13, passed 6-24-13; Am. Ord. OR-
2197-20, passed 12-14-20)
Statutory reference:
   Open meetings law, see Tex. Gov’t code §§ 551.001 et seq.
CHAPTER 97: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
97.01   Definitions
   
97.02   Permit required; application; fee; transferability; false statements
   
97.03   Alarm permit duration and renewal
   
97.04   Duties of the alarm user
   
97.05   Duties of alarm installation company and monitoring company
   
97.06   Duties and authority of the alarm administrator
   
97.07   Fines
   
97.08   Suspension
   
97.09   Appeals
   
97.10   Reinstatement
   
97.11   Confidentiality
   
97.12   Governmental immunity
 
   
97.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A:    Fine and fee table
§ 97.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT OF GOD. Events outside of human control, such as sudden floods, tornados
or other natural disasters, for which no one can be held responsible.
   ALARM ADMINISTRATOR. A person or persons designated by the Chief to
administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and administer the
provisions of this chapter.
   ALARM DISPATCH REQUEST. A notification to the city that an alarm has been
activated at a particular alarm site and that city emergency service is
requested.
   ALARM INSTALLATION COMPANY. A person in the business of selling, providing,
maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing an
alarm system in an alarm site.
   ALARM PERMIT. Authorization granted by the alarm administrator to an alarm
user to operate an alarm system.
   ALARM PERMIT APPLICATION. The written application for and alarm permit filed
by an alarm user with the alarm administrator.
   ALARM SITE. A single fixed premises or location served by an alarm system or
systems. Each unit, if served by a separate alarm system in a multi-unit
building or complex, shall be considered a separate alarm site, and is further
defined by the following categories:
      (1)   RESIDENTIAL SITE. A single-family residence and each residential
unit of multi-unit building or complex which is served by an alarm system.
      (2)   COMMERCIAL SITE. Every premises or location where any business
activity is regularly conducted and which is served by an alarm system. Each
unit of a business premises or business location, if served by a separate alarm
system in a multi-unit building or complex, shall be considered a separate
commercial alarm system site.
      (3)   FINANCIAL SITE. Every premises or location of a financial
institution which is required to have an alarm system pursuant to the Bank
Protection Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. § 1882).
      (4)   EDUCATIONAL/GOVERNMENT SITE. Every premises or location of a public
or private school or school administrative office and every premises or
location of any federal, state, county or municipal governmental office.
      (5)   CHURCH SITE. A building for public worship or religious services.
Each unit of a church premises or church location, if served by a separate
alarm system in a multi-unit building or complex, shall be considered a
separate church alarm system site.
   ALARM SYSTEM. A device or series of devices, including, but not limited to,
hardwired systems and systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such
as cellular or private radio signals, which emit or transmit a remote or local
audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition and intended
to summon a city emergency service response, including local alarm systems.
ALARM SYSTEM does not include an alarm installed in a vehicle or on someone's
person unless the vehicle or the personal alarm is permanently located at a
site.
   ALARM USER. Any person who (which) owns or operates an alarm system at an
alarm site.
   ARMING STATION. A device that allows control of an alarm system.
   AUTOMATIC VOICE DIALER. Any electrical, electronic, mechanical, or other
device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message, when
activated, over a telephone line, radio or other communication system, to a
city emergency service requesting dispatch.
   CANCELLATION. The process where response is terminated when a monitoring
company (designated by the alarm user) for the alarm site notifies the
responding city emergency service that there is not an existing situation at
the alarm site requiring a response after an alarm dispatch request.
   CHIEF. The Chief of Police of the City of Mansfield or authorized
representative.
   CITY. The City of Mansfield, Texas.
   CITY EMERGENCY SERVICE. Any emergency service provided by the city,
including police, fire, and emergency medical services.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Mansfield, Texas, or the City
Manager's designee.
   DISABLED VETERAN EXEMPTION. You qualify for a disabled veteran alarm permit/
renewal fee exemption if you are a veteran who was designated as 100% disabled
while serving with the United States Armed Forces. The veteran must provide
official documents to the alarm administrator or designee from either the
Veteran's Administration or the branch of the armed forces that clearly
reflects the 100% disability rating at the time of the application to be
eligible for this exemption.
   DURESS ALARM. A silent alarm system signal generated by the entry of a
designated code into an arming station in order to signal that the alarm user
is being forced to turn off the system and requires law enforcement response.
   FALSE ALARM NOTIFICATION. An alarm notification to the City of Mansfield
when a police officer is dispatched to respond to the location by the alarms
system company or the responding officer finds, through an inspection of the
interior or exterior of the alarm site, no evidence of an attempted or actual
unauthorized intrusion, burglary, robbery or hostage taking and the officer has
responded to the site within 30 minutes of the city receiving the alarm
notification. Duress, panic, and hold up alarms or alarm calls cancelled prior
to an officer's arrival are not considered false alarms.
   HOLDUP ALARM. A silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a
device intended to signal a robbery in progress.
   LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM. Any alarm system, which is not monitored, that emits an
audible alarm only at the alarm site.
   MONITORING. The process by which a monitoring company receives signals from
an alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to the municipality for
the purpose of summoning city emergency services to the alarm site.
   MONITORING COMPANY. A person in the business of providing monitoring
services.
   PANIC ALARM. An audible alarm system signal generated by the manual
activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency
situation requiring emergency response.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization
or similar entity.
   RESPONDER. An individual capable of reaching the alarm site within 30
minutes and having access to the alarm site, the code to the alarm system and
the authority to approve repairs to the alarm system.
   SIA CONTROL PANEL STANDARD CP-01. The ANSI - American National Standard
Institute approved Security Industry Association - SIA CP-01 Control Panel
Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design
features for security system control panels and their associated arming and
disarming devices to reduce the incidence of false alarms. Control panels built
and tested to this standard by Underwriters Laboratory (UL), or other
nationally recognized testing organizations, will be marked to state: "Design
evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for
False Alarm Reduction".
   TRANSFER. The transaction or process by which an alarm user takes over
control of an existing alarm system, which was previously controlled by another
alarm user.
   VERIFY. An attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative, to
contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other electronic
means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to determine
whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting city emergency service
dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. For the
purpose of this chapter, telephone verification shall require, as a minimum
that a second call be made to a different number if the first attempt fails to
reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to determine whether
an alarm signal is valid before requesting an emergency response.
   ZONES. Division of devices into which an alarm system is divided to indicate
the general location from which an alarm system signal is transmitted.
(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10; Am. Ord.
OR-2206-21, passed 4-26-21)
§ 97.02 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE; TRANSFERABILITY; FALSE STATEMENTS.
   (A)   No alarm user shall operate, or cause to be operated, an alarm system
at its alarm site without a valid alarm permit. A separate alarm permit is
required for each alarm site.
   (B)   The fee for an alarm permit or an alarm permit renewal is set forth
below and shall be paid by the alarm user. No refund of a permit or permit
renewal fee will be made. The initial alarm permit fee must be submitted to the
alarm administrator within five days after the alarm system installation or an
alarm system transfer.
      (1)   Permit fees: (see
Appendix A: Fine and Fee Table).
      (2)   Renewal fees: (see
Appendix A: Fine and Fee Table).
   (C)   Upon receipt of a completed alarm permit application form and the
alarm permit fee, the alarm administrator shall register the applicant unless
the applicant has:
      (1)   Failed to pay a fine assessed under §
97.07; or
      (2)   Had an alarm permit for the alarm site suspended and the violation
causing the suspension has not been corrected.
   (D)   Each alarm permit application must include the following information:
      (1)   The name, complete address (including apt/suite number), and
telephone numbers of the person who will be the permit holder and be
responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and
payment of fees assessed under this chapter.
      (2)   The classification of the alarm site as either residential
(includes apartment, condo, mobile home, etc.) commercial, financial, church or
educational/government.
      (3)   For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the classification
of the alarm system (i.e. burglary, holdup, fire, emergency medical, duress,
panic alarms or other) and for each classification whether such alarm is
audible or silent.
      (4)   Mailing address, if different from the address of the alarm site.
      (5)   Any dangerous or special conditions present at the alarm site.
      (6)   Names and telephone numbers of at least two individuals who are
able and have agreed to:
         (a)   Receive notification of an alarm system activation at any time;
         (b)   Respond to the alarm site within 30 minutes at any time; and
         (c)   Upon request can grant access to the alarm site and deactivate
the alarm system if necessary.
      (7)   Type of business conducted at a commercial alarm site.
      (8)   Signed certification from the alarm user stating the following:
         (a)   The date of installation or transfer of the alarm system,
whichever is applicable.
         (b)   The name, address, and telephone number of the alarm
installation company or companies performing the alarm system installation or
transfer and of the alarm installation company responsible for providing repair
service to the alarm system.
         (c)   The name, address, and telephone number of the monitoring
company if different from the alarm installation company.
         (d)   That a set of written operating instructions for the alarm
system, including written guidelines on how to avoid false alarms, have been
left with the applicant by the alarm installation company.
         (e)   An acknowledgment that the alarm installation company has
trained the applicant in proper use of the alarm system, including instructions
on how to avoid false alarms.
         (f)   An acknowledgment that the alarm user understands and agrees
that a city emergency service response may be influenced by factors including,
but not limited to the availability of city emergency service units, priority
of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions,
staffing levels, etc.
         (g)   Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for
the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit shall be sufficient cause for refusal
to issue a permit or for suspension of an existing permit.
         (h)   An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person or alarm
site. An alarm user shall inform the alarm administrator of any change that
alters any of the information listed on the alarm permit application within
five business days of such change.
         (i)   All fines and fees owed by an applicant must be paid before an
alarm permit may be issued or renewed.
         (j)   The alarm administrator will issue the following when issuing an
alarm permit:
            1.   An alarm permit issued by the department. The alarm permit
will contain the alarm permit number, date of issuance and the date of
expiration.
            2.   A window decal containing the alarm permits number, alarm
permit date of issuance and the date of expiration. The decal can be placed at
a location chosen by the alarm user and serve as a reminder of the alarm
permit's expiration date.
(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10) Penalty,
see §
97.99
§ 97.03 ALARM PERMIT DURATION AND RENEWAL.
   (A)   An alarm permit shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance, and
must be renewed annually by submitting an updated application and a permit
renewal fee to the alarm administrator.
   (B)   The alarm administrator will send written notification to a current
permit holder 30 days prior to the expiration of their current alarm permit.
   (C)   It is the responsibility of the alarm user to submit an application
prior to the permit expiration date. Failure to renew will be classified as use
of a non-permitted alarm system and fines shall be assessed. A $10 late fee may
be assessed if the renewal is more than 30 days late.
(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10)
§ 97.04 DUTIES OF THE ALARM USER.
   (A)   An alarm user shall:
      (1)   Maintain the alarm site and the alarm system in a manner that will
minimize or eliminate false alarms;
      (2)   Make every reasonable effort to have a responder arrive at the
alarm system's location within 30 minutes when requested by a city emergency
service in order to:
         (a)   Deactivate an alarm system;
         (b)   Provide access to the alarm site; and/or
         (c)   Provide alternative security for the alarm site.
      (3)   Not activate an alarm system for any reason other than an
occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.
   (B)   An alarm user shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be
adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm site will
sound for no longer than ten minutes after being activated.
   (C)   An alarm user shall not use automatic voice dialers.
   (D)   An alarm user shall maintain at each alarm site, a set of written
operating instructions for each alarm system.
   (E)   All alarm users shall review with their alarm installation company
and/or monitoring company the alarm user false alarm prevention checklist or an
equivalent checklist approved by the alarm administrator and acknowledge their
understanding of false alarm prevention procedures by signing and dating same.
A fully executed copy of the customer false alarm prevention checklist shall be
filed with the original application for an alarm permit.
   (F)   It is the responsibility of the alarm permit holder to notify both the
alarm monitoring company and the alarm administrator in the event they
discontinue service or no longer occupy the permitted alarm site.
(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10) Penalty,
see §
97.99
§ 97.05 DUTIES OF ALARM INSTALLATION COMPANY AND MONITORING COMPANY.
   (A)   The alarm installation company shall provide written and oral
instructions to each of its alarm users in the proper use and operation of
their alarm systems. Such instructions will specifically include all
instructions necessary to turn the alarm system on and off and to avoid false
alarms.
   (B)   Upon the effective date of this chapter, alarm installation companies
shall not install a device to activate a holdup alarm which is a single action,
non-recessed button.
   (C)   Ninety days after enactment of this chapter, the alarm installation
companies shall, on new installations, use only alarm control panel(s) which
meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01.
   (D)   An alarm company shall not use automatic voice dialers.
   (E)   A monitoring company shall:
      (1)   Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers designated by the
alarm administrator;
      (2)   Verify every alarm signal, except a duress or holdup alarm
activation before requesting a city emergency service response to an alarm
system signal;
      (3)   Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the city in a manner and
form determined by the alarm administrator;
      (4)   Communicate cancellations to the city in a manner and form
determined by the alarm administrator;
      (5)   Ensure that all alarm users of alarm systems equipped with a
duress, holdup or panic alarm are given adequate training as to the proper use
of the duress, holdup or panic alarm;
      (6)   Communicate any available information (north, south, front, back,
floor, etc.) about the location on all alarm signals related to the alarm
dispatch request;
      (7)   Communicate type of alarm activation (silent or audible, interior
or perimeter);
      (8)   Provide the address of the alarm site;
      (9)   After an alarm dispatch request, promptly advise the responding
city emergency service if the monitoring company knows that the alarm user or
the responder has or has not been contacted.
(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10; Am. Ord.
OR-2206-21, passed 4-26-21) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.06 DUTIES AND AUTHORITY OF THE ALARM ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The alarm administrator shall:
      (1)   Designate a manner, form and telephone numbers for the
communication of alarm dispatch requests; and
      (2)   Establish a procedure to accept cancellation of alarm dispatch
requests.
   (B)   The alarm administrator shall establish a procedure to record such
information on alarm dispatch requests necessary to permit the alarm
administrator to maintain records, including, but not limited to, the
information listed below:
      (1)   Identification of the permit number for the alarm site.
      (2)   Identification of the alarm site.
      (3)   Date and time alarm dispatch request was received.
      (4)   Date and time of the city emergency service arrival at the alarm
site.
   (C)   The alarm administrator shall establish a procedure for the
notification to the alarm user of a fineable false alarm.
   (D)   The alarm administrator may require a conference with an alarm user
and the alarm installation company and/or monitoring company responsible for
the repair or monitoring of the alarm system to review the circumstances of
each false alarm.
   (E)   The alarm administrator may create and implement an alarm user
awareness class. The alarm administrator may request the assistance of
associations, alarm companies and law enforcement agencies in developing and
implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm users of the problems
created by false alarms and teach alarm users how to avoid generating false
alarms.
   (F)   The alarm administrator may require an alarm user to remove a holdup
alarm that is a single action, non-recessed button, if a false holdup alarm has
occurred.
   (G)   If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used
or maintained in a manner that ensures proper operation and reduction of false
alarm notifications, the alarm administrator may require a conference with an
alarm permit holder. If the alarm permit holder fails to attend a conference,
after receiving notice, an administrative fee (see
Appendix A: Fine and Fee Table) may be imposed against the alarm permit holder.
   (H)   Upon receipt of evidence showing the alarm user has taken steps to
restore the alarm system to a proper working condition and has worked to
prevent further false alarms, the alarm administrator may waive or reduce fees
imposed against the alarm permit holder.
(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10; Am. Ord.
OR-2206-21, passed 4-26-21)
§ 97.07 FINES.
   (A)   An alarm user shall be subject to fines, depending on the number of
false alarms in the preceding 12-month period based upon the fee schedule (see
Appendix A: Fine and Fee Table).
   (B)   In addition, any person operating a non-permitted alarm system will be
subject to a fine (see
Appendix A: Fine and Fee Table) for each false alarm in addition to any other
fines. The alarm administrator may waive this additional fine for a non-
permitted system if the alarm user submits an application for alarm permit
within ten days after notification of such violation.
   (C)   The alarm installation company shall be subject to a fine (see
Appendix A: Fine and Fee Table) if the responding city emergency service
determines that an on-site employee of the alarm installation company directly
caused the false alarm. In this situation, the false alarm will not be counted
against the alarm user.
   (D)   The monitoring company shall be subject to a fine (see
Appendix A: Fine and Fee Table) for each failure to verify alarm system signals
as specified in §
97.05(E)(2).
   (E)   An alarm user shall be subject to a fine for operating an alarm system
during the time the alarm permit is under suspension (see
Appendix A: Fine and Fee Table).
   (F)   Notice of the right of appeal under this chapter will be included with
any fines.
(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10; Am. Ord.
OR-2206-21, passed 4-26-21)
§ 97.08 SUSPENSION.
   (A)   The alarm administrator may suspend any alarm permit upon the
occurrence of any of the following conditions:
      (1)   If the alarm user provides any false information in, or in
connection with, an alarm permit application;
      (2)   If an alarm site has more than 12 false alarms in any 12-month
period; or
      (3)   If any fines assessed by the alarm administrator become 180 days or
more past due.
   (B)   An alarm user may appeal the suspension of an alarm permit in
accordance with the provision for appeals set forth in this chapter.
   (C)   The alarm administrator will notify the alarm user in writing ten
business days prior to the effective date an alarm permit has been suspended
and the reason for the suspension. The notice of suspension may also include
the amount of the fine for each false alarm, if applicable.
(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10)
§ 97.09 APPEALS.
   (A)   If the alarm administrator assesses a fine or denies the issuance,
renewal or reinstatement of an alarm permit, the alarm administrator shall send
written notice of the action and a statement of the right to an appeal to
either the affected applicant or alarm user and the alarm installation company
and/or monitoring company.
   (B)   The alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring company may
appeal an assessment of a fine or the suspension of an alarm permit to the
alarm administrator by setting forth in writing the reasons for the appeal
within ten business days after receipt of the fine or notice of suspension and
by submitting a certified check in the amount of $25 payable to the city to
cover the cost of processing the appeal. The payment for the cost of the appeal
will not be refunded.
   (C)   The alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring company may
appeal the decision of the alarm administrator by requesting, within ten
business days from the date of the decision, that the alarm administrator
forward the appeal to the City Manager. The alarm administrator will, within
five business days of such a request, provide the City Manager with notice of
the appeal. The City Manager shall, within a period of 30 days from receipt of
the notice of appeal from the alarm administrator, hear the appeal and the
facts as presented by the appellant and the alarm administrator, affording both
parties a reasonable and equal amount of time for the presentation of facts,
evidence, and the questioning and cross-examination of witnesses. Within ten
business days of the hearing, the City Manager shall render a final, written
decision affirming or reversing the decision of the alarm administrator. Such
written decision shall be filed with the City Secretary.
   (D)   Filing of a notice of appeal shall stay the action by the alarm
administrator suspending an alarm permit or requiring payment of a fine, until
the City Manager has rendered a decision. If a request for an appeal to the
City Manager is not made within the required ten business day period, the
action of the alarm administrator is final.
   (E)   The alarm administrator may adjust the count of false alarms based on:
      (1)   Evidence that a false alarm was caused by an Act of God;
      (2)   Evidence that a false alarm was caused by action of the telephone
company;
      (3)   Evidence that a false alarm was caused by a power outage;
      (4)   Evidence that the alarm dispatch request was not a false alarm;
and/or
      (5)   Evidence that a city emergency service response was not completed
in a timely fashion.
   (F)   With respect to fines of an alarm installation company or monitoring
company the alarm administrator may take into consideration whether the alarm
company or monitoring company has engaged in a consistent pattern of
violations.
(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10; Am. Ord.
OR-2206-21, passed 4-26-21)
§ 97.10 REINSTATEMENT.
   (A)   A person whose alarm permit has been suspended may, at the discretion
of the alarm administrator, have the alarm permit reinstated by the alarm
administrator if the person:
      (1)   Submits a new application and pays a reinstatement fee (see
Appendix A: Fine and Fee Table);
      (2)   Pays, or otherwise resolves, all outstanding citations and fines;
and
      (3)   Submits a certification from an alarm installation company, stating
that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the
alarm installation company.
   (B)   In addition, the alarm administrator may require one or more of the
following as a condition to reinstatement:
      (1)   Proof that an employee of the alarm installation company or
monitoring company caused the false alarm;
      (2)   A certificate showing that the alarm user has successfully
completed the alarm user awareness class as provided under §
97.06;
      (3)   Upgrade the alarm control panel to meet SIA Control Panel Standard
CP-01;
      (4)   A written statement from an independent inspector that the alarm
system has been inspected and is in good working order;
      (5)   Confirmation that all motion detectors are "dual technology" type;
      (6)   Confirmation that the alarm system requires two independent zones
to trigger before transmitting an alarm signal to the monitoring company;
      (7)   Confirmation that the alarm system requires two independent
detectors to trigger before transmitting an alarm signal to the monitoring
company;
      (8)   Certification that the monitoring company will not make an alarm
dispatch request unless the need for a city emergency service is confirmed by a
listen-in device;
      (9)   Certification that the monitoring company will not request an alarm
dispatch unless the need for a city emergency service response is confirmed by
a camera device; or
      (10)   Certification that the monitoring company will not make an alarm
dispatch request unless the need for a city emergency service response is
confirmed by a person at the alarm site.
(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10)
§ 97.11 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   In the interest of public safety, all information contained in and gathered
through the alarm permit applications and applications for appeals shall be
held in confidence by all employees or representatives of the city and by any
third-party administrator or employees of a third-party administrator with
access to such information with the exception of information that must be
disclosed under the Freedom of Information Act, the Texas Public Information
Act, and as required by applicable law.
(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10; Am. Ord.
OR-2206-21, passed 4-26-21)
§ 97.12 GOVERNMENTAL IMMUNITY.
   An alarm permit is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or
obligation, either expressed or implied, for a city emergency response. Any and
all liability and consequential damage resulting from the city's failure or
inability to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental
immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an alarm permit, the
alarm user acknowledges that a city emergency response may be influenced by
factors such as: The availability of city emergency service units, priority of
calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing
levels and prior response history.
(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Penalty/Violations.
      (1)   General. A person commits an offense if he violates by commission
or omission any provision of this chapter that imposes upon him a duty or
responsibility, regardless of the presence or absence of a culpable mental
state.
      (2)   Alarm user. A person who is required to have a permit under this
chapter commits an offense if he/she knowingly operates, causes or permits to
be operated an alarm system without a current alarm permit issued by the Chief.
      (3)   Revoked permit. A person who is required to have a permit under
this chapter commits an offense if he knowingly operates, causes or permits to
be operated an alarm system during the period in which the alarm permit is
suspended.
      (4)   Alarm systems company. It is unlawful for an alarm systems company
or any owner, operator, manager, agent or employee thereof to allow or permit a
violation of any of the duties imposed by §
97.05 to occur.
      (5)   Penalty. A person who violates a provision of this chapter is
guilty of a separate offense for each violation committed, continued or
permitted, and each offense is punishable by a fine of not more than $500.
   (B)   Corporations, Partnerships and Associations. In addition to
prohibiting or requiring certain conduct of individuals, it is the intent of
this chapter to hold a corporation, partnership or other association criminally
responsible for acts or omissions performed by an agent acting in behalf of the
corporation, partnership or other association, and within the scope of his
employment.
(Ord. OR-1775-10, passed 8-9-10; Am. Ord. OR-1790-10, passed 11-8-10)
APPENDIX A: FINE AND FEE TABLE
FEE TYPE CODE SECTION FEE PURPOSE FEE AMOUNT
FEE TYPE       CODE SECTION FEE PURPOSE                           FEE AMOUNT
                            Residential site (initial issuance)
Permit         97.02        (Persons 65 years of age or older are $50.00
                            exempt from this permit fee)
                            Residential site (renewal)            $25.00
Permit         97.02        (Persons 65 years of age or older are (annually)
                            exempt from this permit fee)
Permit         97.02        Commercial/church site (issuance/     $100.00
                            renewal)                              (annually)
Permit         97.02        Financial institution site (issuance/ $200.00
                            renewal)                              (annually)
Permit         97.02        Government/education site             No fee
Late fee       97.03        Permit received 30-days past          $10.00
                            expiration
                            Operating a non-permitted alarm       $100.00 (per
No permit fee  97.07        system (may be waived by obtaining    incident)
                            permit)
Suspension     97.07        Operating an alarm system during      $200.00
                            alarm permit suspension
Appeal         97.09        Appeal processing fee                 $25.00
Administrative 97.10        Reinstatement of suspended permit     $25.00
False alarm    97.07        6th and any subsequent false alarm    $50.00
fee                         within the preceding 12-month period
                            Failure to comply or violation of §  $200.00
Fine           97.05        97.05 of the Alarm Systems Ordinance  (per
                                                                  incident)
 
(Am. Ord. OR-2206-21, passed 4-26-21; Am. Ord. OR-2416-25, passed 8-25-25)
CHAPTER 98: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
98.01   Obstructing, damaging streets or alleys
   
98.02   Street specifications
   
98.03   Solicitations and sales in certain locations
   
98.04   Prohibition of aggressive panhandling
Excavations
   
98.15   Permit required; fee
   
98.16   Backfilling
   
98.17   Notice in case of street closing
   
98.18   Guarding, warning devices required
Mass Gatherings
   
98.30   Definitions
   
98.31   Permits required
   
98.32   Permit application; fee; bond
   
98.33   Investigations
   
98.34   Hearing
   
98.35   Permit issuance or denial
   
98.36   Permit revocation
   
98.37   Appeals
Garage Sales
   
98.50   Definitions
   
98.51   Permit required
   
98.52   Sale hours
   
98.53   Garage sale signs
   
98.54   Restrictions
   
98.55   Complaints
   
98.56   Variance requests
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 98.01 OBSTRUCTING, DAMAGING STREETS OR ALLEYS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct or injure or cause
to be obstructed or injured or maintain an obstruction in any manner whatsoever
upon any street or alley within the city.
('78 Code, § 15-1) (Ord. 144, passed 8-14-62)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to remove street obstructions, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 1175
(18)
   Offense of placing street obstructions, see Tex. Penal Code, § 42.03
§ 98.02 STREET SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   All new streets shall be constructed of concrete.
   (B)   The City Manager, subject to the approval of the City Council, is
hereby authorized to promulgate definitions, rules, regulations, standards and
specifications for construction, installation, design, location and arrangement
of streets, curbs, street lights, alleys, utility layouts, utility easements,
gates for utility easements, sidewalks, water supply and water distribution
systems, fire hydrants, sewage disposal systems, septic tanks, water wells,
monuments, criteria for drainage easement requirements, drainage facilities and
crosswalk ways. He/she shall file same with the Planning and Zoning Commission
for approval, and thereafter, file with the City Secretary at least ten days
before they become effective. He/she may, subject to the approval of the City
Council, amend the same from time to time, upon the approval of the Planning
and Zoning Commission, and the amendment shall be filed with the City Secretary
at least ten days before it becomes effective. No such rules, regulations,
standards and specifications shall conflict with this section or any ordinance
of the city. All improvements shall be constructed, installed, designed,
located and arranged by the subdivider in accordance with the rules,
regulations, standards and specifications.
('78 Code, § 15-7) (Ord. 493, passed 5-9-83)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 98.03 SOLICITATIONS AND SALES IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, sell or offer for
sale or distribution any goods, wares, merchandise or service, or solicit a
ride, employment, donations, contributions or business within a roadway, or on
any median, traffic island or within the right-of-way of any street or highway
within the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, sell, offer for
sale or distribution any goods, wares, merchandise, or solicit a ride,
employment, donations or contributions by a direct transaction or exchange with
the occupant of any vehicle upon any street or highway within the city.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to contact, direct, or otherwise
solicit business, patronage, or other commerce with the occupant of any vehicle
on any public roadway from said roadway, shoulder of roadway, medians or right-
of-ways.
   (D)   An offense under this section occurs when the offer, solicitation or
distribution is made regardless of whether a transaction is completed, or the
operator or occupant of the vehicle was ever aware of the offer, solicitation
or distribution.
   (E)   For purposes of division (A), ROADWAY is defined as that portion of a
street or highway designed, improved or ordinarily used for vehicular travel,
typically delineated by curbs, edgelines or the edge of pavement.
(Ord. 1472, passed 1-29-04)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 98.04 PROHIBITION OF AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates another meaning.
      AGGRESSIVE PAN HANDLING. Includes approaching or following pedestrians,
repetitive solicitation despite refusals, the use of abusive or profane
language to cause fear and intimidation, unwanted physical contact, or the
intentional blocking of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
      AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE or ATM. A machine, other than a telephone, that
is capable of being operated by a patron to communicate to a financial
institution;
         (a)   A request to withdraw money from an account directly or under a
line of credit previously authorized;
         (b)   An instruction to deposit money in an account with the financial
institution;
         (c)   An instruction to transfer money between one or more accounts
maintained with the financial institution;
         (d)   An instruction to apply money against an indebtedness to the
financial institution; or
         (e)   A request for information concerning the balance of the account
with the financial institution.
      FINANCIAL TRANSACTION. The actual purchasing, paying, charging or
negotiating for the procurement or sale of any goods or services.
      FUEL DISPENSING DEVICE. A pump or other machine utilized for dispensing
fuel to motor vehicles or containers.
      PAY TELEPHONE. Any coin-operated or credit or debit card reader operated
telephone located on any public or private property that is accessible for
public use.
      PUBLIC PLACE. A street, sidewalk, or other place that is open to the
public.
      REQUEST. Any imperative instruction, whether verbal or non-verbal, by a
solicitee to a solicitor to desist the solicitation including but not limited
to words or gestures such as "stop," "back off," "stay back," "get away,"
"leave me alone," or "withdraw."
      SOLICITATION. The act of panhandling by seeking through a communication
with another person, whether by gesture or verbally, funds or goods for food,
personal favors (such as trips, transportation, clothing, or other), drink,
lodging, vehicle fare, or any other purpose to directly benefit an individual
or his family members.
      SOLICITEE. Any individual to whom a solicitor, as defined herein, directs
a solicitation.
      SOLICITOR. Any person who engages in the act of solicitation as defined
above.
   (B)   It shall be a violation for anyone to knowingly with respect to the
nature of their conduct or to circumstances surrounding their conduct to
violate any provision of this section.
   (C)   Immediately upon any request from a solicitee to a solicitor, a
solicitor who is in a public place when the request is made shall discontinue
the solicitation until there is a space of at least ten feet between the
solicitor and the solicitee. For the purposes of this division (C), distance
shall be measured from any extension of the solicitor's body, including without
limitation any sign or other object being used or carried by the solicitor, to
any part of the solicitee's body.
   (D)   No solicitor shall engage in solicitation within a distance of 20 feet
from any ATM, pay telephone, fuel dispensing device, or outdoor dining or
seating establishment, including, but not limited to, a sidewalk cafe. For the
purposes of this division (D), distance shall be measured from any extension of
the solicitor's body, including without limitation any sign or other object
being used or carried by the solicitor, to any part of the physical structure
of the ATM, pay telephone, fuel dispensing device, or outdoor dining or seating
establishment.
   (E)   No solicitor shall engage in solicitation of anyone who is engaged in
a financial transaction.
   (F)   Aggressive panhandling as defined herein is prohibited.
(Ord. OR-1837-12, passed 6-11-12)
EXCAVATIONS
§ 98.15 PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate across, along, in or about
any public street, alley or other public way without first having obtained a
permit for such purpose from the City Secretary. A fee of $10 will be paid to
the City Secretary for each permit herein provided for and shall be paid at the
time the permit is delivered.
('78 Code, § 15-2)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross reference:
   Banners over streets, see §
130.21
§ 98.16 BACKFILLING.
   (A)   Any person having done any excavation across, along, in or about any
public street, alley or other public way in the city shall refill any
excavations according to city specifications.
   (B)   When it is necessary to cross an existing street with a utility line,
the road crossing will be bored where it is possible. Should it not be possible
to bore the street or if the utility main is in the existing street, the street
may be open cut and the ditch back filled as outlined above.
('78 Code, § 15-3)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 98.17 NOTICE IN CASE OF STREET CLOSING.
   Any excavation requiring the closing of a street must be reported to the
Police and Fire Departments prior to closing.
('78 Code, § 15-4)
§ 98.18 GUARDING, WARNING DEVICES REQUIRED.
   (A)   The person working in the street, alley or other public way shall be
responsible for providing all warning devices and signs to provide for the
safety of both pedestrians and vehicular traffic.
('78 Code, § 15-5)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person having charge of any public or
private improvement or building in the city to leave any hole, ditch or
excavation of any kind in the surface of the earth in or adjoining any public
square, street, alley, sidewalk or other public place without guarding or
covering same in such manner as to protect persons and animals from injury.
('78 Code, § 15-6)
Penalty, see § 10.99
MASS GATHERINGS
§ 98.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ISSUING OFFICER. The City Manager, or his designated representative.
   MASS GATHERING. Any meeting or gathering held within the city, wherein
anyone in attendance at the meeting or gathering is not or is not expected to
be within a permanent structure and which attracts or can be expected to
attract more than 100 persons who will remain at the location of the gathering
for a period of more than six continuous hours.
   PERMANENT. As used in "permanent structure" means any man-made structure for
which the city has issued a building permit, a plumbing permit and an
electrical permit, which has existing and currently operating plumbing and
electrical service which complies with all ordinances of the city, which has an
existing and currently operating supply of water provided only by the city and
which has existing and currently operating sanitary sewer service provided only
by the city.
   PROMOTER. Any person, group of persons, firm, corporation, partnership or
association that organizes, promotes, manages, finances or holds a mass
gathering.
('78 Code, § 11-20)
Statutory reference:
   Mass Gatherings Act, see Tex. Health & Safety Code §§ 751.001 et seq.
   Outdoor music festival regulations, see Tex. Occ. Code §§ 2104.001 et seq.
§ 98.31 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   No person may act as a promoter of a mass gathering in the city unless he/
she obtains a permit from the issuing officer under the provisions of this
subchapter. If the owner of the property on which the mass gathering will be
held is not the promoter as defined in §
98.30, the owner of the property shall also be required to obtain a permit
under the provisions of this subchapter as specified and required of a
promoter.
('78 Code, § 11-21)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 98.32 PERMIT APPLICATION; FEE; BOND.
   (A)   At least 60 days before a mass gathering is to be held, the promoter
of the mass gathering shall file with the issuing officers an application for a
permit.
   (B)   The application shall include the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the promoter.
      (2)   A financial statement reflecting all funds which are being supplied
to finance the mass gathering and who supplied them.
      (3)   The name and address of the owner of the property on which the mass
gathering is to be held and a certified copy of the agreement made between the
promoter and the owner of the property.
      (4)   The location and a description of the property on which the mass
gathering is to be held.
      (5)   The dates and the times that the mass gathering will be held.
      (6)   The number of persons the promoter will allow to attend the mass
gathering and the plan which the promoter intends to use to limit attendance to
this number.
      (7)   The names and addresses of the performers who have agreed to appear
and their agents and a description of any agreements reached with these
performers.
      (8)   A description of all steps taken by the promoter to assure that
minimum standards of sanitation and health will be maintained during the mass
gathering.
      (9)   A description of all preparations being made to provide traffic
control and to assure that the mass gathering will be conducted in an orderly
fashion and that the physical safety of the persons in attendance will be
protected.
      (10)   A description of the preparations made to provide adequate medical
and nursing care.
      (11)   A description of the preparations made to supervise minor persons
who may attend the mass gathering.
   (C)   A filing fee of $25 must be submitted with the application for a
permit.
   (D)   The issuing officer, upon a full and complete investigation of the
proposed mass gathering, shall have the authority to require the promoter to
post a bond in an amount that would cover all reasonable expenses entailed in
cleaning up the premises after the gathering in the event the promoter fails to
do so. The issuing officer shall have the authority to require either a cash
bond or a corporate surety bond in his/her discretion. The bond shall be
released and returned upon the clean up and maintenance being accomplished by
the promoter. If it is necessary for the city to accomplish the clean up, the
bond will be used to cover the city's reasonable and necessary expenses.
('78 Code, § 11-22)
§ 98.33 INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   After an application is filed with the issuing officer, he/she shall
send copies to the city health officer or the party serving in that capacity as
designated by the City Manager and the Chief of Police.
   (B)   The city health officer shall inquire into preparations for the mass
gathering and at least five days before the hearing shall submit a report to
the issuing officer stating whether or not he/she believes that the minimum
standards of health and sanitation provided by state and local laws, rules,
regulations and orders will be maintained.
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall investigate preparations for the mass
gathering and at least five days before the hearing shall submit a report to
the issuing officer stating whether or not he/she believes that the minimum
standards provided by state and local laws, rules, regulations and orders for
assuring public safety and order will be maintained.
   (D)   The issuing officer may conduct any additional investigation which he/
she considers necessary.
   (E)   The city health officer and the Chief of Police shall be available to
give testimony relating to their reports at the hearing.
('78 Code, § 11-23)
§ 98.34 HEARING.
   (A)   The issuing officer shall set a date and a time for a public hearing
on the application which shall be held at least ten days before the day on
which the mass gathering is to begin.
   (B)   Notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be given to
the promoter and to any persons who have an interest in the granting or denial
of the permit, including notice to all owners of property which abuts the
property where the mass gathering will be held.
   (C)   At the hearing, any person may appear and testify for or against the
granting of the permit.
('78 Code, § 11-24)
§ 98.35 PERMIT ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
   (A)   After the hearing is completed, the issuing officer shall enter his/
her findings in the record and shall grant or deny the permit.
   (B)   The issuing officer may deny the permit if he/she finds the following:
      (1)   The application contains false or misleading information or
required information is omitted.
      (2)   The financial backing of the promoter is insufficient to assure
that the mass gathering will be conducted in the manner stated in the
application.
      (3)   The location selected for the mass gathering is inadequate for the
purpose for which it is to be used.
      (4)   The promoter has not made adequate preparations to limit the number
of persons attending the mass gathering or to provide adequate supervision for
minor persons attending the mass gathering.
      (5)   The promoter does not have assurance that performers who are
scheduled to appear will appear.
      (6)   The preparations for the mass gathering do not assure that minimum
standards of sanitation and health will be maintained or that the mass
gathering will be conducted in an orderly fashion and the physical safety of
persons in attendance will be protected or that adequate supervision of minor
persons will be provided.
      (7)   Adequate arrangements for traffic control have not been provided.
      (8)   Adequate medical and nursing care will not be available.
('78 Code, § 11-25)
§ 98.36 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (A)   After a permit is issued, if the issuing officer finds that
preparations for the event will not be completed by the time the mass gathering
is to begin or that the permit has been obtained by fraud or misrepresentation,
lie may revoke the permit.
   (B)   The issuing officer must give notice to the promoter 24 hours in
advance of the revocation and hold a hearing on the revocation if requested by
the promoter.
('78 Code, § 11-26)
§ 98.37 APPEALS.
   Any promoter or person affected by the action of the issuing officer in
granting, denying or revoking a permit under this subchapter may request a
hearing before the City Council.
('78 Code, § 11-27)
GARAGE SALES
§ 98.50 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ESTATE SALE. A way of liquidating the belongings of a family or estate,
usually much more than a garage sale or yard sales, and is used when someone is
in need of a way to sell off personal belongings due to downsizing, moving,
divorce, bankruptcy, or death.
   GARAGE SALE. A sale of household goods, furniture, equipment, utensils,
appliances, tools, personal clothing, glassware or similar personal property,
including, but not limited to any sale commonly termed “estate sale,” “porch
sale,” “yard sale,” “lawn sale,” “group family sale,” or “attic sale.”
(‘78 Code, § 10-80) (Ord. 705, passed 11-10-86; Am. Ord. OR-1974-15, passed 11-
9-15)
§ 98.51 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   A garage sale permit issued by the Development Services Department
shall be obtained prior to a garage sale.
   (B)   A permit fee in the amount of $5 shall be paid to the city at the time
an application is made.
   (C)   A garage sale shall not exceed three consecutive days in duration for
each permit.
   (D)   No more than two garage sale permits shall be issued for any one
premise per calendar year.
(‘78 Code, § 10-81) (Ord. 705, passed 11-10-86; Am. Ord. OR-1974-15, passed 11-
9-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 98.52 SALE HOURS.
   No person shall conduct a garage sale before 7:00 a.m. of any day or after
7:00 p.m. on any day.
(‘78 Code, § 10-82) (Ord. 705, passed 11-10-86; Am. Ord. OR-1974-15, passed 11-
9-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 98.53 GARAGE SALE SIGNS.
   (A)   No more than three signs may be allowed per garage sale. Signs shall
be allowed with consent of the property owner at off-site locations.
   (B)   Signs shall be limited to a maximum area of four square feet and a
maximum height of three feet when measured from the ground to the top of the
sign.
   (C)   Signs shall be removed promptly after a garage sale.
   (D)   A garage sale permit must be obtained before the placement of signs.
   (E)   The address of the garage sale location must be on the sign.
   (F)   Pennants, spinners, balloons, streamers, flags, wind signs or other
similar devices shall not be attached to any sign.
   (G)   Signs shall be permitted in city street right-of-way, but shall not be
placed in any street median on any fence, sign pole, utility pole or other
fixed objects in the city right-of-way.
   (H)   Signs shall not be placed in such a manner as to obscure vision at any
intersection, traffic sign or signal.
   (I)   Any sign found illegally placed will be immediately removed and
discarded.
(‘78 Code, § 10-83) (Ord. 705, passed 11-10-86; Am. Ord. OR-1974-15, passed 11-
9-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 98.54 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   All sidewalks, walk areas or driveways, abutting on and in front of
the property at which any garage sale is being conducted shall remain free and
uncongested so as to allow normal passage of traffic, both pedestrian and motor
vehicles.
   (B)   A garage sale shall not be held for the purpose of conducting a
commercial enterprise or selling items purchased for resale.
(‘78 Code, § 10-84) (Ord. 705, passed 11-10-86; Am. Ord. OR-1974-15, passed 11-
9-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 98.55 COMPLAINTS.
   Complaints shall be filed with the Development Services Department.
(‘78 Code, § 10-85) (Ord. 705, passed 11-10-86; Am. Ord. OR-1974-15, passed 11-
9-15)
§ 98.56 VARIANCE REQUEST.
   Any party or individual, who needs to conduct an estate sale and feels that
he or she cannot comply with the requirements in §
98.51(D) due to special circumstances, may request a variance by submitting a
letter of request containing information and evidence as they deem appropriate
to demonstrate the justification for not complying with the requirements. The
Deputy City Manager in charge of the Development Services Department will
decide on the variance request based upon whether or not he or she believes the
information and evidence submitted by the applicant is sufficient to
demonstrate that compliance with the requirements in §
98.51(D) will cause unnecessary hardship due to special circumstances not
simply a hardship related to convenience and that the granting of the variance
will not be contrary to the public interest.
(Ord. OR-1974-15, passed 11-9-15)
CHAPTER 99: NATURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
99.01   Title
   
99.02   Purpose and intent
   
99.03   Definitions
Permits
   
99.15   Tree removal permit required
   
99.16   Authority for review
   
99.17   Submittal requirements
   
99.18   Action on permit application
Regulations
   
99.30   Clear cutting
   
99.31   Selective thinning
   
99.32   Ground level cuts
   
99.33   New developments
   
99.34   Private property
   
99.35   Municipal/public domain property, rights-of-way and easements
   
99.36   Exceptions
   
99.37   Tree replacement requirements
   
99.38   Tree protection
   
99.39   Tree pruning restrictions
   
99.40   Tree planting restrictions
Administration and Enforcement
   
99.50   Additional duties and authorities of the Tree Board
   
99.51   Building permit
   
99.52   Acceptance of improvements
   
99.53   Certificate of occupancy
   
99.54   Fiscal security
 
   
99.98   Violations
   
99.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Tree exhibit
   
Appendix B:   Tree diameter measurement
   
Appendix C:   Tree protection detail
   
Appendix D:   List of items required on tree survey
   
Appendix E:   Construction plan requirements
   
Appendix F:   Tree pruning recommendations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 99.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as and may be referred to as the Natural
Resources Management Ordinance.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)
§ 99.02 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote site planning which furthers the
preservation of mature trees and natural areas, to protect trees during
construction, to facilitate site design and construction which contribute to
the long term viability of existing trees and to control the removal of trees
when necessary. It is the further purpose of this chapter to achieve the
following broader objectives:
   (A)   Prohibit the indiscriminate clearing of property.
   (B)   Protect and increase the value of residential and commercial
properties within the city.
   (C)   Maintain and enhance a positive image for the attraction of new
business enterprises to the city.
   (D)   Protect healthy quality trees and promote the natural ecological
environmental and aesthetic qualities of the city.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)
§ 99.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words and
terms used in this chapter, but not defined in this chapter shall have the
meanings ascribed thereto in the zoning ordinance or other ordinances of the
city. Words and terms defined in two ordinances shall be read in harmony unless
there exists an irreconcilable conflict in which case the definition contained
in this chapter shall control.
   AGRICULTURAL USE. The use of land to produce plant or animal products, such
as the growing of crops, raising and pasturing of livestock or farming. It does
not include the processing of plant or animal products after harvesting or the
production of timber or forest products.
   BUILDABLE AREA. That portion of a building site exclusive of the required
yard areas on which a structure or building improvements may be erected and
including the actual structure, driveway, parking lot, pool and other
construction as shown on a site plan.
   BUILDING PAD. The actual foundation area of a building and the area within
six feet of the foundation that is used for construction and grade transition.
   CLEAR CUTTING. The removal of all of the trees or a significant majority of
the trees within an area.
   CRITICAL ROOT ZONE (CRZ). The area of undisturbed natural soil around a tree
defined by a concentric circle with a radius equal to the distance from the
trunk to the outermost portion of the dripline. (See Appendix A.)
   CUT/FILL. Areas where the natural ground level has been excavated (cut) or
fill brought in.
   DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH). The diameter of a tree trunk, or, in the
case of a multi-trunk tree, the total of the diameter of the largest trunk and
one-half of the diameter of each additional trunk, measured at a height of four
and one-half feet above the ground.
   DRIP LINE. A vertical line run through the outermost portion of the canopy
of a tree and extending to the ground. (See Appendix A.)
   LIMITS OF CONSTRUCTION. A delineation on the graphic exhibit which shows the
boundary of the area within which all construction activity will occur.
   MUNICIPAL/PUBLIC DOMAIN PROPERTY. Examples of this would include City Hall,
public parks, county property, Corps of Engineers property, State of Texas
R.O.W., library, fire stations, water tower sites or similar properties.
   PROTECTIVE FENCING. A physical and visual barrier installed around the
critical root zone of a protected tree as required by this chapter in order to
prevent damage to the tree and its root system.
   SELECTIVE THINNING. The process by which noncontiguous protected trees are
identified and removed within a heavily wooded area to provide the maximum
benefit to the remaining protected trees.
   TREE. Any self-supporting, woody, perennial plant which will attain a trunk
diameter of two inches or more when measured at a point four and one-half feet
above ground level and normally an overall height of at least 15 feet at
maturity, usually with one main stem or trunk and many branches. It may appear
to have several stems or trunks as in several varieties of oaks.
   TREE BOARD. There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board. This
Board shall be the Planning and Zoning Commission unless otherwise appointed by
City Council.
   TREE, PARK. Trees in public parks and all areas owned by the city to which
the public has free access to as a park.
   TREE, PROTECTED. Any canopy tree that has a diameter at breast height of six
inches or greater; any understory tree that has a diameter at breast height of
two inches or greater; any specimen tree which is determined by the Landscape
Administrator to be of unique and intrinsic value to the general public because
of its size, age, historic association or ecological value; or any tree listed
in the most current edition of the Big Tree Registry, as amended, published by
the Texas Forest Service.
   TREE, STREET. Trees on land lying between property lines on either side of
all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes or ways within the city.
   TREE TOPPING. The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three
inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the
normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98; Am. Ord. OR-1785-10, passed 9-13-10)
PERMITS
§ 99.15 TREE REMOVAL PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, directly or indirectly, shall cut down, destroy, remove or move
or effectively destroy through damaging any protected tree situated on property
regulated by this chapter without first obtaining a tree removal permit unless
otherwise specified in this chapter.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.16 AUTHORITY FOR REVIEW.
   The Landscape Administrator shall be responsible for the review and approval
of all requests for tree removal permits submitted in accordance with the
requirements specified herein.
   (A)   Deferrals. The Landscape Administrator may defer the approval of a
tree removal permit to the Tree Board for any reason. All decisions made by the
Tree Board shall be final.
   (B)   Appeals. Any decision made by the Landscape Administrator may be
appealed to the Tree Board. All decisions made by the Tree Board shall be
final.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)
§ 99.17 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The Landscape Administrator shall establish administrative procedures
necessary to facilitate the implementation and enforcement of this chapter.
   (A)   Tree removal permit. A request for a tree removal permit must be
submitted and approved prior to the removal of any protected tree in the city
unless the tree is exempt under a provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Fees. All tree removal permits shall be accompanied by a payment made
to the city in the amount specified by City Council.
   (C)   Required documents. Either a transparency or tree survey shall be
required as determined by the Landscape Administrator and must include the
items referenced in this chapter and its appendices.
   (D)   Permit expiration. Permits for tree removal issued in connection with
a building permit or site plan shall be valid for the period of that building
permit's or site plan's validity. Permit(s) for tree removal not issued in
connection with a building permit or a site plan shall become void 180 days
after the issue date on the permit.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)
§ 99.18 ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION.
   The Landscape Administrator or the Tree Board shall grant a tree removal
permit based on the following criteria:
   (A)   Whether or not a reasonable accommodation or alternative solution can
be made to accomplish the desired activity without the removal of the tree.
   (B)   The cost of preserving the tree.
   (C)   Whether the tree is worthy of preservation depending on the individual
characteristics of the tree.
   (D)   The effect of the removal on erosion, soil moisture, retention, flow
of surface waters and drainage systems.
   (E)   The need for buffering of residential areas from the noise, glare and
visual effects of nonresidential uses.
   (F)   Whether the tree interferes with a utility service.
   (G)   Whether the proposed tree replacement pursuant to the tree replacement
requirements hereof adequately mitigates the removal of the tree.
   (H)   Whether the removal affects the public health, safety or welfare.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98; Am. Ord. OR-1785-10, passed 9-13-10)
REGULATIONS
§ 99.30 CLEAR CUTTING.
   The clear cutting of land as defined in this chapter is prohibited.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.31 SELECTIVE THINNING.
   The removal of selected trees from within a densely forested area when done
in a professionally accepted manner shall be allowed as a single permit upon
approval by the Landscape Administrator. Approval will only be granted when the
Landscape Administrator determines that the selective thinning is being done in
a manner that would enhance the environment and likelihood of survival for the
remaining trees.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.32 GROUND LEVEL CUTS.
   Where protected tree removal is allowed through exemption or by tree removal
permit and the root system is intertwined with protected trees which are
intended to be saved, the tree shall be removed by flush cutting with the
natural level of the surrounding ground. Where stump removal is also desired,
stump grinding shall be allowed, or upon approval of the Landscape
Administrator, a trench may be cut between the two trees sufficient to cut the
roots near the tree to be removed, thereby allowing removal of the remaining
stump without destruction of the root system of the saved tree.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)
§ 99.33 NEW DEVELOPMENTS.
   All developments which have not submitted final construction plans as of the
effective date of this chapter shall be subject to the requirements for tree
protection and replacement specified as follows.
   (A)   Residential developments. All areas within street right-of-ways,
utility or drainage easements as shown on an approved final plat and areas
designated as cut/fill on the master construction plan approved by the
Landscape Administrator shall be exempt from the tree protection and
replacement requirements specified herein. The developer may request the
Landscape Administrator to allow trees within potential building pad areas be
included in the exemption described herein. All other area shall be subject to
these requirements.
   (B)   Non-residential development. All area within street right-of-ways,
public utility or drainage easements as shown on an approved final plat, area
designated as cut/fill on the master construction plan approved by the
Landscape Administrator, plus fire lanes, parking areas and building pad as
shown on an approved construction plan shall be exempt from the tree protection
and replacement requirements specified herein.
   (C)   Gas well drilling and production facilities/natural gas pipelines.
Facilities constructed for gas well drilling and production, such as drill
sites, operation sites, compressor stations, frac ponds and access roads, and
natural gas pipelines and their related surface appertances, shall not be
exempt from the tree protection and replacement requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   Permit requirements. A tree-removal permit shall not be required for
removal of a protected tree within an area noted in divisions (E)(1) and (E)(2)
below, however a permit must be obtained prior to the removal of any other
protected tree on the property.
   (E)   Landscape Administrator review.
      (1)   Residential development. A developer shall be required to furnish a
digital copy of the proposed development showing all proposed improvements
(e.g. right-of-ways, easements, lot patterns, cut/fill, etc.) with the
submittal of a site plan, development plan, preliminary plat, or final plat,
whichever occurs first. The digital copy shall use the North American Datum
1983 (NAD 83), Texas State Plane - North Central Zone (4202), United States,
and providing a scale factor if a surface survey is used. The Landscape
Administrator is authorized to require a tree survey meeting the requirements
of Appendix D herein when determined to be needed to fully evaluate the impact
on trees.
      (2)   Non-residential development. A developer shall be required to
furnish a digital copy of the proposed development showing all proposed
improvements (e.g. right-of-ways, easements, lot patterns, cut/fill, fire
lanes, parking areas and building pads, etc.) with the submittal of a site
plan, development plan, construction plan, plot plan or building permit
application, whichever occurs first. The digital copy shall use the North
American Datum 1983 (NAD 83), Texas State Plane - North Central Zone (4202),
United States, and providing a scale factor if a surface survey is used. The
Landscape Administrator is authorized to require a tree survey meeting the
requirements of Appendix D herein when determined to be needed to fully
evaluate the impact on trees.
      (3)   It is highly recommended that the developer consult with the
Landscape Administrator and submit the required transparency or survey for
review as early as possible so as to minimize changes in preliminary or final
plats and to determine that there is adequate area for the proposed
improvements after tree protection and replacement have been taken into
consideration.
      (4)   The Landscape Administrator will evaluate the required
transparency, survey or plan to determine that the developer has made a best
good-faith effort at saving as many protected trees as possible. The
Administrator will forward review comments to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for consideration regarding denial or approval of the development.
If the review involves a document that normally does not require the approval
of the Planning & Zoning Commission, the Administrator will follow the
procedures in division (E)(1) herein.
   (F)   Parking area. When a non-residential development consists of extra
parking spaces beyond 110% of the minimum parking spaces required by the Zoning
Ordinance, the developer shall be required to replace a percentage of the trees
removed or make a payment into the Tree Restoration Fund. The replacement trees
shall be calculated by multiplying the total diameter of trees removed in all
parking spaces by the percentage of said extra parking spaces to the total
number of parking spaces (i.e. total diameter of trees removed x extra parking
spaces ÷ total parking spaces). The replacement trees shall be provided in
accordance with §
99.37.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98; Am. Ord. OR-1785-10, passed 9-13-10)
§ 99.34 PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Homestead. The owner of property which is used for an individual
residence or homestead shall be exempt from the tree protection and replacement
requirements specified herein.
   (B)   Property owned by home builder. All areas within the building pad,
driveway, sidewalks, patios, septic tank and lateral lines, parking area, pool
and associated deck area as shown on a plot plan approved by the Landscape
Administrator shall be exempt from the tree protection and replacement
requirements specified herein. All other area of the lot shall be subject to
these requirements.
      (1)   Permit requirements. A tree removal permit shall not be required
for removal of a protected tree within an area noted above; however a permit
must be obtained prior to the removal of any other protected tree on the
property.
      (2)   Landscape Administrator review. A transparency showing all proposed
improvements shall be required with the submittal of a building permit
application. The transparency shall be on a sheet drawn to a scale as required
by the Landscape Administrator or on a computer disk in the format of a
commonly used Computer-Aided Design (CAD) program. The Landscape Administrator
is authorized to require a tree survey meeting the requirements of Appendix D
herein when determined to be needed to fully evaluate the impact on trees.
   (C)   Agricultural property. The owner of property being actively used for
agricultural purposes shall be permitted to remove up to seven protected trees
per calendar year without obtaining a permit. Protected trees removed in excess
of seven will require permits. It is not the intent of this chapter to prohibit
the clearing of land for legitimate, agricultural use. The property owner shall
request the Landscape Administrator to make an on-site inspection of the
property to be cleared and provide the Landscape Administrator the purpose and
reason for the clearing. If the Landscape Administrator determines the clearing
of land to be for a legitimate, agricultural reason, he/she will issue a tree
removal permit.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.35 MUNICIPAL/PUBLIC DOMAIN PROPERTY, RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND EASEMENTS.
   All construction and maintenance activities within municipal/public domain
property, public right-of-ways or public easements by the city or franchise
utility companies shall be subject to the requirements for tree protection and
replacement specified herein.
   (A)   Removal of protected trees. A tree removal permit shall not be
required for removal of a protected tree. Pruning activities by a utility shall
be governed by the provisions of §
99.39.
   (B)   Tree Board responsibilities. The Tree Board is authorized to study,
investigate, counsel and develop and/or update periodically, and administer a
written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal
or disposition of trees in parks, along streets and in other public areas. When
adopted by the City Council, such plan shall represent the comprehensive tree
plan for the city.
   (C)   Acceptable trees. The Landscape Administrator shall maintain a list of
trees acceptable for planting along streets, within parks or other public
areas. Trees other than those listed as acceptable may only be planted upon
approval of the Landscape Administrator.
   (D)   Street tree spacing. The spacing of street trees shall be in
accordance with recommendations of the Landscape Administrator. Closer spacings
or group plantings may be approved by the Landscape Administrator in unique
situations and when recommended by a registered landscape architect.
   (E)   Public tree care. The city shall have the right to plant, prune, and
maintain street trees and park trees within the lines of all streets, alleys,
avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure
public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public
properties. The city may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree or
part thereof, which is in an unsafe condition, or which by reason of its nature
is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other
public improvements, or which is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or
other pest.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98; Am. Ord. OR-1785-10, passed 9-13-10)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.36 EXCEPTIONS.
   A tree removal permit and tree protection and replacement requirements shall
not be required under any of the following circumstances. The burden of proof
as a qualified exemption is upon the remover of a tree. It is highly
recommended that qualification as an exemption be determined with the Landscape
Administrator prior to removal of any tree.
   (A)   Preexisting conditions. All construction activities for which final
construction plans and building permit applications have been submitted prior
to the effective date of this chapter shall be exempt.
   (B)   Diseased trees. The tree is diseased, damaged beyond the point of
recovery or in danger of falling as determined by the Landscape Administrator
prior to the removal of the tree. The removal of a diseased tree by the city or
an individual is required to reduce the chance of spreading the disease to
adjacent healthy trees.
   (C)   Public safety. The tree endangers the public health, welfare or safety
and immediate removal is required.
   (D)   Utility service interruption. The tree has disrupted a public utility
service due to a tornado, storm, flood or other act of God. Removal shall be
limited to the portion of the tree reasonably necessary to reestablish and
maintain reliable utility service.
   (E)   Landscape nursery. All licensed plant or tree nurseries shall be
exempt from the requirements of this chapter as they pertain to those trees
planted and growing on the premises of the licensee that are so planted and
growing for the sale or intended sale to the general public in the ordinary
course of the licensee's business.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)
§ 99.37 TREE REPLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Tree replacement. In the event that it is necessary to remove a
protected tree as specified in §§99.33 through 99.35, the party (other than
franchise utility companies) removing the tree shall be required to replace the
protected trees being removed with quality trees approved by the Landscape
Administrator. A sufficient number of trees shall be planted to equal or exceed
the diameter (measured at four and one-half inches above ground level) of each
tree removed. This mitigative measure is not meant to supplant good site
planning. Tree replacement will be considered only after all design
alternatives which could save more existing trees have been evaluated and
reasonably rejected. Said replacement trees shall be a minimum of three-and-a-
half inch diameter (measured at one foot above ground) and seven feet in height
when planted.
   (B)   Replacement procedures. At the time of review, the agent responsible
for replacement, the time of replacement and the location of the new trees will
be determined by the Landscape Administrator. The replacement trees shall be
located on the subject site whenever possible. However if this is not feasible,
the Landscape Administrator has the authority to allow the planting to take
place on another property, including public property. Franchise utility
companies shall be exempt from this requirement. If the Landscape Administrator
approves the planting of replacement trees more than 30 days after the removal
of protected trees, the applicant shall provide the Landscape Administrator
with an affidavit that all replacement trees will be planted within six months.
Any replacement tree required by this chapter must be covered by a one-year
warranty that is acceptable to the Landscape Administrator.
   (C)   Tree Reforestation Fund. In a densely forested area, the applicant,
upon approval of the Landscape Administrator, may make a payment into the Tree
Reforestation Fund in lieu of planting the replacement tree on the subject
site. The funds shall be used for: purchasing and planting trees on public
property; acquiring wooded property which shall remain in a naturalistic state
in perpetuity; and any irrigation, administrative and other costs incurred by
the city while pursuing the activities described herein and other activities in
support of tree planting, preservation and maintenance, and the general purpose
and intent of this chapter. The amount of the payment required for each
replacement tree shall be calculated based on a schedule published periodically
by the Landscape Administrator which sets forth the average cost of a quality
tree added to the average cost of planting a tree.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98; Am. Ord. OR-1785-10, passed 9-13-10)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.38 TREE PROTECTION.
   A major purpose of this chapter is to protect all protected trees which are
not required to be removed to allow approved construction to occur. The
following procedures are required.
   (A)   Construction plan requirements. All construction plans shall include
the requirements noted in Appendix E.
   (B)   Prohibited activities. The following activities shall be prohibited
within the limits of the critical root zone of any protected tree subject to
the requirements of this chapter.
      (1)   Material storage. No materials intended for use in construction or
waste materials accumulated due to excavation or demolition shall be placed
within the limits of the critical root zone of any protected tree. However,
this restriction shall not apply to material storage in areas exempt from the
tree protection and replacement requirements (for example, building pad,
driveway, patio, parking lot and the like.)
      (2)   Equipment cleaning/liquid disposal. No equipment shall be cleaned
or other liquids deposited or allowed to flow overland within the limits of the
critical root zone of a protected tree. This includes, without limitation,
paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar or similar materials.
      (3)   Tree attachments. No signs, wires or other attachments, other than
those of a protective nature shall be attached to any protected tree.
      (4)   Vehicular traffic. No vehicular and/or construction equipment
traffic or parking shall take place within the limits of the critical root zone
of any protected tree other than on an existing street pavement. This
restriction does not apply to single incident access within the critical root
zone for purposes of clearing underbrush, establishing the building pad and
associated lot grading, vehicular traffic necessary for routine utility
maintenance or emergency restoration of utility service or routine mowing
operations.
      (5)   Grade changes. No grade changes shall be allowed within the limits
of the critical root zone of any protected tree unless adequate construction
methods are approved by the Landscape Administrator or if grading is as
directed by the city's drainage inspector.
      (6)   Impervious paving. No paving with asphalt, concrete or other
impervious materials in a manner which may reasonably be expected to kill a
tree shall be placed within the limits of the critical root zone of a protected
tree except as otherwise allowed in this chapter.
   (C)   Preserved tree. A protected tree shall be considered to be preserved
only if a minimum of 75% of the critical root zone is maintained at undisturbed
natural grade and no more than 25% of the canopy is removed due to building
encroachment.
   (D)   Prior to construction. The following procedures shall be followed on
all types of construction projects (including residential subdivisions,
commercial, multi family, industrial developments, residential builders and
municipal/public).
      (1)   Tree flagging or marking. Trees that are approved by the Landscape
Administrator for removal shall be flagged with bright fluorescent orange vinyl
tape wrapped around the main trunk or marked with bright fluorescent orange
paint at a height of four feet or more such that it is very visible to workers
operating construction equipment. This shall not include the flagging or
marking of all protected trees adjacent to right-of-ways within approved
residential subdivisions during the construction of the roadway. Trees that are
not flagged or marked shall be saved and protected by fencing in accordance
with the requirements in division (D)(2).
      (2)   Protective fencing. In those situations where a protected tree is
so close to the construction area that construction equipment might infringe on
the root system or is within 20 feet of the construction area, a protective
fencing shall be required between the outer limits of the critical root zone of
the tree and the construction activity area. Four feet high protective fencing
shall be supported at a maximum of ten feet intervals by approved methods. All
protective fencing shall be in place prior to commencement of any site work and
remain in place until all exterior work has been completed.
      (3)   Bark protection. In situations where a protected tree remains in
the immediate area of intended construction, the tree shall be protected by
enclosing the entire circumference of the tree with 2" x 4" lumber encircled
with wire or other means that do not damage the tree. The intent here is to
protect the bark of the tree against incidental contact by construction
equipment.
   (E)   Permanent construction methods.
      (1)   Boring. Where it is not possible to trench around the critical root
zone of a protected tree, boring of utilities under the protected tree shall be
required. The length of the bore shall at least be the width of the critical
root zone and the depth of the bore shall at least be 24 inches.
      (2)   Grade change. In situations where the grade change within the
critical root zone of a protected tree exceeds the limits noted in division (B)
of this section, the procedures noted in the city standard detail sheet shall
be required.
      (3)   Trenching. All trenching shall be designed to avoid trenching
across the critical root zone of any protected tree. Although this section is
not intended to prohibit the placement of underground services such as
electric, phone, gas and the like, the placement of these utilities is
encouraged to be located outside of the critical root zone of protected trees.
Irrigation system trenching shall be placed outside of the critical root zone
with only the minimum required single head supply line allowed within that area
placed radially to the tree trunk.
      (4)   Root pruning. All roots two inches or larger in diameter which are
exposed as a result of trenching or other excavation shall be cut off square
with a sharp medium tooth saw and covered with pruning compound within two
hours of initial exposure.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.39 TREE PRUNING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   General. No protected tree should be pruned in a manner which
significantly disfigures the tree without proper cause or in a manner which
would reasonably lead to the death of the tree. All pruning shall be conducted
in accordance with universally accepted arboricultural standards and the
regulations contained in this chapter.
   (B)   Permit requirements. All franchise utility companies shall be required
to maintain at the city a set of pruning specifications (updated annually) to
be followed by all pruning contractors working for the company within the city.
Prior to beginning any pruning not requested by the owner of the tree, the
contractor for a non-franchise entity shall submit to the city an application
for a pruning permit for approval. Utility companies may prune trees as
necessary to maintain safe and reliable service or to re-establish disrupted
electric service without obtaining a permit. Prior notification of any pruning
activity shall be given to the city within 72 hours of work commencing.
   (C)   Allowed pruning. The Landscape Administrator may approve pruning of a
protected tree in cases where protected trees must be strategically pruned to
allow construction or demolition of a structure. When allowed, all pruning
shall be in accordance with §
99.38(C), approved Arboricultural techniques and the recommendations of
Appendix F. This section is not intended to require a tree permit for
reasonable pruning performed or contracted to be performed by the owner of the
tree when unrelated to construction activity.
   (D)   Required pruning. The owners of all trees adjacent to public right-of-
way shall be required to maintain a minimum clearance of 14 feet above the
traveled pavement or curb of a public street. Said owners shall also remove all
dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute
a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall also have the right to
prune trees overhanging within public right-of-way which interfere with the
proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interfere with
visibility of any traffic control device or sign or as necessary to preserve
the public safety.
   (E)   Tree topping. It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any
person, firm or city department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree
on public property. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or
certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning
practices are impractical may be exempted from this chapter at the
determination of the Landscape Administrator.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98; Am. Ord. OR-1785-10, passed 9-13-10)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.40 TREE PLANTING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Overhead lines. Any required replacement trees shall not be planted
within an area such that the mature canopy of the tree will be within ten feet
of overhead utility lines.
   (B)   Proximity to utilities. Any required replacement trees or street trees
shall not be planted within five feet of electrical facilities (underground or
surface), public utility lines, including water lines, sewer lines,
transmission lines or other utilities. No trees shall be planted within ten
feet of a fire hydrant. Shrubs will be permitted outside of the minimum
clearance of surface electrical facilities established by the franchise
electrical company.
   (C)   Street corners. No street tree shall be planted closer than 25 feet of
any street comer, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or
curblines.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)
Penalty, see § 99.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 99.50 ADDITIONAL DUTIES AND AUTHORITIES OF THE TREE BOARD.
   The Tree Board shall have the responsibility to review and grant a tree
removal permit for the following land use:
   (A)   Any public or recreational use that is deemed acceptable to the Tree
Board.
   (B)   Any private use that is deemed acceptable to the Tree Board that
usually requires large areas of open space.
   (C)   In granting the tree removal permit, the Tree Board is authorized to
impose whatever conditions of approval that is deemed necessary by the Tree
Board.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)
§ 99.51 BUILDING PERMIT.
   No building permit shall be issued unless the applicant signs an application
or permit request which states that all construction activities shall meet the
requirements of this chapter. The Building Official shall make available to the
applicant a copy of this chapter or a condensed summary of the relevant aspects
pertaining to the type of permit requested.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)
§ 99.52 ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   No acceptance of public improvements shall be authorized until all fines for
violations of this chapter have been paid to the city or otherwise disposed of
through the Municipal Court. No acceptance of public improvements shall be
authorized until all replacement trees have been planted or appropriate
payments have been made to the Tree Reforestation Fund.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)
§ 99.53 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all fines for violations
of this chapter have been paid to the city or otherwise disposed of through the
Municipal Court. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all
replacement trees have been planted or appropriate payments have been made to
the Tree Reforestation Fund.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)
§ 99.54 FISCAL SECURITY.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of §§
99.51 through
99.53, public improvements may be accepted and certificate of occupancy may be
issued before all trees have been replaced if a fiscal security is posted in an
amount equal to the prevailing rate for installed trees with a one year
guarantee, plus 15% to cover administrative costs.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)
§ 99.98 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be deemed a violation of this chapter for any person or firm to
engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating or removing street or
park trees within the city without first procuring approval from the Landscape
Administrator.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates
the provisions of §§
99.15 and
99.33 through
99.36 this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction hereof
shall be fined not to exceed $300 per diameter inch of the tree(s) removed or
damaged.
   (B)   Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates
any other provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction hereof shall be fined not to exceed $500 for each incident. The
unlawful injury, destruction or removal of each protected tree shall be
considered a separate incident and each incident subjects the violator to the
maximum penalty set forth herein per tree.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98; Am. Ord. OR-1785-10, passed 9-13-10)
APPENDIX A
[Click_here_to_view_appendix.]
APPENDIX B
[Click_here_to_view_appendix.]
APPENDIX C
Tree Protection Detail
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6382.jpg]
 
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98; Am. Ord. OR-1785-10, passed 9-13-10)
APPENDIX D
List of Items Required on Tree Survey
1.   Appropriate title (for example, Tree Removal Exhibit or Tree Survey)
2.   Title block which includes street address, lot and block, subdivision
name, city and date of preparation.
3.   North arrow, graphic and written scale in close proximity.
4.   Scale at a size no larger than 1"=100' for residential development; scale
to be determined by the Landscape Administrator for nonresidential and home
building activities.
5.   Name, address and phone of owner and person preparing the document.
6.   Location of all right-of-way lines and public easements.
7.   Location of all buildings, structures, pools, parking and other
improvements which are existing or intended on the lot.
8.   Areas of cut/fill with amount of each shown and flow lines shown.
9.   Existing and proposed spot elevations, grades and major contours, along
with existing landscaping, streams, ponds and major natural features.
10.   Areas of no disturbance labeled as "No Disturbance Area." This area must
be clearly marked on the plan and surrounded with protective fencing on the
ground. A single incidence removal of underbrush and vines is allowed.1
11.   All protected trees shown individually on the plan.² Canopy Trees six
inches or greater in size and Understory Trees two inches or greater in size.
Trees in close proximity that all have a caliper of less than four inches may
be designated as a group of trees with quantity of quality, marginal and
understory trees shown. (See Appendix C)
12.   The location of protected trees must be tied by horizontal control
(including dimensions from lot lines or placed through coordinates determined
via survey.)
13.   All protected trees shown with diameter (four and one-half feet from the
ground), common name and condition.
14.   Any proposed replacement trees shown with caliper size, common name of
tree and mature size.
15.   Graphic representations distinguishing protected trees that will be saved
versus those that will be removed.
16.   Phasing of tree survey along with phasing of the development is
permitted.
Notes:  
1   The Landscape Administrator shall have the authority to designate areas as
"no disturbance" areas where a survey would not be required due to no intended
construction.
²   An area may be designated as a "No Disturbance Zone" on the plan when
approved by the Landscape Administrator and trees within that zone are not
required to be individually identified on the plan.
³   The Landscape Administrator shall have the authority to exempt any of the
above items that he/she deems to be not applicable.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)
APPENDIX E
Construction Plan Requirements
   The following shall be required as a part of all construction plans
submitted to the city when tree removal or tree protection is required during
any phase of site work or construction.
1.   A Tree Preservation Detail Sheet shall include the following at a minimum.
   a.   The requirements of §
99.38 (B) through (D) shall be noted.
   b.   A graphics legend to be used throughout the plans for the purposes of
showing the following: trees to be flagged, protective fencing, trees requiring
bark protection, boring, areas of cut and fill impacting protected trees.
   c.   Graphic tree exhibit showing the features of a tree to include the
critical root zone, trunk, canopy, drip line and method of diameter measurement
(per Appendices A & B).
   d.   Graphic exhibits showing methods of protection to include snow fences,
boarded skirts and the like.
   e.   Graphic exhibits showing construction methods to include grade changes,
boring, trenching and the like.
   f.   Graphic exhibit showing appropriate pruning practices (per Appendix F).
2.   All practices which will be employed in meeting the requirements of this
chapter shall be shown graphically on all applicable sheets within the
construction plans.
3.   Documents as required in Appendix D herein.
(Ord. 1220, passed 7-27-98)
APPENDIX F
[Click_here_to_view_appendix.]
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
111.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
         
112.   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
         
113.   VEHICLES FOR HIRE
         
114.   GAS WELL DRILLING AND PRODUCTION
         
115.   SEWAGE SLUDGE APPLICATION
         
116.   DONATION BOX PERMITS AND ENFORCEMENT
         
117.   PORTABLE ON DEMAND STORAGE UNITS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Telecommunications Services
   
110.01   Telecommunications services exemption from local sales and use tax
repealed
Aluminum Collection Machines
   
110.10   Permit required
   
110.11   Conditions of permit
Child Care Facilities
   
110.25   Minimum standards adopted
   
110.26   Definitions
   
110.27   Permit required; exceptions
   
110.28   Permit application
   
110.29   Issuance of permit; inspections
   
110.30   Permit suspension and revocation
   
110.31   Operation of a child-care center
   
110.32   Food service
   
110.33   Health permit fees
   
110.34   Disclaimer of liability
   
110.35   Enforcement
Massage Establishments
   
110.45   Definitions
   
110.46   License required; conditions; display
   
110.47   License fees
   
110.48   Registered physical therapist required
 
   
110.99   Penalty
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
§ 110.01 TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES EXEMPTED FROM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX
REPEALED.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, "telecommunications services" means the
electronic or electrical transmission, conveyance, routing or reception of
sounds, signals, data or information utilizing wires, cable, radio waves,
microwaves, satellites, fiber optics or any other method now in existence or
that may be devised, including but not limited to long distance telephone
service. The storage of data or information for subsequent retrieval or the
processing or reception and processing of data or information intended to
change its form and content are not included in this definition.
   (B)   For the purpose of determining the proper tax, the sale of
telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or
other telecommunications device from which the call or transmission originates.
If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the
address to which the call is billed.
   (C)   The application of the exemption provided by the Local Sales and Use
Tax Act, Art. 1066c, Section 4B, as amended, is hereby repealed with regard to
telecommunication services sold within the city. The rate of the tax authorized
by the act shall be the same as the rate imposed in the city for all other
local sales and use taxes.
   (D)   The tax imposed by this section shall become effective October 1,
1987.
('78 Code, § 10-90) (Ord. 740, passed 5-13-87)
ALUMINUM COLLECTION MACHINES
§ 110.10 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place on premises in the city an
aluminum collection machine unless the person shall have permission of the
owner and first obtain a permit from the city in accordance with the provisions
of this subchapter and pay the fee herein provided. The permit shall be issued
annually after approval of the city health officer, the payment of an annual
fee of $100 and the finding by the City Manager that the conditions in §
110.11 are satisfied. The permit may be revoked at any time by the City Manager
for breach of the conditions or upon objection of neighboring landowners.
('78 Code, § 10-40) (Ord. 603, passed 4-22-85)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.11 CONDITIONS OF PERMIT.
   The following are conditions of a permit for an automatic aluminum
collection machine:
   (A)   The automatic aluminum collection machine is placed only on the
parking lot of a building site containing 20,000 square feet or more of floor
area or within a retail food store building as an accessory use.
   (B)   The automatic aluminum collection machine does not occupy required
off-street parking spaces.
   (C)   The flattening of aluminum is being conducted wholly within an
automatic aluminum collection machine.
   (D)   The owner of the property and the owner of the aluminum collection
machine shall remove the stored aluminum at least once a week.
   (E)   The owner of the property and the owner and operator of the aluminum
collection machine shall keep same in proper repair, and the exterior shall
have a clean and neat appearance.
   (F)   The owner of the property and the owner and operator of the aluminum
collection machine shall keep the building site clean and in a neat appearance
and shall dispose of aluminum cans and other litter from the building site
where the aluminum collection machine is located.
   (G)   The owner and operator of the aluminum machine shall comply with all
other applicable laws of the state and codes and ordinances of the city.
('78 Code, § 10-41) (Ord. 603, passed 4-22-85)
Penalty, see § 110.99
CHILD CARE FACILITIES
§ 110.25 MINIMUM STANDARDS ADOPTED.
   There is adopted Tex. Admin. Code Title 26, Ch. 746 “Minimum Standards for
Child-Care Centers” and Tex. Admin. Code Title 26, Ch. 744 “Minimum Standards
for School-Age and Before or After-School Programs” as published and promoted
by the Texas Health and Human Services Commission, as amended from time to
time. The provisions thereof shall be incorporated herein and made a part
hereof the same as if fully copied herein, except as modified by this
subchapter. A true copy of the minimum standards shall be kept on file in the
office of the City Secretary and available for inspection during all regular
business hours.
(‘78 Code, § 10-50) (Ord. 767, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 1346, passed 4-23-01;
Am. Ord. OR-2253-22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. OR-2349-24, passed 2-26-24)
§ 110.26 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEFORE AND AFTER-SCHOOL PROGRAM. A child-care center that provides care
before or after, or before and after, the customary school day and during
school holidays, for at least two hours a day, three days a week, to children
who attend prekindergarten through grade six. A before and after-school program
is licensed by and meets the minimum standards of the Texas Department of State
Health Services.
   CHILD. A person under 18 years of age.
   CHILD-CARE CENTER. An establishment subject to regulation by licensing that
provides:
      (1)   Assessment, care, training, education, custody, treatment or
supervision is provided for more than six children who are not related by
blood, marriage, or adoption;
      (2)   Assessment, care, training, education, custody, treatment or
supervision is provided for all or part of a 24-hour day, whether or not the
establishment operates for profit or charges for its service; and
      (3)   A CHILD-CARE CENTER includes the people, administration, governing
body, activities on or off premises, operations, buildings, grounds, equipment,
furnishings, and materials. A CHILD-CARE CENTER does not include child-placing
agencies, listed family homes, employer-based child-care operations, or shelter
care operations.
   CHILD-CARE STAFF. Any person whose primary duty includes direct care,
supervision or guidance of children in a child care center.
   GUARDIAN. A child’s parent or other person who has legal care, custody and
control of a child through natural or court appointed rights.
   HEALTH INSPECTOR. An employee of the city appointed by the City Manager as
his/her representative to inspect and enforce the provisions of this
subchapter.
   INSPECTION. An employee of the city hired to inspect and enforce the
provisions of this subchapter.
   ISOLATION AREA. An area or room apart from other facilities which is
available for use by children who become sick or injured.
   PERMIT. A complete document issued to the approved applicant of a child-care
center authorizing operation at a specific location in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter.
   REGULATORY AUTHORITY. The City of Mansfield Department of Regulatory
Compliance or its authorized representatives or designees.
   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATIONS. A church, synagogue or other religious institution
whose purpose is to support and serve the propagation of truly held religious
beliefs.
   SCHOOL. A child-care center offering an educational program in one or more
grades for children from the ages of five through 13 during the customary
public school day.
(‘78 Code, § 10-51) (Ord. 767, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 1346, passed 4-23-01;
Am. Ord. OR-2253-22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. OR-2349-24, passed 2-26-24)
§ 110.27 PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall operate a child-care center
within the city unless a fire permit for such purpose has been issued by the
Fire Department and a health permit for such purpose has been issued by the
regulatory authority. This shall not exclude requirements of the city adopted
International Fire Code or the Texas Health and Human Services Commission for
fire alarm and sprinkling mandates.
(‘78 Code, § 10-52)
   (B)   The term CHILD CARE shall not apply to, nor shall a permit be required
for, the following facilities:
      (1)   A state operated facility;
      (2)   An agency foster home or child placing agency as designated by the
Tex. Human Res. Code §§ 42.002(11) and (12), as amended;
      (3)   A facility that is operated in connection with a shopping center
business, religious organization or establishment where children are cared for
during short periods while parents or persons responsible for the children are
attending religious services, or engaging in other activities on or near the
premises, including, but not limited to retreats or classes for religious
instructions;
      (4)   A school or class for religious instruction that does not last
longer than two weeks that is conducted by a religious organization during the
summer months;
      (5)   A youth camp licensed by the Texas Department of State Health
Services;
      (6)   A hospital licensed by the Texas Department of State Health
Services;
      (7)   An education facility accredited by the Texas Education Agency or
the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools that operates primarily for
educational purposes in grades kindergarten and above or a before and after-
school program operated directly by an accredited educational facility or a
before and after-school program operated by another entity under contract with
the educational facility, if the Texas Education Agency or Southern Association
of Colleges and Schools has approved the curriculum content of the before and
after school program operated under the contracts;
      (8)   An educational facility that operates solely for educational
purposes in grades kindergarten through at least grade two, that does not
provide custodial care for more than one hour during the hours before or after
the customary school day and is a member of an organization that promulgates,
publishes and requires compliance with health, safety, fire and sanitation
standards equal to standards required by state, county or municipal codes;
      (9)   A kindergarten or preschool educational program that is operated as
part of a public school or private school accredited by the Texas Education
Agency and offers educational programs through grade six and does not provide
custodial care during the hours before or after the customary school day;
      (10)   A group day-care home, a family home, a specialized child-care
home, or a cottage family home facility as defined in Tex. Human Res. Code
Title 2, Subtitle D, Ch. 42, Subch. A;
      (11)   An educational facility that is integral to and inseparable from
its sponsoring religious organization and which does not provide custodial care
for more than two hours maximum, per day, and that offers educational programs
for children ages five and above one or more of the following:
         (a)   Kindergarten through grade three;
         (b)   Upper elementary or secondary grades, provided however, that a
religious organization such as that described in division (B)(3), where
children are cared for during short periods while parents or persons
responsible for the children are attending religious services or engaged in
other activities on or near the premises, may provide custodial care for more
than two hours per day;
      (12)   The Mansfield Independent School District and schools accredited
by the Texas Education Agency;
      (13)   A facility licensed, operated, certified, or registered by a state
agency other than the Department of Health and Human Services; or
      (14)   A juvenile detention facility certified under Tex. Fam. Code §§
51.12 or 141.042(d), a juvenile facility providing services solely for the
Texas Youth Commission, or any other correctional facility for children
operated or regulated by another state agency or by a political subdivision of
the state.
(‘78 Code, § 10-55)
(Ord. 767, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 1346, passed 4-23-01; Am. Ord. OR-2253-22,
passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. OR-2349-24, passed 2-26-24)
§ 110.28 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for an annual permit to operate a child-care center shall
be submitted by the operator on the forms specified by the Fire Department and
regulatory authority.
   (B)   A Fire Department permit application shall state the name, address and
telephone number of the permit applicant and the name, driver's license number
and date of birth of all employees and child-care staff members as required in
the Minimum Standards for Child-Care Centers. The employee background records
must be made available upon request by the regulatory authority.
      (1)   A site plan shall be submitted with the application, drawn to an
accurate scale, indicating the legal description of the property, and showing
the indoor and outdoor areas to be used for the child-care center.
      (2)   Any permit issued under this subchapter is nontransferable.
      (3)   The permit application shall include a certificate of liability
insurance coverage showing the minimum policy limits on coverage for bodily
injury or death of any person entrusted to the care of the child-care center.
   (C)   Child-care center requirements. The applicant is responsible for
complying with all applicable city ordinances, including, but not limited to,
zoning, building, fire, and health ordinances of the city.
   (D)   Permits required. Any person currently operating a child-care center
without the required permit(s) under existing ordinances shall, within 30 days
after the effective date hereof, make application(s) under the provisions of
this subchapter.
   (E)   Fire permit inspection fee. An annual fire permit fee, established in
the Master Fee Schedule adopted by the City Council, as amended from time to
time, shall be payable upon application to the Fire Department, and thereafter,
no later than January 30 of each year. No refund or proration of any fee
required hereunder shall be made.
   (F)   Regulatory authority permit requirements. No person shall operate or
cause to be operated a child-care center in the city without first obtaining a
health permit as issued by the regulatory authority.
      (1)   The health permit application shall be submitted to the regulatory
authority by the owner of a child-care center on the specified form. The health
permit application must include the licensed capacity of the facility and a
copy of their current child-care licensing permit.
      (2)   The health permit application shall state the name(s), address(es),
and telephone number(s) of all persons having an ownership interest in the
child-care center, as well as any other information requested by the regulatory
authority.
      (3)   Any health permit issued under this subchapter is not transferable
and must be prominently displayed.
   (G)   Permit issuance. The regulatory authority, shall have authority to
grant or refuse a health permit to operate a child-care center under the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (H)   Fire permit duration and renewal. Upon approval, the Fire Department
shall issue the fire permit for operation of the child-care center. All fire
permits will be due for renewal on or before January 30 of each succeeding
year.
   (I)   Regulatory authority permit duration and renewal. Upon approval by the
regulatory authority, the health permit for operation of a child-care center
will be valid for one year from the issuance of the permit. Upon expiration,
the health permit may be renewed for a one-year term upon payment of the annual
permit fee, submission of proof of insurance, and proof of background checks
for the owner, operator, director, and each employee conducted within the
previous 24 months. If such background checks are not current, no renewal shall
be issued until such background checks are submitted.
   (J)   Plan review and operation standards. Whenever a child-care center or
before and after-school facility is constructed or extensively remodeled and
whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a child-care center or
before and after-school facility, properly prepared plans and specifications
for such construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the
regulatory authority for review and approval before construction, remodeling,
or conversion has begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the
proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical plans and construction materials of
work areas and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment in centers. The
regulatory authority shall approve the plans and specifications if they meet
the requirements of the State of Texas, the regulatory authority, and city
ordinances. A plan review fee will be charged per the Master Fee Schedule
adopted by City Council, as amended from time to time.
(‘78 Code, § 10-53) (Ord. 767, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 1346, passed 4-23-01;
Am. Ord. OR-2253-22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. OR-2349-24, passed 2-26-24; Am.
Ord. OR-2392-24, passed 10-28-24)
§ 110.29 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The regulatory authority and Fire Department, are authorized to issue
permit(s) when he or she finds that the permit applicant has complied with the
requirements of this subchapter and other applicable sections of this code. The
permit(s) shall be refused in the event the applicant has not complied with the
requirements of this subchapter or any other applicable section of this code,
or if it is determined that any false statement has been made in the permit
application(s).
   (B)   The permitted premises shall be inspected not less frequently than
semiannually to assure that the facilities, grounds and equipment are
maintained in compliance with this subchapter, with the minimum standards
adopted hereby, and in a safe and sanitary condition for the welfare of the
occupants and patrons. Reports of the inspections shall be kept on file with
the city and copies issued to the permit holder, along with appropriate
directives to resolve any deficiencies observed in the inspection. The
regulatory authority and Fire Department, shall have authority to enforce all
provisions of this subchapter and to issue citations for any violation of any
of its provisions.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any permit holder to operate
any facility permitted under the provisions of this subchapter in violation
with any of the provisions hereof, the minimum standards adopted hereby or any
other applicable section of this code, or to fail to respond to any noted
deficiency or violation within the time specified by the Inspector for
correction.
   (D)   Plan review and operation standards.
      (1)   Whenever a child-care center or before and after-school facility is
constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is
converted to use as a child-care center or before and after-school facility,
properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling,
or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review and
approval before construction, remodeling, or conversion has begun. The plans
and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical
plans and construction materials of work areas and the type and model of
proposed fixed equipment in centers. The regulatory authority shall approve the
plans and specifications if they meet the requirements of the State of Texas,
the regulatory authority, and city ordinances. A plan review fee will be
charged per the city’s Department of Regulatory Compliance fee schedule.
      (2)   Whenever plans and specifications are required to be submitted to
the regulatory authority, who shall inspect the child-care center or before and
after-school facility prior to beginning its operation to determine compliance
with the approved plans and specifications and with the requirement of these
rules.
      (3)   Free-standing diaper changing stations in infant and toddler areas
shall have a hand sink, plumbed with hot water at least 100° Fahrenheit (up to
120° Fahrenheit) and cold running water, located at the diapering station. Hot
water must be available within 20 seconds.
      (4)   Child-care centers providing overnight care shall provide bathtubs
and/or showers.
      (5)   Stairs and porches more than two feet above the ground shall have
railings the children can reach.
      (6)   Outside play areas shall be surrounded by a fence with a minimum
height of four feet and shall be immediately adjacent to the center and located
away from heavy traffic areas. Such fences shall be of a design to prevent
entrapment hazards.
         (a)   The use of chain link fencing materials shall be prohibited;
            1.   This provision shall not apply to any existing child care
facilities in operation with a valid health permit in existence on the date of
the adoption of this subchapter. Child care facilities that contain physical
features that are not in compliance with this section and that present a clear
threat to public health, safety, or welfare shall be required to bring said
physical feature into conformance with this subchapter. All new or extensively
remodeled child care facilities shall comply with the physical facility
standards set forth in this section and all other applicable regulations within
the city’s code of ordinances. Extensive remodeling shall mean the repair or
alteration of 50% or more of the existing square footage of an existing
building, a change of occupancy, an addition, or the relocation of an existing
building.
         (b)   The following facilities shall be exempt from fencing
requirements:
            1.   Any child-care center operating a before and after-school
program in a public school building pursuant to a contract with any independent
school district;
            2.   A facility licensed to provide only an alternative care
program as defined in Minimum Standards; or
            3.   A facility licensed to provide only a get-well care program as
defined in Minimum Standards.
      (7)   Outdoor play equipment shall be away from busy areas in the yard
and securely anchored, unless portable by design.
      (8)   Swimming pools and interactive water features shall be constructed,
maintained, and comply with Chapter 92 “Health and Sanitation” standards
regarding swimming pools and spas.
      (9)   An isolation area must be available in the facility for children
who are not feeling well, and must be comfortable and supervised away from
other children.
      (10)   All handwashing lavatories shall be provided with hot and cold
water under pressure, tempered by means of mixing valve or combination faucet.
The facility must ensure that the temperature of hot water available to
children is at least 100° Fahrenheit and no higher than 120° Fahrenheit. Self-
closing or metering faucets shall provide a flow of water for at least 15
seconds without having to be reactivated. Soap and a hand drying device or
disposable towels shall be provided for use by both staff and children.
(‘78 Code, § 10-54) (Ord. 767, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 1346, passed 4-23-01;
Am. Ord. OR-2253-22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. 2349-24, passed 2-26-24)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.30 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Powers of the regulatory authority.
      (1)   Shall have the authority to regularly inspect or visit all child-
care centers and before and after-school programs in the city, whether
permitted or unpermitted, at any and all times necessary to ascertain if child-
care centers or before and after-school program operations are being operated
in conformity with this subchapter or if any conditions exist therein which
require correction.
      (2)   Shall have the authority to give written notice, on the premises,
to the operators of permitted or unpermitted child-care centers and before and
after-school program programs, pertaining to violation of and/or requirement to
comply with the provisions of this subchapter.
      (3)   If non-exempt unpermitted child-care centers or before and after-
school programs are found in operation, the regulatory authority shall have the
authority to give written notice to the operator of said facility to cease
child-care immediately.
   (B)   Authority to suspend permit - written notice required.
      (1)   The regulatory authority, after giving written notice, may suspend
any permit if it finds any of the following: violations of immediate danger
regarding construction of facility or on-premises buildings; toilet facility
violations; sanitation violations; food preparation violations; improper
storage and handling of chemicals or any harmful solution; lack of proper
supervision; child neglect; child-care staff criminal history; potential for
injury or death; infectious diseases; hazards with outdoor play areas; failure
to pay required fees; and failure to comply with all fire, zoning, building,
and health codes, at the child-care center or before and after-school program
care facility.
      (2)   The written notice from the regulatory authority shall call to the
attention of the permit holder the regulations of this subchapter in which he/
she or the child-care center or before and after-school program failed to
comply with, and shall specify a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, to
come into compliance. Suspension of the permit shall require the operator to
cease all activities immediately and to bring the child-care center or before
and after-school program facility into compliance with directives from the
regulatory authority within a prescribed time period.
      (3)   If the permit holder fails to comply with the provisions of this
subchapter within the time specified, the regulatory authority may revoke the
permit in accordance with this subchapter.
   (C)   Authority to revoke permit; written notice required. The regulatory
authority may, upon written notice by personal service or by certified or
registered mail sent to the address provided on the permit holder’s
application, revoke a permit in the event of any of the following:
      (1)   Entry of the regulatory authority into a permitted facility has
been denied or delayed;
      (2)   A statement of fact contained in the application was false or
materially misleading;
      (3)   The permit holder fails to comply with the requirements of division
(B)(2) hereof; or
      (4)   The permit holder has caused, suffered or permitted the commission
of an aggravated violation of any provision of this subchapter.
   (D)   Appeal; notice required.
      (1)   The notice of revocation or denial of a permit shall become a final
revocation after the expiration of ten days from the date of service upon the
permit holder, operator, manager, or other person in charge of the child-care
center or before and after-school program facility in question, unless on or
before the expiration of ten calendar days the permit holder shall file with
the regulatory authority a written appeal signed by such permit holder
addressed to the City Manager setting out the basis for such appeal and in
which it is requested that the City Manager grant a hearing upon the questions
of whether or not the permit shall be revoked.
      (2)   The revocation shall be stayed or postponed until such time as the
City Manager shall grant a hearing and make a final adjudication.
      (3)   The hearing shall be held within ten calendar days after the date
of filing the appeal and the action of the City Manager after hearing all the
evidence and facts shall be final and conclusive as to all parties. Following
revocation or denial, the permittee or applicant shall not be eligible to apply
or reapply for a permit for a period of one calendar year from the date of the
revocation or denial. Any such revocation or denial shall be reported to the
Texas Department of Protective and Regulatory Services. The city shall also
report any violation notices or illegal operations to the Department.
(‘78 Code, § 10-56) (Ord. 767, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 1346, passed 4-23-01;
Am. Ord. OR-2253-22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. OR-2349-24, passed 2-26-24)
§ 110.31 OPERATION OF A CHILD-CARE CENTER.
   (A)   The child-care center permit(s) shall be conspicuously posted on an
inside wall of the main facility and shall be continuously displayed for public
view.
   (B)   A child-care center shall be operated in accordance with all
ordinances of the city and state and federal statutes where applicable.
   (C)   Health records maintained by the facility shall be available for
inspection at all times by the regulatory authority. Records of the facility
shall include immunization schedules and emergency care permission slips from a
parent and guardian for emergency medical treatment of children.
   (D)   The child-care staff, employees and/or drivers shall not be permitted
to work while afflicted with infectious diseases or other illnesses which would
adversely affect their work or the health of the children. Any child ill with a
communicable disease shall be isolated from other children at the child-care
center. Persons shall not be permitted in the child-care center whose health
status or behavior suggests a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of
others, including symptoms of a contagious illness, a dangerous mental or
physical condition, or symptoms of drug or alcohol intoxication.
   (E)   Unanchored mobile homes and upstairs apartments shall not be eligible
sites for child-care centers.
   (F)   Child-care centers may not be used in connection with any other
operation when the other operation is using the same space concurrently. The
child-care center shall not have an interrupted food schedule if a common
kitchen is used.
   (G)   The child-care center shall maintain adequate toilet facilities for
the children, including tissue, paper towels, clean cloths or mounted, approved
hand dryer blowers and soap. A child-care center shall also maintain an
adequate amount of first-aid supplies including, but not limited to, soap,
antiseptic solutions, absorbent cotton, cotton-tip applicators, tweezers,
magnifying glass, sterile gauze, adhesive tape, and adhesive bandages. One
medium-sized package or container of each of these first-aid supplies shall be
maintained in an unopened reserve at all times. First-aid procedures and
supplies shall be applied, including cleaning and bandaging, for any cut or
bleeding abrasion of the skin.
   (H)   Hand sanitizers may not be used as substitute for handwashing.
Handwashing should be a routine part of education and hygiene practices. Hand
sanitizer may be used in situations such as field trips, if no other source of
handwashing is available.
   (I)   Fire inspection requirements.
      (1)   Each child-care center shall have a fire evacuation plan posted in
each room used by the children.
      (2)   The first priority in the event of fire shall be immediate
evacuation of the children. Each child-care center shall have an annual fire
inspection with a written report submitted to the permittee and the city.
      (3)   Any corrections or deficiencies noted shall be promptly corrected
by the permittee. All child-care staff members shall be instructed in emergency
procedures as well as the fire evacuation plan.
      (4)   Fire drills shall be held quarterly at different times of the day
to test the fire evacuation plan.
      (5)   The building shall be constructed so as to permit fast and safe
exit within three minutes in any emergency.
      (6)   The facility shall have at least two exits to the outside located
on different sides of the building. Doors opening into a fenced yard shall be
able to be easily opened from the inside by the children.
      (7)   Doors between rooms shall not be locked while children are present.
Doors and pathways shall not be blocked.
      (8)   Heating devices and their nearby areas shall not be allowed to
present any fire hazards.
      (9)   Gas appliances shall have metal tubing and connections unless
otherwise approved by the Fire Marshal. Open flame space heaters are
prohibited. All gas heaters are to be vented to the outside.
      (10)   Gas pipes shall be tested annually for leaks. A copy of the test
report shall be available at the child-care center.
      (11)   Floor furnaces shall be enclosed to keep children away.
      (12)   Smoke detectors shall be installed to provide an effective warning
to the building occupants of a fire. The detectors shall be placed as required
by the Fire Marshal. Stand-alone single station smoke detectors are permitted
in Mother’s Day out programs that operate less than three days per week and in
facilities that have less than 50 children in care. Before and after-school
care programs providing care for students at a school after normal school hours
are not required to provide smoke detectors under this subchapter.
   (J)   The child-care center shall have a sanitation inspection. A written
report shall be kept on file with the city and a copy furnished to the
permittee. Any corrections called for in the report shall be made promptly by
the permittee.
   (K)   The buildings, grounds and equipment of the child-care center shall be
kept in repair and maintained to protect the health and safety of the children.
      (1)   Electrical outlets accessible to children shall be protected with
childproof covers or safety outlets when not being used.
      (2)   Playgrounds shall be supervised at all times by a teacher or child-
care staff in the same ratio required to be maintained in classrooms.
      (3)   Play areas shall be surrounded by a fence with a minimum height of
four feet.
         (a)   Facilities are exempt from this requirement if they meet the
provisions set out in §
110.29(D)(6)(a).
      (4)   The playground area, including all play equipment, shall be
maintained in a safe condition. No sharp edges, dangerous protrusions, or other
obvious hazards shall be allowed in the play area.
      (5)   Any pool, pond or other body of water greater than ten inches in
depth shall be separated from the playground by a fence with a minimum height
of four feet.
      (6)   Permittee shall keep all toxic substances, both indoors and
outdoors, secure from access by the children.
      (7)   All emergency telephone numbers required by the minimum standards
shall be posted by a telephone which is accessible to all child-care staff.
   (L)   Animals are prohibited at all times from food preparation areas, as
well as childcare areas and child play areas when children are present or when
the animal may present a danger to the children.
   (M)   Overnight child-care facilities.
      (1)   Bathtubs or showers shall be made available for children staying
overnight in a child-care center. Bathtubs or showers used by preschool
children shall be supervised at all times when in use. Privacy shall be assured
for school age children. Tubs or showers shall be cleaned out after each use.
Children shall be provided fresh wash cloths and towels.
      (2)   Toilet fixtures and facilities shall be provided in accordance with
the city’s Plumbing Code.
      (3)   The temperature of any water available to the occupants or patrons
of a child-care center shall reach no higher than 120° Fahrenheit.
      (4)   Each lavatory shall be provided with both hot water and cold water.
      (5)   All handwashing lavatories installed after the effective date of
this subchapter shall be provided with hot and cold water under pressure,
tempered by means of a mixing valve or combination faucet. The child-care
center must ensure that the temperature of hot water available to children is
no higher than 120° Fahrenheit. Self closing or metering faucets shall provide
a flow of water for at least 15 seconds without having to be reactivated. Soap
and a hand-drying device or disposable towels shall be provided for use by both
child-care staff and children.
   (N)   An enrollment agreement shall be obtained for each child prior to
admission, filed at the child-care center or before and after-school facility,
and the director shall be responsible for assuring that the terms of the
agreement related to divisions (N)(1) through (N)(5) below are met. The
agreement signed by the parents shall contain:
      (1)   Hours the child shall be in care (not to exceed 12 hours except in
an emergency);
      (2)   Notarized emergency medical authorization;
      (3)   Any unique security code or child tracking method;
      (4)   A statement that the child will be released only to a parent or a
person named by the parent; and
      (5)   In any instance when the person(s) listed above cannot pick up the
child, the procedures described herein shall be followed:
         (a)   The parent or guardian shall phone the child-care center or
before and after-school facility, and shall designate who will pick the child
up. The director or child-care staff member shall check the child’s enrollment
record to verify parent information.
         (b)   The person who picks up the child must identify themselves as
follows:
            1.   Shall present photo identification;
            2.   The unlisted person shall sign the child out; and
            3.   The director or child-care staff shall copy the valid photo
identification card or photograph the person before they leave the child-care
center or before and after-school facility.
         (c)   The procedure to release children to unlisted persons as
required by the city shall be posted so that it is readily accessible to all
child-care staff.
         (d)   In the event that a child is found to be missing from a child-
care center, the operator of the child-care center shall report such fact to
the city Police Department and regulatory authority immediately.
   (O)   In an emergency occurrence, such as any circumstance that renders all
or part of the center unsafe or unsanitary for a child-care center or before
and after-school facility [for example, but without limitation, flood, fire,
water outage, lack of hot water (120° Fahrenheit), power outage, or sewage
backup], the person in charge shall immediately notify the regulatory
authority.
(‘78 Code, § 10-57) (Ord. 767, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 1346, passed 4-23-01;
Am. Ord. OR-2231-21, passed 12-13-21; Am. Ord. OR-2253-22, passed 5-9-22; Am.
Ord. OR-2349-24, passed 2-26-24) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.32 FOOD SERVICE.
   A child-care facility in which food is prepared for human consumption shall
comply with
Chapter 94 “Food Establishment Regulations” of the code of ordinances. Child-
care facilities that are presently using residential type refrigeration or
cooking equipment must upgrade to commercial refrigeration when the unit fails
or is replaced, or if there is a change of ownership.
(Ord. OR-2231-21, passed 12-13-21; Am. Ord. OR-2253-22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord.
OR-2349-24, passed 2-26-24)
§ 110.33 HEALTH PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Requirement. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a child-
care facility within the city unless they possess a current and valid health
permit issued by the city’s Regulatory Compliance Department.
   (B)   Fees. Permit fees are established in the Master Fee Schedule adopted
by City Council, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. OR-2231-21, passed 12-13-21; Am. Ord. OR-2253-22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord.
OR-2349-24, passed 2-26-24; Am. Ord. OR-2392-24, passed 10-28-24)
§ 110.34 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   All of the regulations provided in this subchapter are hereby declared to be
governmental and for the health, safety and welfare of the general public. Any
member of the City Council or any city official or employee charged with the
enforcement of this subchapter, acting for the city in the discharge of his or
her duties, shall not thereby render himself or herself personally liable; and
he or she is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that
might accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or
permitted in the discharge of his or her duties.
(Ord. OR-2231-21, passed 12-13-21; Am. Ord. OR-2253-22, passed 5-9-22)
§ 110.35 ENFORCEMENT.
   The City Manager, or his or her designated representative, shall have
authority to enforce all provisions of this subchapter together with other
applicable laws regarding child-care centers. This authority shall include the
authority for inspection or visitation of all facilities required to be
permitted under the provisions of this subchapter at all reasonable times.
(‘78 Code, § 10-58) (Ord. 767, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 1346, passed 4-23-01;
Am. Ord. OR-2253-22, passed 5-9-22)
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 110.45 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MASSAGE. Any process consisting in kneading, rubbing, tapping or
manipulating the skin of the body of a human being, either with the hand or by
means of electrical instruments or apparatus, or other special apparatus, but
shall not include massage by duly licensed physicians, nor massage of the face
practiced by duly licensed beauty parlors or barbershops, nor massage
administered by athletic trainers to bona fide athletic team members.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. Any building, room, place or establishment other than
a regularly licensed hospital where manipulated massage or manipulated exercise
are practiced upon the human body by anyone not a duly licensed physician,
whether with or without use of mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices and
shall include Turkish bathhouses. This term shall not include, however, beauty
parlors or barbershops duly licensed under the statutes of the state, nor
registered physical therapists who treat only patients recommended by a
licensed physician and who operate only under the physician's direction.
('78 Code, § 10-30) (Ord. 327, passed 3-28-77)
§ 110.46 LICENSE REQUIRED; CONDITIONS; DISPLAY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a massage establishment in
the city without first having obtained a license therefor from the City
Secretary in accordance with the provisions of this section and paying the fee
herein provided. The license shall only be issued upon the approval in writing
of the city health officer and the Chief of Police and the securing of a
certificate of occupancy from the building official. The license shall be
exhibited at all times in the establishment.
('78 Code, § 10-31) (Ord. 327, passed 3-28-77)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.47 LICENSE FEES.
   The annual license fee shall be $25 for each establishment. If the license
is obtained between January first and June thirtieth, inclusive, of any year,
the full amount of the fee shall be paid; if the license is obtained between
July first and December thirty-first, inclusive, of any year, the fee shall be
one-half of the amount. No refund shall ever be made of any license fee.
('78 Code, § 10-32) (Ord. 327, passed 3-28-77)
§ 110.48 REGISTERED PHYSICAL THERAPIST REQUIRED.
   A registered physical therapist duly licensed by the state shall be on duty
at all times during which the establishment shall be open for business.
('78 Code, § 10-33) (Ord. 327, passed 3-28-77)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter who which no specific
penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in §
10.99.
   (B)   A violation of the conditions of §
110.11 is declared to be unlawful, and any person found guilty of any such act
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined as provided
in §
10.99.
('78 Code, § 10-42)
(Ord. 603, passed 4-22-85)
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Purpose
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   Exemptions
   
111.04   General regulations
   
111.05   Solicitation and canvassing in public right-of-way
   
111.06   Solicitation from a vehicle
   
111.07   Penalty
   111.08 - 111.10   [Reserved]
Permit
   
111.11   Permit required for solicitation; fees
   
111.12   Application
   
111.13   Solicitation by minors; applications
   
111.14   [Reserved]
   
111.15   Application review and permit acceptance
   
111.16   Permit
   
111.17   Revocation or suspension of permit
   
111.18   Appeals
   
111.19   [Reserved]
   
111.20   [Reserved]
Solicitation of Funds
   
111.21   Definitions
   
111.22   Offenses
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the general health,
public safety and welfare, comfort, convenience and protection of the city and
the residents of the city by:
      (1)   Prohibiting door-to-door solicitation and canvassing activity at
residences during the times when such activity is most intrusive and disruptive
to citizens' privacy;
      (2)   Regulating the locations in which solicitation activity may occur
to promote safety and minimize congestion;
      (3)   Regulating the manner in which any solicitation activity,
canvassing activity or handbill distribution may occur to promote good order,
prevent litter and protect citizens from aggressive and intimidating practices;
and
      (4)   Requiring solicitors to register with the city to aid crime
detection and deter deceptive practices and fraud.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall be construed to accomplish these
purposes.
(Ord. OR-2221-21, passed 10-11-21)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANVASSER. A person who engages in canvassing activities.
   CANVASSING or CANVASSING ACTIVITY. The act of:
      (1)   Traveling either by foot or vehicle, going door-to-door, house-to-
house, building-to-building; or
      (2)   Occupying space in or traveling on or through any public place in
the city, personally contacting persons to communicate in any manner, whether
orally, by written or printed materials including, but not limited to,
handbills, leaflets, hand signing or by any other method, direct or implied,
for any purpose other than selling or taking orders for goods, wares,
merchandise or services.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of Police of the city.
   CITY. The City of Mansfield, Texas.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager or the City Manager's designated
representative.
   CURB. The line adjacent to the edge of the roadway which may be either a
raised or lowered or a marked or unmarked surface.
   HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise
reproduced original or copies of any manner.
   HANDBILL DISTRIBUTION. Traveling either by foot or vehicle, going door-to-
door, house-to-house or building-to-building without personally contacting
persons to distribute or leave on or at each premises handbills for any
purpose.
   MINOR. A person under the age of 18.
   NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION. An organization or entity that is exempt from the
payment of tax pursuant to § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
   PERMANENT ESTABLISHED BUSINESS LOCATION. An established place of business
operating in a permanent structure on a continuous basis.
   PERMANENT STRUCTURE. A structure for which a certificate of occupancy has
been issued.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any area to which the public is invited or in which the public
is permitted, and includes, but is not limited to, the parking lot of any
commercial establishment and the right-of-way of any street or highway, but
does not include the offices or work areas of work places not entered by the
public in the normal course of business.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a street or highway designed, improved or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, typically delineated by curbs, edge-
lines, or the edge of the pavement.
   SELLING. To sell, dispense, peddle, hawk, display, offer to sell or solicit
for sale by offering or exposing for sale any goods, wares, merchandise or
services.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street or highway that is between a curb or
lateral line of a roadway and the adjacent property line and intended for
pedestrian use.
   SOLICITATION ACTIVITIES. Traveling either by foot or vehicle, going door-to-
door, house-to-house or building-to-building or occupying space in or traveling
on or through any public place in the city while personally contacting persons
to ask, barter or communicate in any manner, whether orally, by written or
printed materials including but not limited to handbills or leaflets, hand
signing or by any other method, direct or implied, for the purpose of selling
or taking orders for goods, wares, merchandise or services.
   SOLICITOR. A person who engages in solicitation activities.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The width between the boundary lines of a publicly
maintained way, any part of which is open to the public for vehicular traffic.
   TRAFFIC SAFETY VEST. A high visibility vest made of fluorescent orange,
pink, blue or yellow material that may be clearly seen at any time of the day.
(Ord. OR-2221-21, passed 10-11-21)
§ 111.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter does not apply to:
      (1)   The activity of a person with an appointment calling upon or
dealing with manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors, brokers or retailers at
their place of business and in the usual course of business;
      (2)   The activity of a person acting at the request or invitation of the
owner or occupant of a residence;
      (3)   Activity approved in conjunction with a city-sponsored event;
      (4)   Activity conducted in conjunction with a residential yard or garage
sale;
      (5)   Activity of a business conducted at the permanent established
location of that business;
      (6)   Activity conducted on property not owned or under control of the
city with the consent of the owner or person in control of the property and not
conducted while traveling either by foot or vehicle, going door-to-door, house-
to-house or building-to-building;
      (7)   Sales made under the authority of and by judicial order;
      (8)   The activity of a government employee acting within the course and
scope of their official duties serving, delivering or posting official notices
including notices of code violations, water restrictions, utility outages, burn
bans, special event impacts or security issues; or
      (9)   The distribution of newspapers to subscribers.
   (B)   It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution for any offense
under this chapter that the activity of the defendant is listed in division
(A).
(Ord. OR-2221-21, passed 10-11-21)
§ 111.04 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation or
canvassing activity at a residence:
      (1)   Before 9:00 a.m.; or
      (2)   After 7:00 p.m. Central Standard Time or 8:30 p.m. Daylight Savings
Time; or
      (3)   Sunday; or
      (4)   Any of the following holidays: Good Friday; Thanksgiving Day; the
day after Thanksgiving Day; Christmas Eve; and Christmas Day.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation
activities, canvassing activities, or handbill distribution at a premises with
a posted notice that such activity is not welcomed or invited. It shall be
presumed that there is notice that solicitation or canvassing activity is not
welcomed or invited when there is exhibited in a conspicuous place on or near
the main entrance of the premises, a sign, not less than four inches by three
inches in size, containing the words "NO SOLICITORS," "NO TRESPASSING," or
words of similar meaning in letters not less than two-thirds of one inch in
height.
   (C)   A person who is not the owner or tenant of a premises commits an
offense if the person removes, defaces or otherwise renders illegible a sign
placed by the owner or tenant of the premises pursuant to division (B).
   (D)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation
activities, canvassing activities, or handbill distribution and remains or
lingers on a premises after being informed by the owner or tenant that they are
not welcome.
   (E)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation
activities, canvassing activities, or handbill distribution in an aggressive or
intimidating manner. The term AGGRESSIVE OR INTIMIDATING MANNER means:
      (1)   Blocking the path of a person who is the object of the activity; or
      (2)   Following behind, ahead or alongside a person who walks away from
the solicitor after being solicited, approached, accosted or offered a
handbill, leaflet or any other item.
   (F)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation
activities, canvassing activities, or handbill distribution and distributes,
deposits, places, throws, scatters, or casts a handbill at a residence except
by:
      (1)   Handing or transmitting the handbill directly to the owner or
occupant then present in or upon the premises; or
      (2)   Without using adhesive or tape, placing or depositing the handbill
in a manner that secures the handbill and prevents it from being blown away,
except that mailboxes may not be used when the use is prohibited by federal
postal laws or regulations.
   (G)   A person commits an offense if the person secures a handbill at a
residence in the manner described by division (F)(2):
      (1)   In a place that is more than five feet from the front door of the
residence; or
      (2)   When another handbill has already been left or secured at the
residence and has not been removed from the outside of the residence.
   (H)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation
activities without wearing a traffic safety vest.
(Ord. OR-2221-21, passed 10-11-21; Ord. OR-2237-22, passed 1-10-22)
§ 111.05 SOLICITATION AND CANVASSING IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation or
canvassing activity within the roadway, or on any median or traffic island
within the right-of-way of any street or highway within the city.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation
activity by a direct transaction or exchange with the occupant of any vehicle
stopped or traveling on any street or highway in the city which is designated
as an arterial or collector on the city's thoroughfare plan. An offense under
this division occurs when the offer, solicitation or distribution is made
regardless of whether a transaction is completed.
   (C)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation or
canvassing activity on a sidewalk within the city in a manner that impedes the
flow of pedestrian traffic.
   (D)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation or
canvassing activity on a sidewalk in such a manner that the sidewalk is
occupied by any tent, table, blanket, container, box, rack or any other
physical structure. Solicitation or canvassing activity on a sidewalk is
permitted if the handbills, leaflets, or other written or printed material,
goods, wares or merchandise are carried and displayed by the person engaged in
the solicitation or canvassing activity.
   (E)   It is a defense to prosecution under divisions (A) or (B) above if the
person engages in solicitation activity to operate a taxi cab, mail carrier,
vehicle for hire such as commercial servicing or repair of any disabled motor
vehicle.
   (F)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (A) if the person
engages in solicitation activity from a vehicle in a manner that does not
violate §
111.06(A)(1).
(Ord. OR-2221-21, passed 10-11-21)
§ 111.06 SOLICITATION FROM A VEHICLE.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person conducts solicitation
activities from a vehicle and:
      (1)   The solicitation is conducted at a location within the right-of-way
of any street or highway in the city which is designated as a highway or
freeway, major or minor arterial on the city's thoroughfare plan; or
      (2)   The person stops the vehicle within a roadway to conduct business
before the vehicle has been approached, called, or waived down by a prospective
customer.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person operates a vehicle from
which solicitation activities are conducted upon any street or highway within
the city in a manner that blocks or impedes access to or from any alley, street
or driveway, or impedes the flow of traffic on any public street or highway.
   (C)   A person commits an offense if the driver of a vehicle is distributing
funds or material items to a solicitor and the activities are conducted upon
any street or highway within the city in a manner that blocks or impedes access
to or from any alley, street or driveway, or impedes the flow of traffic on any
public street or highway.
(Ord. OR-2221-21, passed 10-11-21)
§ 111.07 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not
more than $500 for each offense as provided in §
10.99. Each attempted or completed act of handbill distribution or solicitation
or canvassing activity shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (B)   In case of any willful violation of any of the terms and provisions of
this chapter, the city, in addition to imposing the penalties provided in
division (A), may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in any court
having proper jurisdiction, to restrain, correct or abate such violations, and
the definition of any violation as a misdemeanor shall not preclude the city
from invoking the civil remedies given it by the laws of the state.
   (C)   The court trying a civil or criminal cause under divisions (A) or (B)
shall have the right and power upon judgment or conviction of any person for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter to decree and to make as a
part of the judgment or conviction in such cause the forfeiture of the permit
required by this chapter. When a permit is forfeited in this manner, no further
certificate shall be issued to that person for one year from the date of
judgment or conviction.
(Ord. OR-2221-21, passed 10-11-21)
§§ 111.08 - 111.10 [RESERVED].
PERMIT
§ 111.11 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR SOLICITATION; FEES.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in solicitation
activities in the city without a valid permit issued by the Chief of Police or
the designee of the Chief of Police.
   (B)   A permit shall be valid for one year following the date of its
issuance unless a shorter period is requested by the applicant.
   (C)   An applicant for a permit shall pay a non-refundable application fee
at the time the application is submitted.
   (D)   The amount of the non-refundable application fee shall be $100. If a
person, firm, corporation or organization engages in solicitation activity
through two or more agents, employees, or volunteers the non-refundable
application fee for each additional agent, employee or volunteer shall be $100
per each agent, employee, or volunteer. The non-refundable application fee
shall be used for the purpose of defraying administrative expenses incident to
the issuing of permit.
   (E)   A non-profit organization or a person conducting solicitation activity
on behalf of a non-profit organization is exempt from payment of the
application fee.
(Ord. OR-2221-21, passed 10-11-21)
§ 111.12 APPLICATION.
   A person desiring to conduct solicitation activities within the city shall
make a written application on a form provided by the Chief of Police for a
permit. The application shall contain or be submitted with the following
information:
   (A)   The full name, date of birth, phone number and address of the
applicant;
   (B)   A valid state driver's license number or a state-approved
identification card number (the Chief of Police or the designee of the Chief of
Police will make a photocopy and attach to the application) of the applicant;
   (C)   Except as provided by §
111.13(C), two photographs of the applicant, measuring one and one-half-inch by
one and one-half-inch and showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a
clear and distinguishing manner, which shall have been taken within the
preceding 60 days before filing the application;
   (D)   If a vehicle or vehicles are used to conduct the solicitation
activity, a description of each vehicle, its license plate number and vehicle
identification number, the name and license number of the driver who will
operate each vehicle, and adequate proof under state law that each driver
maintains financial responsibility for the vehicle they will operate shall be
attached to the application;
   (E)   If the applicant is acting as an employee, agent or volunteer, the
name and physical street address (not a post office box) and telephone number
of the employer, principal or organization with credentials in written form
establishing the relationship and authority of the employee, agent or volunteer
to act for the employer, principal or organization;
   (F)   If applicable, the merchandise to be sold or offered for sale, the
nature of the services to be furnished;
   (G)   The approximate time period within which the solicitation is to be
made, stating the date of the beginning of the solicitation activity, its
projected conclusion and the proposed dates and times of solicitation;
   (H)   Whether the applicant, upon any order obtained, will demand, accept or
receive payment or the deposit of money in advance of final delivery;
   (I)   If the applicant, or the applicant's employer or principal has pled
guilty, or nolo contendere to, or has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor
involving fraud, deceit, theft, embezzlement, burglary, larceny, fraudulent
conversion, misrepresentation, or misappropriation of property within ten years
preceding the date of application, a description of each such conviction or
plea, the name of the court and jurisdiction in which the complaint or
indictment was filed and the date of the offense;
   (J)   If the applicant, or the applicant's employer or principal is a person
against whom a civil judgment or administrative decision based upon fraud,
deceit, theft, embezzlement, burglary, larceny, fraudulent conversion,
misrepresentation, or misappropriation of property has been entered or ordered
within ten years preceding the date of application, a description of judgment
or action, the case or cause number, if any, and the court or administrative
agency that rendered the judgment or decision; and
   (K)   If the solicitation activity is to be conducted on behalf of a non-
profit organization, proof of such status shall be attached to the application.
(Ord. OR-2221-21, passed 10-11-21)
§ 111.13 SOLICITATION BY MINORS; APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   A minor who conducts solicitation activities shall be sponsored or
employed by a person over the age of 18, a corporation, firm or organization
The person, corporation, firm or organization that is sponsoring or employing
the minor(s) is responsible for controlling the conduct of the minor(s) and the
minors shall be under the constant supervisor of a person 18 years of age or
older.
   (B)   A person, corporation, firm or organization that sponsors or employs
one or more minors as solicitors may submit one application and pay one non-
refundable application fee, in the amount of $100, for the permit of the minors
regardless of the number of minors who conduct solicitation activities. The
sponsor or employer shall provide the Chief of Police the name(s), date(s) of
birth, address(es) and driver's license number(s) (if applicable), and a
notarized parental consent form for each minor that will be conducting
solicitation activities. The parental consent form to employ a child to
solicit, which shall be obtained from the Texas Workforce Commission, shall
acknowledge the release of the information set forth above.
   (C)   A minor that does not submit an application is exempt from §
111.16 and shall be required to carry while conducting solicitation activities
only a copy of the approved solicitor's permit application.
(Ord. OR-2221-21, passed 10-11-21)
§ 111.14 [RESERVED].
§ 111.15 APPLICATION REVIEW AND PERMIT ACCEPTANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, the Chief of Police or the designee of
the Chief of Police shall review the application to ensure compliance with this
chapter.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall authorize the permit within 30 days of
receipt of the application unless:
      (1)   An investigation reveals that the applicant or the applicant's
employer, principal or organization falsified information or omitted
information on the application;
      (2)   Within ten years preceding the date of application, the applicant
or the applicant's employer, principal or organization has pled guilty or nolo
contendere to, or has been convicted of, a felony or misdemeanor described in §
111.12(I);
      (3)   Within ten years preceding the date of application, a civil
judgment or administrative decision described in §
111.12(J) has been entered or ordered against the applicant or the applicant's
employer, principal or organization;
      (4)   The applicant provided no proof of authority to act on behalf of
the employer, principal or organization; or
      (5)   The application does not contain the information or documents
required by §
111.12.
   (C)   The denial and the reasons for the denial shall be noted on the
application, and the applicant shall be notified of the denial in person or by
notice mailed to the applicant and the applicant's employer, principal or
organization at the address shown on the application or the last known address.
The notice of denial shall be mailed within 30 days of the receipt of the
application.
(Ord. OR-2221-21, passed 10-11-21)
§ 111.16 PERMIT.
   (A)   Upon authorization of the permit, the Chief of Police or the designee
of the Chief of Police shall deliver a permit for each solicitor.
   (B)   The permit shall be in the form of a photo identification tag and
shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the solicitor;
      (2)   The solicitor's employer, principal or organization, if applicable;
      (3)   The kind of goods or services to be sold or offered for sale, if
applicable;
      (4)   A description and license plate number of any vehicle to be used in
carrying out the solicitation activities, if applicable;
      (5)   A permit number; and
      (6)   The dates of issuance and expiration of the certificate.
   (C)   When engaged in door to door solicitation, each solicitor shall wear a
high visibility vest provided by the city displaying the current year. Each
permit shall be affixed to the vest at all times while conducting door to door
sales.
   (D)   A permit shall be used only by the solicitor for whom it was issued
and may not be transferred to another person. A person commits an offense if
the person wears or displays a photo identification tag issued to another
person.
   (E)   A person who uses a vehicle in conducting solicitation activities
shall post a sign located in a conspicuous place on or in the window of the
vehicle, identifying the name of the person, company or organization that the
person represents. If the name is an individual person, it must be followed by
the word "solicitor" The lettering on the sign must be at least two and one-
half inches high. A person commits an offense if the person violates this
division.
(Ord. OR-2221-21, passed 10-11-21)
§ 111.17 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   A permit issued pursuant to this subchapter may be revoked or suspended by
the Chief of Police, after notice sent in written format by certified mail to
the address listed on the application or hand delivered by a police officer,
for any of the following reasons:
   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for permit;
   (B)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made by a solicitor in
the course of conducting solicitation activities;
   (C)   A plea or conviction of a crime described in §
111.12(I);
   (D)   A judgment involving a matter described in §
111.12(J); or
   (E)   A violation of any of the regulations set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. OR-2221-21, passed 10-11-21)
§ 111.18 APPEALS.
   (A)   A person who is denied a permit or whose permit is revoked or
suspended by the Chief of Police may appeal the decision to the City Manager's
office by filing notice of appeal with the City Manager within 15 days after
the notice of the decision is mailed to the address indicated on the
application or the last known address.
   (B)   Within ten days of the receipt of the notice of appeal, the City
Manager shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal which shall be
not later than 40 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal.
   (C)   Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be delivered to the
person by mail, sent to the address indicated on the application or the last
known address of the appellant.
   (D)   The decision of the City Manager on the appeal is final. No other
administrative procedures are provided by the city.
(Ord. OR-2221-21, passed 10-11-21)
§ 111.19 [RESERVED].
§ 111.20 [RESERVED].
SOLICITATION OF FUNDS
§ 111.21 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AGGRESSIVE OR INTIMIDATING MANNER.
         (a)   To approach or speak to a person in such a manner as would cause
a reasonable person to believe that the person is being threatened with:
            1.   Imminent bodily injury; or
            2.   The commission of a criminal act upon the person or another
person, or upon property in the person's immediate possession;
         (b)   To persist in a solicitation after the person solicited has
given a negative response; or
         (c)   To block, either individually or as part of a group of persons,
the passage of a solicited person.
      AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE. A machine, other than a telephone:
         (a)   That is capable of being operated by a customer of a financial
institution;
         (b)   By which the customer may communicate to the financial
institution a request to withdraw a benefit for the customer or for another
person directly from the customer's account or from the customer's account
under a line of credit previously authorized by the financial institution for
the customer; and
         (c)   The use of which may or may not involve personnel of a financial
institution.
      EXTERIOR PUBLIC PAY TELEPHONE. Any coin or credit card reader telephone
that is:
         (a)   Installed or located anywhere on a premise except exclusively in
the interior of a building located on the premise; and
         (b)   Accessible and available for use by members of the general
public.
      PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION STOP. An area officially marked and designated as a
place to wait for a bus, a light rail vehicle, or any other public
transportation vehicle that is operated on a scheduled route with passengers
paying fares on an individual basis.
      SELF-SERVICE CAR WASH. A structure:
         (a)   At which a vehicle may be manually washed by its owner or
operator with equipment that is activated by the deposit of money in a coin-
operated machine or a station of vacuums used in the cleaning of a vehicle
whether coin-operated or not; and
         (b)   That is accessible and available for use by the general public.
      SELF-SERVICE FUEL PUMP. A fuel pump:
         (a)   From which a vehicle may be manually filled with gasoline or
other fuel directly by its owner or operator, without the aid of an employee or
attendant of the premises at which the fuel pump is located; and
         (b)   That is accessible and available for use by the general public.
      SOLICITATION. To ask, beg or plead, whether orally or in written or
printed manner or with an object for the purpose of receiving contributions,
alms, charity, or gifts of items of value for oneself or another person.
      SOLICITATION-FREE ZONE. Any area or structure which provides any service,
retail sales or entertainment for the general public and includes any parking
lot used for customer parking associated with those areas or structures.
   (B)   In this chapter, to the extent of any conflict between the definitions
in this section and §
111.02, the definitions in this section shall control.
(Ord. OR-2221-21, passed 10-11-21)
§ 111.22 OFFENSES.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if he conducts a solicitation in an
aggressive or intimidating manner.
   (B)   (1)   A person commits an offense if he conducts a solicitation in any
outdoor area in the city at any time after 7:00 p.m. Central Standard Time or
8:30 p.m. Daylight Savings Time; or Sunday; or on any of the following
holidays: Good Friday; Thanksgiving Day; the day after Thanksgiving Day;
Christmas Eve; and Christmas Day.
      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution under this division if the
solicitation:
         (a)   Consists exclusively of passive, nonverbal acts; or
         (b)   Was being conducted on the property with the advance written
permission of the owner, manager or other person in control of the property.
   (C)   A person commits an offense if he or she conducts solicitation at any
time within a solicitation-free zone. It is an affirmative defense to
prosecution under this division if the solicitation was being conducted on
property with advanced written permission of the owner, manager, or other
person in control of the property.
   (D)   A person commits an offense if he or she conducts a solicitation of
any person within 50 feet of:
      (1)   An automated teller machine;
      (2)   An entrance or exit of a bank, credit union, or other similar
financial institution;
      (3)   An exterior public pay phone;
      (4)   A self-service car wash;
      (5)   A self-service fuel pump;
      (6)   A public transportation stop; or
      (7)   An outdoor dining area of a fixed food establishment.
   (E)   For the purpose of division (D) measurement will be made in a straight
line, without regard to intervening objects or structures, from the nearest
point at which a solicitation is being conducted to whichever is applicable of
the following:
      (1)   The nearest entrance or exit of a facility in which an automated
teller machine is enclosed or, if the machine is not enclosed in a facility, to
the nearest part of the automated teller machine;
      (2)   The nearest entrance or exit of a bank, credit union, or other
similar financial institution;
      (3)   The nearest part of an exterior public pay phone;
      (4)   The nearest part of a structure of a self-service car wash;
      (5)   The nearest part of a self-service fuel pump;
      (6)   The nearest point of any sign or marking designating an area as a
public transportation stop; or
      (7)   The nearest part of any table in an outdoor dining area or, if the
outdoor dining area is contained within an open-air enclosure, the nearest part
of that enclosure.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a solicitation within a
roadway, or on any median or traffic island within the right-of-way of any
street or highway within the city.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle or any person to
conduct a solicitation by a direct transaction or exchange with the occupant of
any vehicle stopped or traveling on any street or highway in the city which is
designated as an arterial or collector on the city's thoroughfare plan.
   (H)   An offense under divisions (F) and (G) occurs when the solicitation is
made regardless of whether a transaction is completed.
(Ord. OR-2221-21, passed 10-11-21; Ord. OR-2237-22, passed 1-10-22)
CHAPTER 112: SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Adoption of preamble
   
112.02   Purpose and intent
   
112.03   Definitions
   
112.04   Locations of establishments
   
112.05   Nonconforming uses
   
112.06   Defenses to prosecution
Licenses
   
112.20   License required
   
112.21   License application
   
112.22   License issuance
   
112.23   Inspection and maintenance of records
   
112.24   License expiration
   
112.25   License suspension
   
112.26   License revocation
   
112.27   Appeal
   
112.28   License transfer
Regulations
   
112.40   Adult cabaret
   
112.41   Escort agency
   
112.42   Nude model business
   
112.43   Adult theater and adult motion picture theater
   
112.44   Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos
   
112.45   Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores and adult video stores
   
112.46   Hours of operation
   
112.47   Prohibition against children in an adult entertainment establishment
   
112.48   Prohibition of nudity in certain commercial establishments
   
112.49   Additional regulations for adult entertainment establishments
   
112.50   Employee permits
Other Provisions
   
112.60   Location Appeal Board; exemptions from location restrictions
   
112.61   Amendments to chapter
 
   
112.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 ADOPTION OF PREAMBLE.
   The findings contained in the preambles of Ordinance Nos. 969 and 1486 are
determined to be true and correct and are adopted as a part of this chapter.
('78 Code, § 2.5-1) (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
§ 112.02 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult entertainment
establishments to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent the deleterious location and concentration of adult entertainment
establishments within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the
purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content
of any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented, adult materials.
Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny
access by adults to sexually-oriented, adult materials protected by the First
Amendment or to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of sexually-
oriented, adult materials to their intended market. Neither is it the intent
nor the effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscene materials.
('78 Code, § 2.5-2) (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
§ 112.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. This term includes the following:
      (1)   An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult theater, adult motion picture theater,
escort agency, nude model business or sexual encounter center.
      (2)   Any establishment whose principal business is the offering of a
service or the selling, renting or exhibiting of devices or any other items
intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to its
customers, and which is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, or whose employees or customers appear in a state
of nudity.
      (3)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS are also commonly known and
referred to as sexually-oriented businesses.
      (4)   The term ADULT ENTERTAINMENT shall not be construed to include the
following:
         (a)   Any business operated by or employing licensed psychologists,
licensed physical therapists, registered nurses or licensed athletic trainers.
         (b)   Any business operated by or employing licensed physicians or
licensed chiropractors engaged in practicing the healing arts.
         (c)   Any activity conducted or sponsored by any state independent
school district, licensed or accredited private school or public or private
college or university.
   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-
producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per
machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas."
   ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial
establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale
or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides or other visual representations, or any combination thereof, which
depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas."
      (2)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with "specified sexual activities." This does not include items used
for birth control or for prevention of sexually transmitted diseases.
   ADULT CABARET.  A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features the following:
      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or
      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
"specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities."
   ADULT MOTEL.
      (1)   A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which does the
following:
         (a)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas;" and has a sign
visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this
adult type of photographic reproductions;
         (b)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is
less than ten hours; or
         (c)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the
room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.
      (2)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar
commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a
period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption
that the business is an adult motel.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where, for any form
of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar
photograph reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the
depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas."
   ADULT THEATER.  A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity
or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified
anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities."
   CHURCH. A building, whether situated within the city or not, in which
persons regularly assemble for religious worship, intended primarily for
purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of
religious belief.
   CUSTOMER. Any person who meets one or more of the following conditions:
      (1)   Is allowed to enter an adult entertainment establishment in return
for the payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or
gratuity.
      (2)   Enters an adult entertainment establishment and purchases, rents or
otherwise partakes of any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services
offered therein.
      (3)   Is a member of and on the premises of an adult entertainment
establishment operating as a private club.
   EMPLOYEE.  Any person who renders any service whatsoever to the customers of
an adult entertainment establishment or who works in or about an adult
entertainment establishment and who receives compensation for the service or
work from the operator or owner of the adult entertainment establishment or
from the customers therein.
   ESCORT.  A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately
model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
   ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association who, as one of its principal
business purposes, furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish
escorts for a fee, tip or other consideration.
   LICENSEE.  A person in whose name a license to operate an adult
entertainment establishment has been issued, as well as any and all individuals
listed as applicants on the application for a license.
   LICENSED DAY CARE CENTER.  A facility licensed by the state, whether
situated within the city or not, that provides care, training, education,
custody treatment or supervision for more than six children under 14 years of
age, where the children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the
owner or operator of the facility, for less than 24 hours a day, regardless of
whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the
services if offers.
   NUDE MODEL BUSINESS. Any place where a person who appears in a state of
nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided or allowed to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
   NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY.
      (1)   This term means less than completely and opaquely covered:
         (a)   Human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair;
         (b)   All portions of a female breast below a point immediately above
the top of the areola continuing downward to the lowest portion of the breast;
         (c)   Human buttock, anus, or anal cleft or cleavage; or
         (d)   Any combination of the above.
      (2)   This term also includes human male genitals in a discernible turgid
state even if completely and opaquely covered.
   OPERATED or CAUSES TO BE OPERATED. To cause to function or to put or keep in
operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated an
adult entertainment establishment whether or not that person is an owner, part
owner, licensee or manager of the establishment.
   OPERATOR.  An individual who is in control of the operations of an adult
entertainment establishment, including, but not limited to, a person designated
by the licensee under §
112.40(H). This control can be either on an hourly basis, daily basis, weekly
basis, or shift basis, or any combination thereof. An OPERATOR includes, but is
not limited to, manager, assistant manager, house mother, floor manager, or
shift manager.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
foundation, company, corporation or other legal entity.
   PRINCIPAL. Over 25% of customers, volume of sales, stock in trade, display
areas or presentation time devoted to or generated from material depicting or
describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" in any
three-month increment period. Stock in trade shall be measured with  all titles
or objects available on the premises for sale or rental including those that
are identical, considered a separate title or object.
   REGULARLY.  Featuring, promoting or advertising a happening or occurrence on
a recurring basis.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. A residentially zoned district as defined in the
Zoning Ordinance of the city.
   RESIDENTIAL USE. A single-family home, townhouse, duplex, mobile home,
manufactured home or multiple-family use as defined in the Zoning Ordinance of
the city.
   SECONDARY FREEWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT. The Secondary Freeway Overlay District
as established by the Zoning Ordinance of the city.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of
its principal business purpose, offers for any form of consideration the
following:
      (1)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex.
      (2)   Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity.
   SIMULATED NUDITY. A state of dress in which any device or covering is worn
and exposed to view that simulates any part of the genitals, buttocks, anus,
pubic region, or areola of the female breast.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Human genitals, pubic region, buttocks and
female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  This term includes any of the following:
      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, pubic hair, perineum, buttocks, anus or female breasts.
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy or bestiality.
      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated.
      (4)   Excretory functions.
('78 Code, § 2.5-3) (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1486, passed 7-12-04;
Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
§ 112.04 LOCATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   An adult entertainment establishment shall be located within a
specific zoning district as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance of the city.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if he/she establishes, operates or causes
to be operated or expanded an adult entertainment establishment within 1,000
feet of the following:
      (1)   A church.
      (2)   A public or private elementary or secondary school.
      (3)   A boundary of a residential district.
      (4)   A boundary of the Freeway Overlay District as defined in this
chapter.
      (5)   A boundary of the Secondary Freeway Overlay District as defined in
this chapter.
      (6)   A licensed day care center.
      (7)   A public park, recreation center or water park.
      (8)   The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined
in this section.
      (9)   A public library.
   (C)   A person commits an offense if he/she establishes, operates or causes
to be operated or expanded an adult entertainment establishment within 1,000
feet of any other adult entertainment establishment.
   (D)   A person commits an offense if he/she establishes, operates or causes
to be operated or expanded an adult entertainment establishment in any
building, structure or portion thereof containing another adult entertainment
establishment.
   (E)   For the purposes of division (B) of this section, measurement shall be
made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as tenant space
occupied for an adult entertainment establishment to the nearest property line
of the premises of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school,
licensed day care center, public library, or to the nearest boundary of an
affected public park, recreation center, water park, residential district,
residential lot or use, Freeway Overlay District or Secondary Freeway Overlay
District.
   (F)   For purposes of division (C) of this section, the distance between any
two adult entertainment establishments shall be measured in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior
wall of the structure in which each business is located or from the wall of the
tenant space occupied as applicable.
   (G)   For purposes of divisions (B), (C) and (D) of this section, "expanded"
shall mean an increase by 25% or more in floor areas occupied by the business.
('78 Code, § 2.5-20) (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.05 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Any adult entertainment establishment lawfully operating prior to the
effective date of this chapter that is in violation of §
112.04 shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be
permitted to continue for a period not to exceed three years from the effective
date of this chapter, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily
discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. The nonconforming uses shall not
be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed
to a conforming use. If two or more adult entertainment establishments are
within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the
adult entertainment establishment which was first established and continually
operating at a particular location is the conforming use, and the later-
established business(es) is nonconforming.
   (B)   Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the City
Council may extend the amortization period herein provided to a reasonable
period of time for any nonconforming adult entertainment establishment upon a
showing by a particular business that without an extension it will be unable to
recoup its investment in the nonconforming structure.
      (1)   Any nonconforming adult entertainment establishment which desires
an extension must register with the City Council as a nonconforming use no
later than September 1, 1993, and must file an application for an extension of
the amortization period not later than December 1, 1993. Requests for an
extension of the amortization period shall be limited to one application with
the City Council.
      (2)   This division (B) shall not apply to any establishment which has
undergone a change in ownership since the effective date of this chapter.
   (C)   An adult entertainment establishment lawfully operating as a
conforming use after the effective date of this chapter is not rendered a
nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the commencement of operation
of the adult entertainment establishment, of a church, public or private
elementary or secondary school, public park, recreation center, water park,
licensed day care center, Freeway Overlay District, Secondary Freeway Overlay
District, residential use or residential zoning district within 1,000 feet of
the adult entertainment establishment.
('78 Code, § 2.5-21) (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.06 DEFENSES TO PROSECUTION.
   (A)   It is a defense to prosecution under §§
112.04,
112.20 and
112.42 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a structure which
meets the following conditions:
      (1)   Which has no sign or other advertising visible from the exterior of
the structure indicating a nude person is available for viewing;
      (2)   Where in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class; and
      (3)   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under §§
112.04 and
112.20 that the item of descriptive, printed, film or video material offered
for sale or rental taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value; and when taken as a whole, does not appeal to
the prurient interest in sex.
('78 Code, § 2.5-51) (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
LICENSES
§ 112.20 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if he/she operates or causes to operate an
adult entertainment establishment without a valid license issued by the city
for the particular type of business.
   (B)   Application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
Director of Public Safety. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or
diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of
total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be
professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with
marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches.
   (C)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate an adult entertainment establishment
is an individual, he/she must sign the application for a license as applicant.
If a person who wishes to operate an adult entertainment establishment is other
than an individual, each individual who has a 10% or greater interest in the
business must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a corporation
is listed as owner of an adult entertainment establishment or as the entity
that wishes to operate such a business, all corporate officers and directors
must sign the application for an operator's license as applicant. Each
applicant must be qualified under §
112.22, and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is
granted.
   (E)   The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits
does not exempt him/her from the requirement of obtaining a license for an
adult entertainment establishment.
   (F)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to existing adult
entertainment establishments beginning 90 days after the effective date of this
chapter.
('78 Code, § 2.5-30) (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.21 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person desiring to obtain an adult entertainment establishment
license shall make application on a form provided by the Director of Public
Safety or his/her designee.
   (B)   All applications for a license under this subchapter shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of $750. An application shall
not be considered to have been filed until the fee is paid and all information
required by the application form has been submitted.
('78 Code, § 2.5-31) (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
§ 112.22 LICENSE ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The Director of Public Safety shall approve the issuance of a license
to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless the
Director of Public Safety finds one or more of the following to be true.
      (1)   The location of the adult entertainment establishment is or would
be in violation of this chapter.
      (2)   The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on
the application.
      (3)   The applicant gave false, fraudulent or untruthful information on
the application.
      (4)   An applicant is under 18 years of age.
      (5)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the
city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the
applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to an adult entertainment
establishment.
      (6)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a
violation of a provision of this chapter, other than the offense of operating
an adult entertainment establishment without a license, within two years
immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being
appealed shall have no effect.
      (7)   The license application fee required by this chapter has not been
paid.
      (8)   The applicant has not demonstrated that the owner of the adult
entertainment establishment owns or holds a lease for the property or the
applicable portion thereof upon which the adult entertainment establishment
will be situated or has a legally enforceable right to acquire the same.
      (9)   An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is
not in compliance with of this chapter.
      (10)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse or employee has been
convicted of a crime involving the following:
         (a)   Any of the following offenses as described in the Tex. Penal
Code, Ch. 43:
            1.   Prostitution.
            2.   Promotion of prostitution.
            3.   Aggravated promotion of prostitution.
            4.   Compelling prostitution.
            5.   Obscenity.
            6.   Obscene display or distribution.
            7.   Sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor.
            8.   Sexual performance by a child.
            9.   Employment harmful to children.
            10.   Possession of child pornography.
         (b)   Any of the following offenses as described in the Tex. Penal
Code, Ch. 21:
            1.   Public lewdness.
            2.   Indecent exposure.
            3.   Indecency with a child.
            4.   Improper photography or visual recording.
         (c)   Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in the
Tex. Penal Code, Ch. 22.
         (d)   Incest, solicitation of a child or harboring a runaway child as
described in the Tex. Penal Code, Ch. 25.
         (e)   Any felony as described in the Texas Penal Codes.
         (f)   Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of
the foregoing offenses.
         (g)   Any similar sex-related offense to those described above under
the criminal or penal code of any state or country.
            1.   For which less than two years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from the terms of probation, parole or
deferred adjudication or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor
offense; or
            2.   For which less than five years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from the terms of probation, parole or
deferred adjudication or the date of release from confinement for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony
offense; or
            3.   For which less than five years have elapsed since the date of
the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more
misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within
any 24-month period.
   (B)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse.
   (C)   An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted
of an offense listed in this section may qualify for an adult entertainment
establishment license only when the time period required by this section has
elapsed.
   (D)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of
the adult entertainment establishment.
   (E)   The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
entrance to the adult entertainment establishment so that it may be easily read
at any time.
('78 Code, § 2.5-32) (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.23 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.
   (A)   A licensee, operator or employee of an adult entertainment
establishment shall be subject to the regulations under this chapter and shall
permit representatives of the Department of Public Safety, Health Authority,
and Building Services Department to inspect all portions of the premises open
to the public and the records required to be maintained under this chapter by
the adult entertainment establishment for the purpose of ensuring compliance
with this chapter at any time it is occupied by a customer(s) or open for
business.
   (B)   A licensee or operator of an adult entertainment establishment commits
an offense if the person operates the establishment without maintaining a
current list of all employees of the business, along with a complete updated
employment application for each employee. A legible copy of a valid driver's
license, state identification card or passport, with a photograph, together
with an original photograph accurately depicting the employee as the person
appears at the time the person is hired, shall be required and maintained on
the premises with the employee's application.
   (C)   A licensee or operator of an adult entertainment establishment commits
an offense if the person refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the records
and premises by a representative of the Police Department at any time the adult
entertainment establishment is occupied by a customer(s) or open for business.
   (D)   The licensee or operator of an adult entertainment establishment shall
maintain all records required to be maintained under the provisions of this
chapter on the licensed premises.
   (E)   The licensee or operator of an adult entertainment establishment
commits an offense if the person does not maintain the required records on the
premises of the licensed establishment.
   (F)   A licensee, operator or employee of an adult entertainment
establishment shall permit representatives of the Police Department to take
photographs of the premises, and the licensee, operator or employees of the
adult entertainment establishment for the purpose of ensuring compliance with
this chapter at any time it is occupied by a customer(s) or open for business.
   (G)   A licensee, operator or employee of an adult entertainment
establishment commits an offense if the person does not permit representatives
of the Police Department to take photographs of the premises, or the licensee,
operator or employees of the adult entertainment establishment for the purpose
of ensuring compliance with this chapter at any time it is occupied by a
customer(s) or open for business.
   (H)   The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel
which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or
temporary habitation.
('78 Code, § 2.5-33) (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1486, passed 7-12-04;
Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.24 LICENSE EXPIRATION.
   (A)   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance.
   (B)   A license may be renewed by submission to the Director of Public
Safety, or his/her designee, of an application on the form prescribed by the
official and payment of a nonrefundable renewal processing fee of $750.
   (C)   Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the
expiration date.
('78 Code, § 2.5-34) (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
§ 112.25 LICENSE SUSPENSION.
   (A)   Subject to division (C) below, the Director of Public Safety shall
suspend an adult entertainment establishment license if the Director of Public
Safety determines that a licensee(s) or employee(s) of a licensee (or any
combination thereof) has/have:
      (1)   (a)   On two or more occasions within any 12-month period of time
been cited for a violation of §§
112.04,
112.23,
112.28 or
112.40 through
112.50; and
         (b)   Been convicted or placed on deferred disposition or probation
for the violations; or
      (2)   (a)   Been cited for any combination of offenses under division (A)
(1) above that total four within any 12-month period of time; and
         (b)   Been convicted or placed on deferred disposition or probation
for the violations; or
      (3)   Engaged in public intoxication on the premises of an adult
entertainment establishment or knowingly permitted gambling by any person on
the premises of the adult entertainment establishment.
   (B)   A period of suspension will begin the first day after the decision of
the Director of Public Safety becomes final as provided in this section, unless
the licensee appeals to an appropriate court under §
112.27. If appeal is taken under §
112.27, the period of suspension begins the day after all appeals are final.
   (C)   The suspension of a license as provided for in division (A) above
shall be as follows:
      (1)   The first suspension of a license shall be for a period of seven
calendar days.
      (2)   The second suspension of a license shall be for a period of 30
calendar days.
      (3)   On the third cause of suspension, the Director of Public Safety
shall revoke a license according to §
112.26.
   (D)   Each day in which a violation is permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate violation for the purposes of suspension.
('78 Code, § 2.5-35) (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1486, passed 7-12-04;
Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
§ 112.26 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Director of Public Safety shall revoke a license if a license has
been suspended under the provisions of §
112.25(C)(3).
   (B)   The Director of Public Safety shall revoke a license if he/she
determines one or more of the following.
      (1)   The licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted to the Director of Public Safety during the application process.
      (2)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or
sale of controlled substances on the premises.
      (3)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises.
      (4)   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the adult
entertainment establishment during a period of time when the licensee's license
was suspended.
      (5)   A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in §
112.22(A)(10) for which the time period required has not lapsed.
      (6)   On two or more occasions within a 12-month period an employee of
the establishment committed in or on the licensed premises an offense listed in
§
112.22(A)(10) for which a conviction has been obtained.
      (7)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur
in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same
meaning as it is defined in the Tex. Penal Code, § 21.01.
      (8)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy
taxes, ad valorem taxes or sales taxes related to the adult entertainment
establishment.
   (C)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the revocation of the license.
   (D)   Division (B)(7) of this section does not apply to adult motels as a
ground for revoking the license, unless the licensee or employee knowingly
allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or
sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view.
   (E)   When the Director of Public Safety revokes a license, the revocation
shall continue for five years, and the licensee shall not be issued an adult
entertainment establishment license for five years from the date revocation
became effective. If the license was revoked under division (B)(5) of this
section, an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate
number of years required under §
112.22(A)(10) has elapsed.
('78 Code, § 2.5-36) (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1486, passed 7-12-04;
Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
§ 112.27 APPEAL.
   (A)   When the Director of Public Safety is authorized to deny the issuance
of a license, or suspend or revoke a license under this chapter, the Director
of Public Safety shall give written notice to the applicant or licensee of such
intention.
      (1)   The notice shall provide that the denial of issuance, suspension or
revocation shall take effect at the expiration of the tenth calendar day after
notification, unless the licensee provides a written response to the Director
of Public Safety before the expiration of the tenth calendar day.
      (2)   If a written response from the applicant or licensee is received by
the Director of Public Safety before the expiration of the tenth calendar day,
the denial of issuance, suspension or revocation will be stayed pending a
decision by the Director of Public Safety. The Director of Public Safety shall
review the response before the rendering of a decision.
      (3)   The Director of Public Safety shall give written notice of this
decision to the applicant or licensee within ten calendar days of receipt of
the written response from the applicant or licensee.
      (4)   The decision by the Director of Public Safety is effective
immediately and final pending any appeal to an appropriate court.
      (5)   Notice shall be deemed delivered by hand delivery to a licensee,
owner or employee of the establishment or by a posting of the notice at the
usual business entrance of the establishment. Notice may also be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall be mailed to the
address listed in the license application for receipt of notice.
   (B)   Upon receipt of written notice of the denial of issuance, suspension
or revocation, the licensee whose application for a license has been denied or
whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have the right to appeal to
an appropriate court.
   (C)   An appeal to the appropriate court must be filed within 30 days after
the receipt of notice of the decision of the Director of Public Safety.
   (D)   The licensee or applicant shall bear the burden of proof in court.
('78 Code, § 2.5-38) (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.28 LICENSE TRANSFER.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if he/she transfers his/her license to
another person or operates an adult entertainment establishment under the
authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the
application.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if he/she counterfeits, forges, changes,
defaces or alters a license.
('78 Code, § 2.5-38) (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
Penalty, see § 112.99
REGULATIONS
§ 112.40 ADULT CABARET.
   (A)   An employee of an adult cabaret, while appearing in a state of nudity,
commits an offense if he/she touches a customer or the clothing of a customer.
   (B)   A customer at an adult cabaret commits an offense if the customer
touches an employee appearing in a state of nudity or the clothing of an
employee appearing in a state of nudity.
   (C)   Each adult cabaret shall have a manager's station, which shall not
exceed 32 square feet of floor area. A licensee, operator or employee commits
an offense if the licensee permits any customer access to an area of the
premises not visible from the manager's station without entering a private,
exclusive, closed, curtained, or otherwise screened area, excluding restrooms.
The view required in this division shall be by direct line of sight. The view
shall be deemed insufficient if clear visibility of such line of sight must be
attained by utilizing flashlights or spotlights in addition to overhead house
lighting.
   (D)   A licensee, operator or employee commits an offense if the licensee,
operator or employee appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another
to appear in a state of nudity in an area of the adult cabaret premises that
can be viewed from a public right-of-way.
   (E)   A person commits an offense if the person employs at an adult cabaret
any person under the age of 18 years.
   (F)   An employee of an adult cabaret must attend training given by the
licensee concerning the requirements of this chapter as they pertain to adult
cabarets, including, but not limited to, §§
112.23,
112.25,
112.26,
112.40,
112.46,
112.47,
112.48,
112.49,
112.50 and
112.99 before the employee receives any compensation for the employee's
services. The licensee shall provide this training to all employees at the
beginning of the employment before the employee receives any compensation for
services; and, at least once a year thereafter. The licensee shall maintain
written records of the training provided to each employee pursuant to this
division. These records shall include a signed and dated statement from each
employee verifying the employee's attendance at and participation in training
provided by the licensee identifying the date on which the training was
provided and the specific topics discussed.
   (G)   A licensee shall designate and appoint one or more individuals to
manage, direct and control the premises and operations of the adult cabaret. At
least one person so appointed shall be on the premises at any time the adult
cabaret is occupied by a customer(s) or open for business. A manager or a
person appointed under this division shall have the duty to remain in the
manager's station at all times the adult cabaret is occupied by a customer(s).
   (H)   An operator or a person appointed under division (G) above shall at
all times have the duty to ensure that each employee in the adult cabaret has
received the training required by division (F) above and each employee is
instructed to commit no act which would constitute a violation of this chapter
or which would provide grounds, or part of the grounds, for suspension or
revocation of a license issued under this chapter.
   (I)   No employee of an adult cabaret may appear in an area of the business
visible to customers unless the employee completely and opaquely covers his or
her genitals, pubic region, and pubic hair; anus; and, if female, her areola.
   (J)   No licensee, owner, operator, or manager of an adult cabaret shall
permit an employee to violate division (I).
   (K)   A licensee, operator, or employee commits an offense if the licensee,
operator, or employee appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another
to appear in a state of nudity, in an adult cabaret, unless the person is an
employee who, while in a state of nudity, is on a stage (on which no patron or
customer is present) that is at least 18 inches above the floor, and that is at
least six feet from any customer.
   (L)   It is an offense for an employee, while in a state of nudity in an
adult cabaret, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any customer or to receive
directly any pay or gratuity from any customer, or for any customer to pay or
give any gratuity directly to any employee, while that employee is in a state
of nudity in an adult cabaret. Such gratuity or pay may be provided to such an
employee through a tip receptacle, located more than six feet from the nearest
point of the performance stage where the employee is in a state of nudity, or
may be paid to an employee that is not in a state of nudity, as part of the
customer's bill.
   (M)   (1)   A licensee or operator commits an offense if the licensee or
operator fails to display a sign on the interior of the premises notifying
customers and employees of the prohibitions described in this section. The sign
must be prominently and continuously displayed where customers enter the
premises, and immediately adjacent to each performance stage, and must state in
letters at least two inches high:
   TOUCHING OR TIPPING AN EMPLOYEE WHO IS IN A STATE OF NUDITY IS A CRIME
(MISDEMEANOR) PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OF UP TO $2,000. CUSTOMERS SHALL REMAIN AT
LEAST SIX FEET FROM ALL PERFORMANCE STAGES.
      (2)   The Director of Public Safety may also require, at the time of
issuance or renewal of the license, the licensee to display the sign in a
language other than English if he or she determines that a substantial portion
of the expected customers speak the other language as their familiar language.
Upon notification, a licensee commits an offense if the sign does not contain
this language in the required language, in addition to English.
   (N)   A licensee or operator commits an offense if the licensee or operator
fails to prominently and continuously display a glow-in-the-dark line on the
floor of the adult cabaret, at least two inches wide, marking a distance of six
feet from each performance stage on which an employee in a state of nudity may
appear in accordance with divisions (K) and (L).
   (O)   An adult cabaret shall also comply with the requirements of §§
112.23,
112.49, and
112.50.
('78 Code, § 2.5-41) (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1486, passed 7-12-04;
Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.41 ESCORT AGENCY.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if he/she employs at an escort agency any
person under the age of 18 years.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if he/she acts as an escort or agrees to
act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.
   (C)   An employee of an escort agency must attend training given by the
licensee concerning the requirements of this chapter as they pertain to escort
agencies, including, but not limited to, §§
112.23,
112.25,
112.26,
112.41,
112.46,
112.47,
112.48,
112.49,
112.50 and
112.99 before the employee receives any compensation for the employee's
services. The licensee shall provide this training to all employees at the
beginning of the employment before the employee receives any compensation for
services; and, at least once a year thereafter. The licensee shall maintain
written records of the training provided to each employee pursuant to this
division. These records shall include a signed and dated statement from each
employee verifying the employee's attendance at and participation in training
provided by the licensee identifying the date on which the training was
provided and the specific topics discussed.
   (D)   A licensee shall designate and appoint one or more individuals to
manage, direct and control the premises and operations of the escort agency. At
least one person so appointed shall be on the premises at any time the escort
agency is open.
   (E)   An operator or a person appointed under division (D) above shall at
all times have the duty to ensure that each employee in the escort agency has
received the training required by division (C) above and each employee is
instructed to commit no act which would constitute a violation of this chapter
or which would provide grounds, or part of the grounds, for suspension or
revocation of a license issued under this chapter.
('78 Code, § 2.5-42) (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1486, passed 7-12-04;
Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.42 NUDE MODEL BUSINESS.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if he/she employs at a nude model business
any person under the age of 18 years.
   (B)   A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he/she
appears in or on the premises of a nude model business.
   (C)   A person commits an offense if he/she appears in a state of nudity or
knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude
model business premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way.
   (D)   A person commits an offense if he/she places or permits a bed, sofa or
mattress in any room on the premises of a nude model business; except that a
sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public.
   (E)   Each nude model business shall have a manager's station, which shall
not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. A licensee, operator or employee
commits an offense if the licensee, operator or employee permits any customer
access to an area of the premises not visible from the manager's station
without entering a private, exclusive, closed, curtained or otherwise screened
area, excluding restrooms. The view required in this division shall be by
direct line of sight. The view shall be deemed insufficient if clear visibility
of such line of sight must be attained by utilizing flashlights or spotlights
in addition to overhead house lighting.
   (F)   An employee of a nude model business, while appearing in a state of
nudity, commits an offense if the employee touches a customer or the clothing
of a customer.
   (G)   A customer at a nude model business commits an offense if the customer
touches an employee or the clothing of an employee while the employee is
appearing in a state of nudity.
   (H)   An employee of a nude model business commits an offense if that
employee allows, asks, directs, or suggests that a customer disrobe to a state
of nudity.
   (I)   An employee of a nude model business must attend training given by the
licensee concerning the requirements of this chapter as they pertain to nude
model businesses, including, but not limited to, §§
112.23,
112.25,
112.26,
112.42,
112.46,
112.47,
112.48,
112.49,
112.50 and
112.99 before the employee receives any compensation for the employee's
services. The licensee shall provide this training to all employees at the
beginning of the employment before the employee receives any compensation for
services; and, at least once a year thereafter. The licensee shall maintain
written records of the training provided to each employee pursuant to this
division. These records shall include a signed and dated statement from each
employee verifying the employee's attendance at and participation in training
provided by the licensee identifying the date on which the training was
provided and the specific topics discussed.
   (J)   A licensee shall designate and appoint one or more individuals to
manage, direct and control the premises and operations of the nude model
business. At least one person so appointed shall be on the premises at any time
the nude model business is occupied by a customer(s) or open for business. A
manager or a person appointed under this division shall have the duty to remain
in the manager's station at all times the nude model business is occupied by a
customer(s).
   (K)   An operator or a person appointed under division (J) above shall at
all times have the duty to ensure that each employee in the nude model business
has received the training required by division (I) above and each employee is
instructed to commit no act which would constitute a violation of this chapter
or which would provide grounds, or part of the grounds, for suspension or
revocation of a license issued under this chapter.
   (L)   A licensee, operator, or employee commits an offense if the licensee,
operator, or employee appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another
to appear in a state of nudity, in an adult cabaret, unless the person is an
employee who, while in a state of nudity, is on a stage (on which no patron or
customer is present) that is at least 18 inches above the floor, and that is at
least six feet from any customer.
   (M)   It is an offense for an employee, while in a state of nudity in a nude
model business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any customer or to receive
directly any pay or gratuity from any customer, or for any customer to pay or
give any gratuity directly to any employee, while that employee is in a state
of nudity in a nude model business. Such gratuity or pay may be provided to
such an employee through a tip receptacle, located more than six feet from the
nearest point of the performance stage where the employee is in a state of
nudity, or may be paid to an employee that is not in a state of nudity, as part
of the customer's bill.
   (N)   (1)   A licensee or operator commits an offense if the licensee or
operator fails to display a sign on the interior of the premises notifying
customers and employees of the prohibitions described in this section. The sign
must be prominently and continuously displayed where customers enter the
premises, and immediately adjacent to each performance stage, and must state in
letters at least two inches high:
   TOUCHING OR TIPPING AN EMPLOYEE WHO IS IN A STATE OF NUDITY IS A CRIME
(MISDEMEANOR) PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OF UP TO $2,000. CUSTOMERS SHALL REMAIN AT
LEAST SIX FEET FROM ALL PERFORMANCE STAGES.
      (2)   The Director of Public Safety may also require, at the time of
issuance or renewal of the license, the licensee to display the sign in a
language other than English if he or she determines that a substantial portion
of the expected customers speak the other language as their familiar language.
Upon notification, a licensee commits an offense if the sign does not contain
this language in the required language, in addition to English.
   (O)   A licensee or operator commits an offense if the licensee or operator
fails to prominently and continuously display a glow-in-the-dark line on the
floor of the nude model business, at least two inches wide, marking a distance
of six feet from each performance stage on which an employee in a state of
nudity may appear in accordance with divisions (L) and (M), above.
   (P)   A nude model business shall also comply with the requirements of §§
112.23,
112.49, and
112.50.
('78 Code, § 2.5-43) (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1486, passed 7-12-04;
Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.43 ADULT THEATER AND ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if he/she knowingly allows a person under
the age of 18 years in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion
picture theater.
   (B)   A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he/she
knowingly appears in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion
picture theater.
   (C)   Adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters shall also comply
with the requirements of §§
112.23,
112.44,
112.49, and
112.50, except that adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters are not
required to comply with §
112.49(C) in a viewing room while a film, photograph, picture, video cassette
or other video reproduction is being shown. Viewing rooms shall be equipped
with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every
place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less
than five footcandles as measured at floor level while a film, photograph,
picture, video cassette or other video reproduction is being shown.
   (D)   An employee of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater must
attend training given by the licensee concerning the requirements of this
chapter as they pertain to adult theaters or adult motion picture theaters,
including, but not limited to, §§
112.23,
112.25,
112.26,
112.43,
112.44,
112.46,
112.47,
112.48,
112.49,
112.50 and
112.99 before the employee receives any compensation for the employee's
services. The licensee shall provide this training to all employees at the
beginning of the employment before the employee receives any compensation for
services; and, at least once a year thereafter. The licensee shall maintain
written records of the training provided to each employee pursuant to this
division. These records shall include a signed and dated statement from each
employee verifying the employee's attendance at and participation in training
provided by the licensee identifying the date on which the training was
provided and the specific topics discussed.
   (E)   Each adult theater or adult motion picture theater shall have at least
one manager's station, which shall not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The
interior of the premises shall be configured to allow an unobstructed view from
a manager's station of the entire area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access, excluding the restroom. The view required by this subsection
must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. It shall be the
duty of the operator and any agents or employees present in the premises to
ensure that the view remains unobstructed at all times. It shall also be the
duty of the operator and any agents or employees present in the premises to
ensure that no customer is permitted access to any area of the premises that
has not been designated as an area in which customers will be permitted.
   (F)   A licensee shall designate and appoint one or more individuals to
manage, direct and control the premises and operations of the adult theater or
adult motion picture theater. At least one person so appointed shall be on the
premises at any time the adult theater or adult motion picture theater is
occupied by a customer(s) or open for business. A manager or a person appointed
under this division shall have the duty to remain in the manager's station at
all times the adult theater or adult motion picture theater is occupied by a
customer(s).
   (G)   An operator or a person appointed under division (E) above shall at
all times have the duty to ensure that each employee in the adult theater or
adult motion picture theater has received the training required by division (D)
above and each employee is instructed to commit no act which would constitute a
violation of this chapter or which would provide grounds, or part of the
grounds, for suspension or revocation of a license issued under this chapter.
('78 Code, § 2.5-44) (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1486, passed 7-12-04;
Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.44 EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS.
   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult entertainment
establishment, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises, in a
viewing room, a film, photograph, picture, video cassette or other video
reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, shall also comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   An application for an adult entertainment establishment license
shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof
specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of
all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in
which customers will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32
square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which
the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be
required; however each diagram should be oriented to the north, or to some
designated street or object, and should be drawn to a designated scale or with
marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all
areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches. The Director of Public Safety may waive the foregoing diagram for
renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously
submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been
altered since the previously submitted diagram was prepared.
      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station may be made without the prior approval of the Director of Public
Safety.
      (4)   An operator or manager shall have a duty to remain in the manager's
station(s) at all times a customer is present on the premises.
      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of
the premises to which any customer is permitted access for any purpose,
excluding restrooms. If the premises has two or more manager's stations
designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which
any customer is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the
manager's stations. The view required in this division must be by direct line
of sight from the manager's station.
      (6)   The licensee commits an offense if the licensee permits customer
access to any area of the premises that is not visible from the manager's
station for any purpose, excluding restrooms.
      (7)   The licensee, operator and any agents and employees present on the
premises shall ensure that the view area specified in division (A)(5) above
remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise,
display racks or other materials at all times that any customer is present on,
in or about the premises, and that no customer is permitted access to any area
of the premises which has been designated as an area in which customers will
not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to division (A)(1) above.
      (8)   The licensee commits an offense if the licensee permits
illumination of any area of the premises to which customers have access to be
less than five footcandles as measured at the floor level.
      (9)   No viewing room or booth of less than 150 square feet may be
occupied by more than one person at any time.
      (10)   No licensee shall allow openings or holes of any kind to exist
between adjacent or adjoining viewing rooms or booths.
      (11)   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening or hole of any
kind between adjacent or adjoining viewing rooms or booths.
      (12)   The licensee or operator shall, during each business day,
regularly inspect the walls of all viewing rooms or booths to determine if any
openings or holes exist.
      (13)   The walls of any viewing room or booth of less than 150 square
feet shall be no more than 48 inches tall. At least one wall of any viewing
room or booth shall be visible in a direct unobstructed line of sight from the
manager's station. Each wall or door of any viewing room or booth shall be
constructed of clear transparent glass, plastic or substantially equivalent
materials that allow an unobstructed view of the entire interior of the viewing
room or booth.
      (14)   Live entertainment is prohibited in any viewing room or booth of
less than 500 square feet of floor space, as well as any other room adjacent to
or visible from any such viewing room or booth.
      (15)   The licensee or operator commits an offense if the licensee or
operator knowingly allows a person to appear in a state of nudity in, on or
about the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, other than an adult
motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 500 square
feet of floor space, a film, photograph, picture, video cassette or other video
reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      (16)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly appears in a
state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment,
other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of
less than 500 square feet of floor space, a film, photograph, picture, video
cassette or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.
      (17)   It is a defense to prosecution under divisions (A)(15) and (A)(16)
above if the person was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the
opposite sex.
   (B)   A person having a duty under divisions (A)(1) through (A)(17) above
commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
   (C)   An employee of an adult entertainment establishment that exhibits
sexually explicit films, photographs, pictures or videos must attend training
given by the licensee concerning the requirements of this chapter as they
pertain to such a business, including, but not limited to, §§
112.23,
112.25,
112.26,
112.43,
112.44,
112.46,
112.47,
112.48,
112.49,
112.50 and
112.99 before the employee receives any compensation for the employee's
services. The licensee shall provide this training to all employees at the
beginning of the employment before the employee receives any compensation for
services; and, at least once a year thereafter. The licensee shall maintain
written records of the training provided to each employee pursuant to this
division. These records shall include a signed and dated statement from each
employee verifying the employee's attendance at and participation in training
provided by the licensee identifying the date on which the training was
provided and the specific topics discussed.
   (D)   A licensee shall designate and appoint one or more individuals to
manage, direct and control the premises and operations of the adult
entertainment establishment as described in this section. At least one person
so appointed shall be on the premises at any time the adult entertainment
establishment as described in this section is open.
   (E)   An operator or a person appointed under division (D) above shall at
all times have the duty to ensure that each employee in the adult entertainment
establishment as described in this section has received the training required
by division (C) above and each employee is instructed to commit no act which
would constitute a violation of this chapter or which would provide grounds, or
part of the grounds, for suspension or revocation of a license issued under
this chapter.
('78 Code, § 2.5-45) (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1486, passed 7-12-04;
Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.45 ADULT BOOKSTORES, ADULT NOVELTY STORES AND ADULT VIDEO STORES.
   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult bookstore,
adult or adult video store shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   An application for an adult entertainment establishment license
shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof
specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of
all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in
which customers will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32
square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which
the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be
required; however each diagram should be oriented to the north, or to some
designated street or object, and should be drawn to a designated scale or with
marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all
areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches. The Director of Public Safety may waive the foregoing diagram for
renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously
submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been
altered since the previously submitted diagram was prepared.
      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station may be made without the prior approval of the Director of Public
Safety.
      (4)   The licensee commits an offense if the licensee permits a manager's
station to be unattended by an employee at any time a customer is present on
the premises.
      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of
the premises to which any customer is permitted access for any purpose,
excluding restrooms. If the premises has two or more manager's stations
designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which
any customer is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the
manager's stations. The view required in this division must be by direct line
of sight from the manager's station.
      (6)   The licensee commits an offense if the licensee permits a customer
access to any area of the premises that is not visible from the manager's
station for any purpose, excluding restrooms.
      (7)   The licensee, operator and any agents and employees present on the
premises shall ensure that the view area specified in division (A)(5) above
remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise,
display racks or other materials at all times that any customer is present on,
in or about the premises, and that no customer is permitted access to any area
of the premises which has been designated as an area in which customers will
not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to division (A)(1) above.
      (8)   No viewing room or reading room may be occupied by more than one
person at any time.
      (9)   No licensee shall allow openings or holes of any kind to exist
between adjacent or adjoining viewing rooms, reading rooms or booths.
      (10)   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening or hole of any
kind between adjacent or adjoining viewing rooms, reading rooms or booths.
      (11)   The licensee or operator shall, during each business day,
regularly inspect the walls of all viewing rooms, reading rooms or booths to
determine if any openings or holes exist.
      (12)   The walls of any viewing room, reading room or booth shall be no
more than 48 inches tall. At least one wall of any viewing room, reading room
or booth shall be visible in a direct unobstructed line of sight from the
manager's station. Each wall or door of any viewing room, reading room or booth
shall be constructed of clear transparent glass, plastic or substantially
equivalent materials that allow an unobstructed view of the entire interior of
the viewing room, reading room or booth.
      (13)   Live entertainment is prohibited in any viewing room, reading room
or booth as well as any other room adjacent to or visible from any viewing
room, reading room or booth.
      (14)   The licensee or operator commits an offense if the licensee or
operator knowingly allows a person to appear in a state of nudity in, on or
about the premises of an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video
store, that contains a viewing room or reading room of less than 500 square
feet of floor space.
      (15)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly appears in a
state of nudity in, on, or about the premises of an adult bookstore, adult
novelty store or adult video store that contains a viewing room or reading room
of less than 500 square feet of floor space.
      (16)   It is a defense to prosecution under divisions (A)(14) and (A)(15)
above if the person was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the
opposite sex.
   (B)   A person having a duty under divisions (A)(1) through (A)(16) above
commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
   (C)   An employee of an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video
store must attend training given by the licensee concerning the requirements of
this chapter as they pertain to such a business, including, but not limited to,
§§
112.23,
112.25,
112.26,
112.43,
112.44,
112.45,
112.46,
112.47,
112.48,
112.49,
112.50 and
112.99 before the employee receives any compensation for the employee's
services. The licensee shall provide this training to all employees at the
beginning of the employment before the employee receives any compensation for
services; and, at least once a year thereafter. The licensee shall maintain
written records of the training provided to each employee pursuant to this
division. These records shall include a signed and dated statement from each
employee verifying the employee's attendance at and participation in training
provided by the licensee identifying the date on which the training was
provided and the specific topics discussed.
   (D)   A licensee shall designate and appoint one or more individuals to
manage, direct and control the premises and operations of the adult bookstore,
adult novelty store or adult video store. At least one person so appointed
shall be on the premises at any time the adult bookstore, adult novelty store
or adult video store is open for business. An operator or manager shall have a
duty to remain in the manager's station(s) at all times a customer is present
on the premises.
   (E)   An operator or a person appointed under division (D) above shall at
all times have the duty to ensure that each employee in the adult bookstore,
adult novelty store or adult video store has received the training required by
division (C) above and each employee is instructed to commit no act which would
constitute a violation of this chapter or which would provide grounds, or part
of the grounds, for suspension or revocation of a license issued under this
chapter.
(Ord. 1486, passed 7-12-04; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.46 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No adult entertainment establishment, except for an adult motel, may remain
open at any time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and
Saturdays. Adult entertainment establishments, except for adult motels, must
remain closed on Sundays.
(Ord. 1486, passed 7-12-04; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.47 PROHIBITION AGAINST CHILDREN IN AN ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT.
   A licensee, operator or employee commits an offense if the licensee,
operator or employee knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years on the
premises of an adult entertainment establishment.
(Ord. 1486, passed 7-12-04; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.48 PROHIBITION OF NUDITY IN CERTAIN COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to prohibit certain acts of commercial
exploitation of human sexuality in commercial establishments where alcoholic
beverages are served or offered for sale for consumption on the premises, or
permitted to be consumed on the premises, and to reduce the likelihood of
criminal activity, moral degradation and disturbances of the peace and good
order of the community, to prohibit lewd and unlawful activity, such as
prostitution and the proliferation of controlled substances, all of which may
occur when such commercial exploitation is permitted in such places, and to
promote the preservation of property values of neighborhoods and adjacent
properties.
   (B)   No person shall appear in a state of nudity in any commercial
establishment at which alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for
consumption on the premises, or permitted to be consumed on the premises.
   (C)   No licensee, owner, operator, or manager of any commercial
establishment at which alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for
consumption on the premises, or are permitted to be consumed on the premises,
shall permit any person to appear in the premises in a state of nudity.
(Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.49 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Public and employee restrooms in an adult entertainment establishment
shall not, at any time, contain or be used for adult sexually oriented
activity, video reproduction equipment, or sexually oriented merchandise.
   (B)   An adult entertainment establishment shall at all times maintain at
least one legible sign posted in a conspicuous place at each public entrance
easily visible by all persons prior to entry into the establishment with
lettering of at least one inch in height in English and Spanish which contains
the following statement:
   "THIS IS AN ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT WHICH REGULARLY FEATURES
[description of the type of activity licensed to be conducted]. IF NUDITY OR
ACTIVITY OF A SEXUAL NATURE OFFENDS YOU DO NOT ENTER. NO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN
YEARS OF AGE ALLOWED ENTRY [or "NO PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE ALLOWED
ENTRY," if alcohol is served].
   (C)   The premises of any adult entertainment establishment shall be
equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate
every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not
less than 20 footcandles, excluding the limited exception for adult theaters as
contained in §
112.43(C), above.
   (D)   During hours of darkness when an adult entertainment establishment is
in operation, all required parking and all outdoor areas to which pedestrians
have access on the premises of the adult entertainment business shall be
lighted to an intensity of not less than five footcandles measured at ground
level.
   (E)   No models, mannequins, pictures, drawings, sketches, or other live or
simulated, pictorial or graphic displays of nudity shall be allowed in a manner
that is visible to the public from any street, sidewalk, or other public place.
   (F)   The licensee or operator commits an offense if he violates any portion
of this section.
(Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.50 EMPLOYEE PERMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person who does not hold a permit to act
as a manager, operator, or employee of an adult entertainment establishment.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the licensee, operator, manager, and owners of
each adult entertainment establishment to ensure that no person acts as a
manager, operator, or employee of an adult entertainment establishment unless
that person holds a permit.
   (C)   Any person who desires to obtain an original or renewal permit shall
make application in person at the offices of the police department between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, city-observed holidays
excepted. The application shall be made under oath upon a form prescribed by
the Director of Public Safety and shall include:
      (1)   The name, home street address and mailing address (if different) of
the applicant;
      (2)   Proof of the date of birth of the applicant and the identity of the
applicant, including at least one photographic identity card issued by a
governmental agency;
      (3)   A list of any criminal charges pending, convictions, and time of
service in jail or prison as related to any violation of this chapter or any
applicable offense that is specified in §
112.22(A)(10) of this chapter; and
      (4)   One passport-type photograph of the applicant of a size specified
by the Director of Public Safety, which shall become part of the photographic
identity cards if a permit is issued. If an on-site card is required under
division (F) of this section, then the application must contain a second
photograph of the same type.
   (D)   Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable processing
fee of $60. Each applicant shall be required to provide fingerprints to be used
to verify the applicant's identity and criminal history information. Each
applicant shall sign a waiver and authorization form authorizing the Director
of Public Safety to request on behalf of the applicant criminal history reports
from the Texas Department of Public Safety and any appropriate federal agency.
   (E)   The Director of Public Safety shall issue the permit within ten days
from the date of filing of the application unless he finds that the application
is incomplete or that the applicant has been convicted of or spent time in jail
or prison for a violation of this chapter or an offense specified in §
112.22(A)(10) of this chapter within the time specified therein. If the
application is not granted, then the applicant shall be given written notice of
the grounds and of his right to provide a written response as provided by §
112.27 of this chapter, within ten days from the date of filing of the
application.
   (F)   Each permit issued by the Director of Public Safety shall consist of
either one or two photographic identification cards.
      (1)   Each employee of an adult entertainment establishment shall have an
identification card, called a personal card.
      (2)   If an adult entertainment business is required by this chapter to
have an on-site manager, then each employee of such a business shall have a
second identification card, called an on-site card.
   (G)   Upon the applicant's completion of all requirements in division (C) of
this section, then the applicant may, upon written request, be immediately
issued a temporary permit which shall be valid until the third day after the
applicant is given notice of the decision of the Director of Public Safety.
   (H)   If any personal card or on-site card is lost or stolen, the holder
thereof shall immediately notify the Director of Public Safety and request a
replacement, which shall be issued for a fee of $35. within three days
following verification of the identity of the holder.
   (I)   No permit application shall be accepted nor shall a permit be issued
to any person who does not provide proof that he or she is at least 18 years
old. Any permit issued by virtue of any misrepresentation or error to any
person under age 18 shall be void.
   (J)   A permit is valid for two years from the date of its issuance.
   (K)   A permit is personal to the named permit holder and is not valid for
use by any other person.
   (L)   Each permit holder shall notify the Police Department of his or her
new address within ten days following any change of his or her address.
   (M)   Each manager or employee shall conspicuously display his or her
personal card upon his or her person at all times while acting as a manager or
employee of an adult entertainment business.
   (N)   Each manager or employee who is required under this chapter to have an
on-site card shall provide his or her on-site card to the manager or on-site
manager in charge of the adult entertainment business to hold while the manager
or employee is on the premises.
   (O)   In any prosecution under this section, it shall be presumed that the
actor did not have a permit unless the permit was in display as required under
division (M) of this section.
   (P)    In the event that the Director of Public Safety has reasonable
grounds to believe that any permit holder has been convicted of or spent time
in jail or prison for a violation of this chapter or an offense as specified in
the applicable provisions of §
112.22(A)(10) of this chapter within the time specified therein, then the
Director of Public Safety may revoke the permit under the procedures set out in
§
112.26 of this chapter.
   (Q)   If the Director of Public Safety is authorized to deny the issuance of
a permit, or revoke a permit as provided in this section, the applicant or
permittee may appeal the decision of the Director of Public Safety in
accordance with the procedures in §
112.27 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
Penalty, see § 112.99
OTHER PROVISIONS
§ 112.60 LOCATION APPEAL BOARD; EXEMPTIONS FROM LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall serve as a location appeal board,
and shall have the power to rule on the appropriate disposition of applications
for exemptions from the location restrictions for adult entertainment
establishments set forth §
112.04 of this chapter. The Location Appeal Board shall follow the rules and
procedures set forth in this section.
   (B)   If the Director of Public Safety denies the issuance of a license to
an applicant because the location of the adult entertainment establishment is
in violation of §
112.04, then the applicant may, not later than ten calendar days after
receiving notice of the denial, file with the city secretary a written request
for an exemption from the location restrictions.
   (C)   If the written request is filed with the city secretary within the
ten-day limit, a location appeal board shall consider the request. The city
secretary shall set a date for the hearing within 60 days from the date the
written request is received.
   (D)   A hearing by the Board may proceed only if five of the board members
or alternates are present. The Board shall hear and consider evidence offered
by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply.
   (E)   The Location Appeal Board may grant an exemption from the location
restrictions of §
112.04 if it makes the following findings:
      (1)   That the location of the adult entertainment establishment will not
have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public
safety or welfare;
      (2)   That the location of the adult entertainment establishment will not
downgrade the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or
encourage the development of urban blight;
      (3)   That the location of the adult entertainment establishment in the
area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will
it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and
      (4)   That all other applicable provisions of this chapter will be
observed.
   (F)   In making the findings specified above, the Board shall take into
account, among other things:
      (1)   Crime statistics of the location and its 1,000-foot radius, without
regard to city boundaries, maintained by the appropriate law enforcement agency
for the previous six-month period;
      (2)   Tarrant Appraisal District appraisals for the location and its
1,000-foot radius, without regard to city boundaries, taking into account any
decline or increase in property values;
      (3)   Vacancy rates of residential, commercial, or office space within
the surrounding 1,000-foot radius, without regard to city boundaries; and
      (4)   Any evidence regarding the award or denial of any public or private
grants for neighborhood conservation, urban renewal, or restoration for any
property located within a 1,000-foot radius, without regard to city boundaries.
   (G)   The Board shall grant or deny the exemption by a majority vote.
Failure to reach a majority vote approving the exemption shall result in denial
of the exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a
preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the Location Appeal Board is
final.
   (H)   If the Board grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one year
from the date of the Board's action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the
adult entertainment business is in violation of the locational restrictions of
§
112.04 until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption.
   (I)   If the Board denies the exemption, the applicant may not reapply for
an exemption until at least 12 months have elapsed since the date of the
Board's action.
   (J)   The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any
provisions of this chapter other than the locational restrictions.
(Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
§ 112.61 AMENDMENTS TO CHAPTER.
   Section
112.04 may be amended only after compliance with procedures required to amend a
zoning ordinance. All other sections of this chapter may be amended by an
ordinance approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not to exceed $2,000 for each
offense affecting zoning, fire safety or public health and sanitation, and $500
for all other offenses. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
('78 Code, § 2.5-50) (Ord. 969, passed 8-9-93; Am. Ord. 1597, passed 10-23-06)
CHAPTER 113: VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Section
Taxicabs
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Certificate, permits required; exceptions
   
113.03   Certificate of necessity and convenience
   
113.04   Application for certificate
   
113.05   Filing fee for certificate
   
113.06   Driver's permit required
   
113.07   Application for driver's permit
   
113.08   Issuance of driver's permit
   
113.09   Standards of operation
Wreckers
   
113.25   Definitions
   
113.26   Permit required
   
113.27   Application for license
   
113.28   Permit issuance; term; fee
   
113.29   Vehicle requirements
   
113.30   Record-keeping; inspection
   
113.31   Permit denial; suspension; revocation
   
113.32   Appeal
   
113.33   Insurance
   
113.34   Vehicle removal
   
113.35   Removal of a towed vehicle
   
113.36   Regulations
   
113.37   Solicitation of wrecker business
   
113.38   City employee shall not refer
   
113.39   Wrecker service agreement authorized
   
113.40   Notification of changes
   
113.41   Administrative fee
   
113.42   Impound storage fees
 
   
113.99   Penalty
TAXICABS
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. The person, partnership or corporation that applies for a
certificate or permit hereunder.
   CERTIFICATE. A permit in the form of a certificate of public convenience and
necessity, authorizing the operation of taxicabs over the streets of the city
pursuant to certain terms, regulations and conditions.
   CERTIFICATE HOLDER. Any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership
or society who holds a valid and current certificate of convenience and
necessity and who has the control, direction, maintenance and the benefit of
the collection of revenue derived from the operation of one or more taxicabs on
or over the streets or public ways of the city, whether as owner or otherwise.
   DRIVER. The person actually driving a taxicab or a person who has been hired
or contracted with another to drive, whether he/she is the owner or is an
agent, servant or employee of the owner.
   FOR HIRE. For money or other thing of value, gratuities, tips and free-will
offerings, whether paid directly or indirectly, as compensation or
consideration for services rendered.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every motor-propelled vehicle used for the transportation of
persons over the public streets of the city.
   PASSENGERS FOR HIRE. Passengers that pay a fee or fare for transportation.
The term does not include guests of hotels or motels that offer transportation
without charge, students of private and public schools where transportation is
not offered to the general public, nor individuals engaged in pooling or share
the expense arrangement and the number of passengers is not in excess of eight.
   SPECIAL SERVICE TRANSPORTATION. Tour vehicle service, charter service,
limousine service, bus service and door-to-door service using vehicles carrying
passengers for hire.
   TAXICAB. Every motor vehicle used for carrying passengers for hire other
than those motor vehicles used as special service transportation.
('78 Code, § 18-50) (Ord. 754, passed 9-14-87)
§ 113.02 CERTIFICATE, PERMITS REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall operate any taxicab service within the jurisdiction of
the city without first having obtained from the City Council a certificate
declaring that the public convenience and necessity require such an operation.
No person shall drive or operate a taxicab within the city without first having
obtained a driver's permit from the City Manager.
('78 Code, § 18-51)
   (B)   The following vehicles shall be exempt from the certificate or permit
requirements of this subchapter:
      (1)   Vehicles that are leased or rented without drivers.
      (2)   Ambulances and special vehicles used exclusively in connection with
funerals.
      (3)   Vehicles operated by the city or its agents.
      (4)   Taxicabs licensed by another governmental entity transporting a
passenger from a point outside the city to a destination inside the city,
provided that the taxicabs may not receive a passenger inside the city.
      (5)   Special service transportation vehicles.
('78 Code, § 18-52)
(Ord. 754, passed 9-14-87)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.03 CERTIFICATE OF NECESSITY AND CONVENIENCE.
   Upon authorization by the City Council, a certificate of convenience and
necessity shall be signed by the City Manager, or person designated by the City
Manager, and shall contain the name and address of the applicant, a declaration
that the public convenience and necessity require the services of the applicant
and the terms and conditions of the certificate. The applicant shall be
required to sign the certificate and agree to the terms thereof. No certificate
shall be transferable without the written consent of the City Council. Transfer
of a majority interest in the company to which the certificate is issued,
change of ownership or change in partnership shall be considered a transfer
under this section. Any taxicab owner or operator licensed under the provisions
of this code as of the enactment of this section shall not be required to
reapply until the expiration of the existing license. A certificate issued
under this section and a driver's permit issued pursuant to this subchapter
shall be in effect for one year from the date of the certificate or permit
unless suspended or revoked pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter. A
certificate or permit issued under this subchapter shall be renewed annually
unless the City Manager notifies the applicant in writing of his/her intention
to deny renewal due to a failure of the certificate or permit holder to abide
by the provisions of this subchapter. The applicant may file notice of appeal
in writing with the City Manager, and the appeal shall be heard within 30 days
by the City Council. The City Council shall affirm, reverse or modify the
decision of the City Manager with regard to renewal of a certificate or permit,
and its decision on the appeal shall be final.
('78 Code, § 18-53) (Ord. 754, passed 9-14-87)
§ 113.04 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE.
   Application for a certificate of public convenience and necessity for the
operation of taxicabs shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by the applicant
and shall be filed with the City Manager, or person designated by the City
Manager. The application shall be on a form provided by the City Manager, or
person designated by the City Manager, and shall contain at least the
following:
   (A)   The name, date of birth and address of the applicant; if a
partnership, the name, date of birth and address of each partner; if a
corporation, its name, date and place of incorporation, the address of its
principal place of business, the names and addresses of all officers and
directors and a certified copy of its permit to do business in the state; the
trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do business.
   (B)   The address of each place of business from which the applicant
proposes to operate.
   (C)   Whether or not the applicant, or any partner or any officer or
director in the organization, if a corporation, of the applicant has been
finally convicted of any felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
   (D)   Whether or not the applicant, or any partner or any officer or
director in the organization, if a corporation, of the applicant, has any suit
filed against him/her or it or judgment based upon an unpaid debt or negligent
operation of a motor vehicle.
   (E)   A financial statement showing the assets, properties and capital of
the applicant.
   (F)   The nature and character of the service that the applicant proposes to
render, the facts showing the demand for the service, the experience that the
applicant has had in rendering the service and the period of time that he/she
has rendered the service.
   (G)   The proposed fares, rates and charges and operating procedures of the
applicant.
   (H)   A list of all drivers who will operate by authority of the
certificate, to be updated as new drivers are added, and a certification signed
by the applicant that each driver has a current Texas driver's license, is
physically fit to chauffeur passengers, is able to communicate in the English
language, is not addicted to drugs or intoxicating liquors so as to render him/
her unfit to perform the duties of a driver and is a person of good moral
character.
   (I)   A description of the proposed insignia and color scheme for the
taxicabs and description of any distinctive item of apparel to be worn by the
service's drivers.
   (J)   A letter from a duly authorized agent of applicant's insurance
carrier, stating that the insurance required by law for a motor vehicle is
available to applicant and that the coverage is or will be provided prior to
the issuance of the certificate.
('78 Code, § 18-54) (Ord. 754, passed 9-14-87)
§ 113.05 FILING FEE FOR CERTIFICATE.
   The application for a certificate of public convenience and necessity to
operate a taxicab service shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee of
$100 to cover administrative costs.
('78 Code, § 18-55) (Ord. 754, passed 9-14-87)
§ 113.06 DRIVER'S PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for a certificate holder to permit any person to drive
a taxicab under authority of the certificate unless the person shall have been
issued a permit in accordance with this subchapter. Every person employed by a
certificate holder and desiring to drive a taxicab in the city shall apply for
and obtain a permit from the City Manager, or the person designated by the City
Manager.
('78 Code, § 18-56) (Ord. 754, passed 9-14-87)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.07 APPLICATION FOR DRIVER'S PERMIT.
   To obtain a permit to operate a taxicab in the city, an applicant shall make
a sworn written application to the City Manager, or the person designated by
the City Manager, which application shall contain the following information:
   (A)   The name, date of birth and address of applicant.
   (B)   The name of the certificate holder by whom the applicant expects to be
or is employed.
   (C)   The applicant's place of residence for the past five years.
   (D)   A full description of the applicant, including height, weight, color
of eyes and hair, distinguishing body features or marks, an impression of the
applicant's fingerprints taken by the Police Department and three prints of the
applicant's photograph.
   (E)   Whether the applicant has had experience driving a taxicab in a
related type of work.
   (F)   Whether applicant has been finally convicted of any or misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude.
   (G)   A medical report, dated not more than 30 days prior to the date of
application, from a physician certifying that applicant has been examined and
does not suffer from any disease or disability which would impair his/her
ability to operate a taxicab. The medical report shall specifically state the
condition of hearing and eyesight of the applicant.
   (H)   The number and date of expiration and issuance of applicant's Texas
Class A, B or C license.
   (I)   The most recent date of completion of a certified defensive driving
course, if any.
   (J)   A list of all traffic offenses with which the applicant has been
charged since receiving his/her driver's license, including offense,
approximate date and disposition.
('78 Code, § 18-57) (Ord. 754, passed 9-14-87)
§ 113.08 ISSUANCE OF DRIVER'S PERMIT.
   A permit shall be issued to an applicant who has truthfully and correctly
submitted the required sworn application, whose medical report reveals no
physical condition which would impair his/her ability to safely operate a
vehicle, who can communicate in the English language, who is at least 18 years
of age, is licensed by the State Department of Public Safety to operate a
taxicab and whose criminal history does not require denial of a permit pursuant
to this subchapter. Upon approval and issuance of a permit, the applicant shall
receive an identification card which shall contain a photograph of the
applicant, identification number, physical description of driver and residence
address. The driver's identification card shall be posted in any vehicle driven
by the driver in such a manner as to be visible to all passengers.
('78 Code, § 18-58) (Ord. 754, passed 9-14-87)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.09 STANDARDS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Every certificate holder shall purchase and keep in full force and
effect public liability insurance in the amounts required by state law, or
shall obtain a certificate of self insurance as provided by state law, to
secure payment of all lawful and proper claims arising out of the operation of
taxicabs pursuant to the certificate. A written statement from an authorized
agent of the certificate holder's insurance carrier verifying the issuance of
the insurance shall be filed with the City Manager, or the person designated by
the City Manager, before any certificate may be issued. All verifications of
insurance shall provide for a 30-day cancellation notice to the City Manager,
or the person designated by the City Manager.
   (B)   Neither the city, nor any officer, agent or employee thereof shall be
held for the pecuniary responsibility or solvency of any certificate holder or
insurer or in any manner liable on account of any act or omission relating to
the operation of a taxicab.
   (C)   The certificate holder shall furnish the City Manager, or the person
designated by the City Manager, with the original application or as new
vehicles are purchased or rented, the number of vehicles in operation by model,
size, year, make, design, color scheme, motor vehicle identification number and
state license registration number. The certificate holder shall further furnish
a statement that each vehicle is currently licensed and inspected by the state,
that it is satisfactory and in safe mechanical condition, that it has the color
scheme and is identified and marked as represented in the application.
   (D)   The City Manager's representative shall have the right to inspect
during regular business hours any of the operations, equipment or premises of
the certificate holder used in conducting the taxicab services.
   (E)   Each taxicab shall conform to all the state minimum safety standards.
No part of the body of any taxicab shall be missing or visibly rusted. Each
taxicab shall be equipped with two-way radio communication equipment in proper
operating condition capable of transmitting and receiving vocal communication
between the taxicab and the dispatching office of the certificate holder. Each
taxicab shall conform to the description of the insignia and color scheme
proposed in the certificate holder's application. Rips, tears, stains, thread-
bare portions of floors, seats, backs and armrests shall be repaired. No
vehicle shall be used as a taxicab if it is more than 60 months old.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver to consume or be under the
influence of any alcoholic beverages or use any form of controlled substances
or dangerous drugs while on duty as a taxicab driver.
   (G)   A driver of a taxicab employed to carry passengers to a definite point
shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passengers safely
and expeditiously to their destination.
   (H)   Should the City Manager receive a complaint about the operations of a
certificate holder, he/she shall reduce the complaint to writing and forward it
to the certificate holder. The certificate holder shall reply in writing within
ten days. If the complaint is not resolved to the satisfaction of the City
Manager, he/she is authorized to initiate steps to revoke the certificate by
giving notice to the certificate holder and the City Council that a complaint
involving a violation of this subchapter has occurred and his/her proposal that
the certificate be suspended or revoked. The City Council shall set the
complaint for public hearing and shall give notice to the certificate holder of
the hearing. The City Council shall hear the matter within 30 days after the
complaint is presented to them and shall make a determination as to whether the
certificate holder should be suspended or revoked or no action taken.
   (I)   It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver to solicit passengers upon
any public street of the city. The prices to be charged by all taxicab
operations in the city shall be fair and reasonable for the services. Each
taxicab shall have its rates posted in a conspicuous place in view of the
passengers being conveyed. Each taxicab operated under the authority of a
certificate shall be equipped with a meter fastened in front of the passengers,
visible to them at all times, day and night. After sundown, the face of the
taxi meter shall be illuminated. The meters shall be operated mechanically or
electronically by a mechanism of standard design and construction, driven
either from the transmission or from one of the front wheels by a flexible and
permanently attached driving mechanism. They shall be sealed at all points and
connections which, if manipulated, would affect their correct reading and
recording. Each taxi meter shall have thereon a flag to denote when the vehicle
is employed and when it is not employed, and it shall be the duty of the driver
to throw the flag of the taxi meter into a nonrecording position at the
termination of each trip. All meters shall be subject to inspection from time
to time by the City Manager, or his/her designated representative.
('78 Code, § 18-59) (Ord. 754, passed 9-14-87)
Penalty, see § 113.99
WRECKERS
§ 113.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCIDENT. Any occurrence that renders a vehicle wrecked or disabled.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of Police of the city, or his/her designated
representative.
   CONSENT TOW. The towing of a vehicle at the request of the owner or
operator.
   DISABLED VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that has been rendered unsafe to be driven
as the result of some occurrence, including, but not limited to mechanical
failure or breakdown, fire or vandalism, or a motor vehicle that is in a safe
driving condition but whose owner or operator is not present, able or permitted
to drive so as to reasonably necessitate that the vehicle be removed by a
wrecker.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
   NONCONSENT TOW. The towing of a vehicle without the prearranged knowledge
and consent of the owner or operator of the vehicle. Examples include, but are
not limited to vehicles towed when the driver is incapacitated following an
accident, vehicles towed when the driver has been arrested, vehicles removed
from public or private property without prenotification to the vehicle owner,
repossessions and seizures.
   NONRESIDENT WRECKER OR TOW TRUCK OPERATOR. A wrecker or tow truck operator
registered with the state who does not maintain a place of business within the
corporate limits of the city.
   VEHICLE. Every mechanical device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   WRECKED VEHICLE. A discarded, abandoned, junked, wrecked or worn out motor
vehicle that is not in a condition to be lawfully operated on a public road.
   WRECKER. A vehicle designed to be used primarily for removing wrecked or
disabled vehicles.
   WRECKER or TOW TRUCK OPERATOR. A person engaged in the business of using a
wrecker to tow, winch or otherwise move a motor vehicle.
('78 Code, § 18-22) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96)
§ 113.26 PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Requirements.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for a person to operate or employ another to
drive or operate any wrecker over any street in the city for the purpose of
towing a disabled vehicle within the city without first obtaining a permit,
except as provided by this subchapter.
      (2)   Every person desiring to provide a wrecker or towing service to
provide nonconsent tows within the city shall first obtain a permit.
      (3)   A person who charges a fee for towing wrecked or disabled vehicles,
whether by the use of a wrecker or by the use of any other vehicle utilizing
ropes, chains or other mechanisms, shall be considered to be engaging in a
wrecker or towing business. This shall not be construed to include a service
car or other vehicle not equipped with mechanical devices for transporting
wrecked vehicles and not used for such purpose, such as service cars equipped
with compressed air containers and tools for performing minor repairs not
involving towing or transportation of wrecked or disabled vehicles.
('78 Code, § 18-20)
   (B)   Exceptions. A person shall not be required to obtain a permit for the
following activities:
      (1)   The transportation of a vehicle by a nonresident wrecker operator
from some point outside the city to some destination within the city.
      (2)   The transportation of a vehicle by a nonresident wrecker operator
from some point outside the city and traversing the city to some other
destination outside the city.
      (3)   The transportation of a vehicle by a wrecker operator at the
request of the owner or operator of a vehicle.
('78 Code, § 18-21)
(Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.27 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Each applicant for a wrecker license must file a written application with
the Chief of Police. The application shall be verified by the applicant and
shall be on a form furnished by the Police Department and shall contain the
following minimum information:
   (A)   The business or trade name, address and telephone number of the
wrecker company.
   (B)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the wrecker
business. If the applicant is a corporation, the following information shall
also be included: its name, the date and place of incorporation, the address of
its principal place of business, the names and residences of all its officers
and directors, the names and residences of all its stockholders owning 10% or
more of the total issued capital stock and the amount of stock owned by each of
them, the total amount and nature of its authorized capital stock, a certified
copy of its charter and bylaws and a certified copy of its authorization to do
business in the state. If the applicant is a partnership, the following
information shall also be included: its name, the type of partnership, the
names and residences of all its partners owning 10% or more of the ownership
interest in the partnership and their percentage of ownership.
   (C)   The name, driver's license number, address and telephone numbers of
the persons who will operate the applicant's wrecker vehicles in the city and
who will have access to the applicant's storage area.
   (D)   The normal hours of operation of the wrecker business.
   (E)   The location and a description of the applicant's storage facility
where all disabled and wrecked vehicles will be stored, including the number of
spaces available for the storage of towed vehicles, whether the spaces are
enclosed or open, the type of security for the protection of the vehicles and
the normal hours of operation of the storage facility.
   (F)   The number of wreckers for which permits are desired.
   (G)   The design and color scheme of each wrecker to be used and the
lettering and logos to be used thereon.
   (H)   The year, make, model, vehicle identification number, license plate
number, State Department of Transportation number and load capacity of each
wrecker to be licensed.
   (I)   A full and complete statement of the experience, if any, the applicant
has had in rendering wrecker service in the city or elsewhere.
   (J)   A list of any unpaid judgments of record against the applicant, which
list shall include the name and address of each owner of a judgment and the
amount of the judgment. If the applicant is a partnership, a list shall be
furnished for each partner, general or limited, owning a 10% or more interest
in the partnership. If the applicant is a corporation, a list shall be
furnished for each of its officers and directors, as well as for each
stockholder owning 10% or more of the total issued capital stock.
   (K)   A list of any convictions of the applicant for violations of any
federal state and municipal laws other than traffic statutes. If the applicant
is a partnership, a list shall be furnished for each individual partner,
general or limited, owning 10% or more interest in the partnership. If the
applicant is a corporation, a list shall be furnished for each of its officers
and directors, as well as for each stockholder owning 10% or more of the total
issued capital stock.
   (L)   An agreement by the applicant to comply with all of the terms and
conditions of this subchapter and any regulations and requirements for wrecker
and towing services which have been promulgated by the city and the state as
well as any conditions or requirements set forth in the permit.
   (M)   The telephone number of the wrecker business and the hours it will be
answered.
   (N)   Any other information as the Chief of Police shall find reasonably
necessary to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter and to arrive at a fair
determination of whether the requirements of this subchapter have been complied
with.
('78 Code, § 18-23) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.28 PERMIT ISSUANCE; TERM; FEE.
   (A)   Upon payment of the applicable permit fees, the Chief of Police shall
review an application for a wrecker permit. The Chief shall issue a wrecker
permit to each applicant complying with the provisions of this subchapter and
all regulations and requirements for wrecker and towing services which have
been promulgated by the city and the state. In addition, the Chief of Police
shall issue a permit for each wrecker to be operated by the permittee.
   (B)   A permit shall expire on the thirty-first of December in the year in
which it is issued.
   (C)   The permit shall not be transferable and no permit shall be used on
any wrecker other than the one for which it was issued.
   (D)   The annual fee for a wrecker permit shall be $15.
('78 Code, § 18-24) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.29 VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Each wrecker for which a permit is issued shall meet the following
minimum requirements.
      (1)   Each wrecker shall not be less than ¾ ton in size.
      (2)   Each wrecker shall be equipped with a power or hand-operated winch
line and boom or lifting device with a factory rated capacity of not less than
5,000 pounds single capacity.
      (3)   Each wrecker shall carry as standard equipment safety chains, a
fire extinguisher, wrecking bar, broom, ax, shovel, either flares or traffic
control reflectors, a wheel dolly and a container to carry debris.
      (4)   Each wrecker shall have inscribed on each side in letters not less
than three inches in height the name, address and telephone number of the
wrecker business.
      (5)   Each wrecker shall be equipped so as to provide two-way voice
communication by mobile telephone or radio with the permittee's base station at
all times.
      (6)   Each wrecker shall be equipped with overhead flashing emergency
lights visible from 1500 feet.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if he/she operates a wrecker or uses any
equipment within the city that is not in compliance with all of the
requirements of this subchapter.
('78 Code, § 18-25) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.30 RECORD-KEEPING; INSPECTION.
   (A)   Each permittee shall maintain books and records reflecting its
operation in accordance with generally accepted accounting principals as may be
necessary for verification of the permittee's compliance with the terms of this
subchapter. The permittee agrees to make the records available at reasonable
times to the Chief of Police upon request.
   (B)   Members of the Police Department may inspect each wrecker and/or
storage facility used by the permittee at reasonable times during the
application or permit period to ensure compliance with the requirements of this
subchapter.
('78 Code, § 18-26) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.31 PERMIT DENIAL; SUSPENSION; REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Chief of Police may refuse to approve the issuance or renewal of a
wrecker permit or may suspend or revoke a wrecker permit previously issued for
one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   The making by the applicant of any false statement or omission of
information as to a material matter in an application for a permit or permit
renewal or in a hearing concerning the permit.
      (2)   Conviction of the applicant, permittee or an employee of the
applicant or permittee for a violation of a provision of this subchapter.
      (3)   Revocation pursuant to this section of a permit issued to the
applicant or any owner, partner or corporate officer of the applicant within
three years preceding the application.
      (4)   Conviction of the applicant or permittee of a felony, assault,
fraud, burglary, theft, DWI or other offense involving moral turpitude within
five years preceding the application.
      (5)   Suspension of a permit on three occasions within the preceding 12
months, more than three days on each occasion.
      (6)   Habitual failure to respond to the scene of an accident within 30
minutes of notification.
      (7)   Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this subchapter.
   (B)   If the Chief of Police denies an application for a permit, he/she
shall send written notice to the applicant at the address shown on the
application, by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall
state the reason for denial.
   (C)   No permit shall be suspended or revoked without notice to the
permittee and an opportunity for a hearing. A permittee who receives notice of
a proposed suspension or revocation may file a written request for a hearing
with the Chief of Police within ten days from the date of the notice. The Chief
of Police shall conduct a hearing and shall thereafter determine whether to
suspend or revoke the permit.
('78 Code, § 18-27) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96)
§ 113.32 APPEAL.
   Any person whose application for a wrecker permit has been denied, suspended
or revoked by the Chief of Police shall have the right to appeal, in writing,
the denial, suspension or revocation to the City Manager within ten calendar
days after notification of the denial, suspension or revocation. The City
Manager shall review the matter and may uphold, modify or reverse the denial,
suspension or revocation of the wrecker permit. The decision of the City
Manager shall be final.
('78 Code, § 18-28) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96)
§ 113.33 INSURANCE.
   (A)   The city shall not issue a permit unless the wrecker operator shall
procure and keep in full force and effect automobile liability insurance and
garage keepers liability insurance or truck cargo insurance written by an
insurance company authorized to do business in the state and acceptable to the
city and issued in the standard form approved by the State Board of Insurance.
The policies of insurance shall require at least 30 days written notice to the
city of any cancellation or termination or of any material change in the terms
of the insurance coverage. The insurance policies shall contain appropriate
provisions to cover all wreckers and wrecker operators conducting business
under the license.
   (B)   The automobile liability insurance must provide combined single limits
of liability for bodily injury and property damage of not less than $100,000
for any person killed or injured, $500,000 for more than one person killed or
injured in any one accident and $100,000 for property damage and theft coverage
on all vehicles removed or impounded. The automobile liability insurance must
also meet the minimum requirements under the laws of the state.
   (C)   The garage keepers liability insurance or tow truck cargo insurance,
whichever is maintained, must provide limits of liability for any one loss of
not less than $50,000.
   (D)   A copy of the required insurance policies shall be submitted to the
city at the time of application for a wrecker permit and a current copy of the
policies shall be maintained with the Chief of Police throughout the term of
the permit.
('78 Code, § 18-29) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.34 VEHICLE REMOVAL.
   No person may drive a wrecker to the scene of an accident on the streets of
the city unless the person has been called to the scene by a police officer or
by the owner or operator of the vehicle.
('78 Code, § 18-30) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.35 REMOVAL OF A TOWED VEHICLE.
   No vehicle, whether or not the vehicle is wrecked or disabled, for which the
owner or operator of the vehicle has not given his/her consent to tow shall be
removed by a wrecker company from its location in the city to another location
without first notifying the Police Department of the intended removal and the
destination of the vehicle.
('78 Code, § 18-31) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.36 REGULATIONS.
   A wrecker permittee shall do the following:
   (A)   Arrive at the accident within a reasonable time after having been
notified to do so. The response time shall generally not exceed 30 minutes.
   (B)   Deliver the wrecked or disabled vehicle to a location designated by
the owner or operator of the vehicle or by the Police Department.
   (C)   Upon arrival at the scene of an accident, promptly clear the wreckage
and debris from the traveled portion of the roadway and confine it to the
smallest possible portion of the traveled roadway while removal is taking place
and in a manner to minimize the duration of the interference with normal
traffic flow and completely remove from the site of the accident all resulting
wreckage or debris, including all broken glass, but excluding truck or vehicle
cargoes, before leaving the site.
   (D)   To the extent feasible, comply with all traffic regulations in
removing any vehicle from the scene of an accident. Under no circumstances
shall any vehicle be moved or towed in such a manner as to jeopardize the
safety of other vehicles on the roadway.
   (E)   Keep and maintain wrecker vehicles and towing equipment in a safe and
working condition to ensure that the wrecker and equipment are adequate to
perform towing services.
   (F)   Depart the scene of an accident at the request of a police officer
when the wrecker has not been called to the scene in compliance with this
subchapter.
   (G)   Display the permit issued by the city on each wrecker vehicle.
('78 Code, § 18-32) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.37 SOLICITATION OF WRECKER BUSINESS.
   (A)   No person may solicit in any manner, directly or indirectly, on the
streets of the city, the business of towing a vehicle which is wrecked or
disabled regardless of whether the solicitation is for the purpose of
soliciting business of towing, removing, repairing, storing, trading or
purchasing the vehicle.
   (B)   Proof of the presence of a person engaged in the wrecker business,
either as owner, operator, employee or agent, on a street in the city, at or
near the scene of an accident, who has not been called to the scene by the
Police Department or the owner or operator of the vehicle, within one hour
after the happening of an accident is prima facie evidence of a solicitation in
violation of this section.
('78 Code, § 18-33) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.38 CITY EMPLOYEE SHALL NOT REFER.
   No police officer or other employee of the city shall recommend to any
person, directly or indirectly, the name of any particular person engaged in
wrecker business for which solicitation is prohibited, nor shall any police
officer or other city employee attempt to influence in any manner a decision of
a person in selecting a wrecker operator.
('78 Code, § 18-34) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.39 WRECKER SERVICE AGREEMENT AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   The city shall have the right to contract with a single wrecker
service company for the towing of city vehicles or for the towing or
impoundment of any vehicle made necessary in the exercise of the city's police
and governmental functions.
   (B)   The city may call any wrecker company or use any wrecker in cases
where the contractor is unable to respond as required by the agreement, when
there exists an emergency situation or when deemed necessary by the Chief of
Police, or his/her authorized representative. In all cases, a report will be
forwarded to the Chief of Police describing the circumstances involving the
use.
('78 Code, § 18-35) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96)
§ 113.40 NOTIFICATION OF CHANGES.
   (A)   A permittee shall notify the Police Department of any and all
personnel changes for those persons who will operate the wrecker vehicles
within ten calendar days of the personnel changes and additional drivers must
first be approved by the Chief of Police prior to operating any wrecker vehicle
within the city limits.
   (B)   The permittee shall notify the Police Department of any change in
ownership of the wrecker company or any change in the number of wreckers,
location of a storage facility or any other material change in the information
provided on the application for a license within ten calendar days of the
change.
('78 Code, § 18-36) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.41 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.
   To compensate the city for the staff time and expense necessary to process
the release of a vehicle towed and stored without the consent of the owner or
operator, a fee of $10 shall be charged.
('78 Code, § 18-37) (Ord. 1108, passed 1-22-96)
§ 113.42 IMPOUND STORAGE FEES.
   No impound fees or storage costs shall be charged for days on which the
operator is not available for vehicle owners to redeem or claim their vehicle.
For example, a wrecker operator who closes his/her office on Sundays and
holidays may not charge impound fees for those days.
('78 Code, § 18-38) (Ord. 704, passed 11-10-86)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever shall violate any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in §
10.99.
   (B)   The City Council may, at any time after the issuance of the
certificate provided for in §
113.02, suspend or revoke the same for a violation of §§
113.01 et seq., any other applicable ordinance of the city or laws of the state
by the certificate holder or an operator of any taxicab operating under the
certificate. In addition to taking the action on account of a complaint
forwarded to it by the City Manager as provided, the City Council may initiate
the proceedings based upon any other evidence of violation. In the event of the
complaint or violation, the City Council shall give the certificate holder
notice in writing of the time and place of a public hearing to be conducted to
determine whether or not any action should be taken to suspend or revoke an
existing certificate or to disqualify a person from receiving a permit to
operate a taxicab. A person may be denied a permit to operate a taxicab or may
have an existing permit suspended or revoked because of his/her conviction of a
felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude if the crime directly relates
to the duties and responsibilities of a taxicab driver. Any proceeding to
suspend or revoke a certificate or permit shall be concluded and a decision
rendered within 30 days after receipt of the complaint from the City Manager or
initiation of the action by the City Council.
('78 Code, § 18-60) (Ord. 754, passed 9-14-87)
CHAPTER 114: GAS WELL DRILLING AND PRODUCTION
Section
General Provisions
   
114.01   Purpose; intent
   
114.02   Definitions
   
114.03   Compressors
   
114.035   Seismic surveys
   
114.04   Road repair agreement
   
114.045   Operator’s agent
   
114.05   Gas well permit required
   
114.055   Platting requirements for certain residential developments adjacent
to gas wells
   
114.06   Application for and review of gas well permit
   
114.07   Insurance; indemnification
   
114.08   Security
   
114.09   Periodic reports
   
114.10   Amended gas well permits
   
114.11   Transfer of gas well permits
Operation Requirements
   
114.12   On-site operation requirements
   
114.13   Operations and equipment practices and standards
   
114.14    Pipelines
   
114.15   Additional safety and environmental requirements
   
114.16   Supplemental drilling
   
114.17   Re-working of well; notice
   
114.18   Abandonment of wells, pipelines and line compressors
   
114.185   Technical advisor
Enforcement
   
114.19   Remedies of city
   
114.20   Enforcement; right of entry
   
114.21   Variance
 
   
114.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 114.01 PURPOSE; INTENT.
   The exploration, development and production of gas in the city is an
activity which necessitates reasonable regulation to ensure that all property
owners, mineral and otherwise, have the right to peaceably enjoy their property
and its benefits and revenues. It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this
chapter to establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards and
regulations for operations related to the exploring, drilling, developing,
producing, transporting and storing of gas and other substances produced in
association with gas within the city to protect the health, safety and general
welfare of the public, minimize the potential impact to property and mineral
rights owners, protect the quality of the environment and encourage the
efficient production of available mineral resources.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15)
§ 114.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   All technical industry words or phrases related to the drilling and
production of gas wells not specifically defined shall have the meanings
customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the gas industry.
   (B)   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ABANDONMENT. As defined by the Railroad Commission and includes the
plugging of the well and restoration of the drill site as required by this
chapter.
      AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL. The all-encompassing noise level associated with a
given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources at the
location, constituting the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a
given location.
      AMERICAN PETROLEUM INSTITUTE (API) STANDARDS. Standards that are designed
to assist energy industry professionals improve the efficiency and cost-
effectiveness of their operations, comply with legislative and regulatory
requirements, safeguard health, and protect the environment.
      APPLICANT. A person to whom a permit or certificate for the drilling,
operation and production of a well, or the installation or operation of a
pipeline, is issued under this chapter, including, but not limited to, his or
her heirs, legal representatives, successors or assigns.
      BLOWOUT PREVENTER. A mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic or other device or
combination of such devices secured to the top of a well casing, including
valves, fittings and control mechanisms connected therewith, which can be
closed around the drill pipe, or other tubular goods which completely close the
top of the casing and are designed for preventing blowouts.
      CLOSED LOOP MUD SYSTEM. An enclosed suite of solids control equipment
used for mud circulation and intended to minimize drilling fluid dilution to
provide for handling of the drilling wastes so that reserve pits are not used.
      DAYTIME. The period from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
      DEVELOPMENT FEE SCHEDULE. A schedule of development related fees
established by the City Council.
      DRILL SITE. The area used for drilling, completing, or re-working a well.
      DRILLING. Any digging or boring of a new well to develop or produce gas
or to inject gas, water, or any other fluid or substance into the earth.
DRILLING means and includes the re-entry of an abandoned well. DRILLING does
not mean or include the re-entry of a well that has not been abandoned.
      ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA. An area under the jurisdiction of the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers where scientific, ecological, cultural or
aesthetic features have been identified by the Corps of Engineers.
      EXPLORATION. Geologic or geophysical activities, including, but not
limited to, surveying and seismic exploration, related to the search for gas or
other sub-surface hydrocarbons.
      FLARE OR FLARING. The burning of unwanted gas through a pipe. FLARING is
a means of disposal used when there is no way to transport the gas to market
and the operator cannot use the gas for another purpose.
      FLOWBACK. The process of flowing a completed/fractured well for the
purpose of recovering water and residual sand from the gas stream prior to
sending gas down a sales pipeline.
      GAS. Gas or natural gas, as such terms are used in the rules,
regulations, or forms of the Railroad Commission.
      GAS WELL. Any well drilled for the production of gas or classified as a
GAS WELL by the Texas Natural Resources Code or the Railroad Commission.
      GAS WELL PERMIT. A permit applied for and issued or denied pursuant to
this chapter authorizing the drilling, production, and operation of one or more
gas wells.
      HAZARDOUS MATERIALS MANAGEMENT PLAN. The HAZARDOUS MATERIALS MANAGEMENT
PLAN and hazardous materials inventory statements required by the Fire Code.
      HOLIDAY. Any day recognized as an official HOLIDAY by the City of
Mansfield. The list of official holidays observed by the City of Mansfield
shall be maintained for public viewing on the city's official website.
      HYDRAULIC FRACTURING, FRAC, FRACING, FRACTURE OR COMPLETIONS. All stages
of the treatment of a well by the application of hydraulic fracturing fluid
under pressure that is expressly designed to initiate or propagate fractures in
a target geologic formation to enhance production of oil and natural gas.
      HYDRAULIC FRACTURING PUMPING. The active pumping of fluid and sand under
pressure with the expressed intent of stimulating the well and fracturing the
underlying hydrocarbon bearing formation.
      INSPECTOR. The Gas Well Inspector and other city personnel who conduct
inspections as needed and as designated by the City Manager.
      LIFT COMPRESSOR. A device that raises the pressure of a compressible
fluid (gas) in order to lift gas from the well.
      LINE COMPRESSOR. A device that raises the pressure of a compressible
fluid (gas) in order for the gas to be transported through a pipeline.
      LINE COMPRESSOR FACILITY. A facility consisting of one or more
compressors, auxiliary treatment equipment and pipeline installations to pump
natural gas under pressure over long distances, including the land upon which
the facility is located.
      NIGHTTIME. The period between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
      OPERATION SITE. The area used for development and production of gas and
all related operational activities after drilling activities are complete.
      OPERATOR. For each well, the person listed on the Railroad Commission
Form W-l or Form P-4 for a gas well, that is, or will be, actually in charge
and in control of drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping or controlling any
well including, without limitation, a unit OPERATOR. If the OPERATOR, as
defined herein, for any gas well is not the lessee of any premises affected by
the provisions of this chapter, then such lessee shall also be deemed to be an
OPERATOR. In the event that there is no gas lease relating to any premises
affected by this chapter, the owner of the fee mineral estate in the premises
shall be deemed the OPERATOR. For each line compressor facility, OPERATOR shall
mean the entity in control of the facility.
      PIPELINE EASEMENT MAP. A map indicating all gathering line easements. The
easements must be located separately from other utility easements unless
approved by the city.
      PROTECTED USE. A residential structure, public building, hospital,
institution, nursing home, public or private school, day care center, or
commercial building.
      RAILROAD COMMISSION. The Railroad Commission of Texas.
      RE-DRILLING. The re-completion of an existing well by deepening or
sidetrack operations extending more than 150 feet from the existing well bore.
      REDUCED EMISSION (GREEN) COMPLETION. Techniques or methods that minimize
the release of natural gas and vapors to the environment when a well is being
flowed during the completion or re-completion phase of a Barnett Shale Well.
      RE-WORKING. The re-completion or re-entry of an existing well within the
existing bore hole or to deepen or perform sidetrack operations which do not
extend more than 150 feet from the existing well bore, or the replacement of
well liners or casings.
      ROAD REPAIR AGREEMENT. A written agreement obligating the operator to
repair damage, excluding ordinary wear and tear, if any, to public streets,
including, but not limited to, bridges, caused by the operator or its
employees, agents, contractors, subcontractors or representatives in the
performance of drilling or production of any gas wells authorized by the city.
      ROAD DAMAGE REMEDIATION FEE. A fee assessed to repair damage to public
roadways that is based on the projected damage and decreased life expectancy of
roadways in the city caused by the operator's use of the roadways.
      SPECIFIC USE PERMIT. A zoning classification that provides for uses that
require special consideration in certain settings or are of a public or semi-
public character which without specific consideration may have possible adverse
impact on neighboring properties.
      TANK. A container, covered or uncovered, used in conjunction with the
drilling or production of gas or other hydrocarbons for holding or storing
fluids.
      TANK BATTERY. A group of tanks that are connected to receive fluids from
a well or a producing lease.
      TECHNICAL ADVISOR. Such persons familiar with and educated in the gas
industry or the law as it relates to gas matters who may be retained from time
to time by the city.
      WELL. A hole or bore to any horizon, formation, or strata for the purpose
of producing gas or other hydrocarbons.
      WORKOVER OPERATIONS. Work performed in a well after its completion in an
effort to secure production where there has been none, restore production that
has ceased or to increase production.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15)
§ 114.03 COMPRESSORS.
   (A)   A specific use permit shall be required for the establishment and
operation of a compressor, whether in conjunction with a gas well or as an
independent operation.
   (B)   Lift compressors.
      (1)   Lift compressors shall meet the noise standards in §
114.13(E).
      (2)   A lift compressor installed on a site for less than six consecutive
months shall be classified as a temporary lift compressor and may employ sound
blankets or barriers to meet the noise standards.
      (3)   A lift compressor installed on a site for more than six months
shall be classified as a permanent lift compressor. If located within 600 feet
of a protected use or preliminary or final platted residential subdivision, a
permanent lift compressor shall be enclosed in an acoustical structure
constructed of metal, masonry or other materials as approved by the Director of
Planning. The structure must completely screen the equipment from view, be
painted in a non-contrasting neutral earth tone color to match the nearby
surroundings as nearly as possible, and meet all applicable building and fire
codes.
      (4)   If permanent screening has not been installed around a site, all
compressors, associated equipment and buildings shall be enclosed within a
landscaped enclosure in accordance with §
114.12(G) of this chapter immediately upon installation of the compressor and
associated equipment.
      (5)   Secondary containment shall be required around all lift
compressors. All secondary containment shall meet the same requirements for
storage tank facilities in §
114.15(E) of this chapter.
      (6)   All facilities shall be inspected by the Fire Marshal for
compliance with the Fire Code and the Gas Well Inspector prior to operation of
the compressor.
   (C)   Line compressors.
      (1)   Line compressors shall be required to meet all the noise standards
in §
114.13(E).
      (2)   All line compressors and associated equipment exceeding ten feet in
height shall be fully enclosed within a building or structure that complies
with the architectural and community design standards of the zoning district in
which the facility is located and designed in context with surrounding land
uses.
      (3)   A bufferyard with a minimum width of 300 feet shall be established
and maintained around all line compressors, buildings or structures housing
line compressors, and associated equipment. A drill site or operation site
shall be permitted within the bufferyard when such site abuts a compressor
facility.
      (4)   All facilities shall be inspected by the Fire Marshal for
compliance with the Fire Code and the Gas Well Inspector prior to operation of
the compressor.
      (5)   Line compressors and associated equipment shall be landscaped and
screened in the same manner as prescribed for a drill site according to §
114.12(G).
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see § 114.99
§ 114.035 SEISMIC SURVEYS.
   (A)   A permit shall be required for seismic surveys conducted on city-owned
property or within city rights-of-way unless such requirement is waived by the
City Manager or his designated representative.
   (B)   No less than 15 days prior to conducting a seismic survey within the
city, the operator must provide written notice to the city, the owners and
occupants of property and any homeowners association in subdivisions where
surveying will occur. The notice must describe the process of seismic
surveying, the date when surveying will begin, the expected duration of the
survey, and include the contact information with the name, telephone number and
an e-mail address of the operator or contractor performing the survey, and the
contact information for the Gas Well Inspector.
   (C)   Seismic surveys shall only be conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Saturday.
Seismic surveys shall not be conducted on Sundays or holidays.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15)
§ 114.04 ROAD REPAIR AGREEMENT.
   A road repair agreement and road damage remediation fee shall be submitted
in conjunction with the application for a gas well permit. The agreement must
be signed by the operator. The City Manager shall have the authority to execute
the road repair agreement. A road damage remediation fee shall be charged for
each well included in a gas well permit application in the amount set forth in
the approved development fee schedule.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.045 OPERATOR’S AGENT.
   Each operator of a well shall designate an agent upon whom all orders and
notices provided in this chapter may be served in person or by registered or
certified mail. Each operator so designating such agent shall within ten days
notify the City Manager or his designee in writing of any change in such agent
or such mailing address unless operations within the city are discontinued in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15)
§ 114.05 GAS WELL PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the drilling and production of gas wells
within the city without first obtaining a gas well permit.
   (B)   A single gas well permit may be obtained for multiple wells if
approved by the city. An application for a gas well permit may be filed with
the city concurrently with the application for a specific use permit; provided,
however, that the city shall not be required to consider the application for a
gas well permit unless and until a specific use permit is approved by the City
Council.
   (C)   When a gas well permit has been issued covering a well, the permit
shall constitute authority for the following, so long as conducted in strict
accordance with this chapter: drilling, operation, production, gathering of
production, maintenance, repair, re-working, testing, site preparation
consisting of rigs or tank batteries, plugging and abandonment, and any other
activity authorized by this chapter associated with drilling or production by
the operator or its employees, agents, contractors, subcontractors or
representatives. A gas well permit shall also constitute authority for the
construction and use of all facilities reasonably necessary or convenient in
connection therewith by the operator or his or her employees, agents,
contractors, subcontractors or representatives, so long as constructed and used
in strict accordance with this chapter.
   (D)   An original gas well permit shall not, however, constitute authority
for the re-entering and drilling of an abandoned well. Re-entry and drilling of
an abandoned well shall require a new gas well permit.
   (E)   A gas well permit may be issued for any lot, tract, or other parcel of
property, and public utilities may be extended or connected to serve the drill
site, whether or not the lot, tract, or other parcel of property is part of a
recorded plat.
   (F)   In addition to obtaining a gas well permit, each operator must obtain
all other required permits applicable to the proposed operation, including, but
not limited to, above-ground storage tank permits, gas detection system
permits, foam/water line assembly permits, irrigation permits, and electrical
permits, from the applicable city departments and remit all necessary fees
before the work to be permitted may commence.
   (G)   An approved gas well permit shall expire after 180 days from the date
of its issuance unless the drilling of one or more wells under the permit has
commenced. A gas well permit may be extended one time by the Gas Well Inspector
for an additional 180 days upon request by the operator if:
      (1)   The regulatory standards set forth in this chapter have not changed
as applied to the subject permit; and
      (2)   The request is submitted prior to the expiration of the original
permit.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.055 PLATTING REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS ADJACENT
TO GAS WELLS.
   (A)   The provisions of this section shall apply to land in the city:
      (1)   That is subject to any zoning designation which allows for a single
family dwelling;
      (2)   Where any portion of the boundary of the land is located within 300
feet of the boundary of an existing drill site as established by the applicable
specific use permit authorizing the drill site; and
      (3)   Whose owner is required to have a plat prepared and approved
pursuant to the Subdivision Control Ordinance of the City of Mansfield, Texas.
   (B)   The owner of land meeting the criteria set forth in this section
shall, at the time of platting, include on the face of the plat, framed in a
bold line so as to be distinctly visible, in capital letters and in a minimum
type font size of 14 point, the following note: "LOTS ___________________ARE
LOCATED WITHIN 300 FEET OF AN APPROVED GAS WELL DRILL SITE." The owner of the
property shall complete the blank in the plat note to indicate the lots subject
to this section.
   (C)   For the purposes of this section the terms "owner" and "plat" shall
have the meanings ascribed to them by the Subdivision Control Ordinance of the
City of Mansfield. Texas.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15)
§ 114.06 APPLICATION FOR AND REVIEW OF GAS WELL PERMIT.
   (A)   Applications for gas well permits shall be submitted in writing on
forms provided by the city and signed by the operator.
   (B)   Applications for gas well permits shall be filed with the Planning
Department. An administration and inspection fee shall be charged for each
application, in the amounts set forth in the approved development fee schedule.
The administration fee is not refundable regardless of the outcome of the
application. Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant. The
city shall return any application as incomplete if there is a dispute pending
before the Railroad Commission regarding the determination of the operator.
   (C)   An application for a gas well permit must be accompanied by the
following documentation:
       (1)   Ten sets of site plans to include:
         (a)   The specific acreage and number of wells included in the gas
well permit application;
         (b)   A drill site exhibit with existing and proposed wells identified
by each well's unit name and number listed on the Texas Railroad Commission
permit;
         (c)   The location, description and distances of all improvements and
structures within 600 feet of the drill site from the edge of the drill site to
nearest property line;
         (d)   The location of the fracturing pit and access road;
         (e)   A vicinity map locating the property in relationship to existing
major thoroughfares;
         (f)   A drill site detail showing the equipment to be used during
drilling, including but not limited to, the drilling rig, pipe rack, water and
sanitary sewer facilities, electrical supply, camper/office trailers, closed-
loop system, and fracturing pits;
         (g)   An operation site detail showing the production equipment,
including but not limited to, wellheads, separators, dehydrators, tank
batteries, compressors, metering stations, the screening wall/device and
landscaping;
         (h)   Any existing and proposed easements;
         (i)   A pipeline routing map showing the anticipated or existing
alignment of the pipeline(s) serving the operation site through the city;
         (j)   The proposed transportation route and road map for equipment,
chemicals or waste products used or produced by the gas well operation; and
         (k)   The screening, landscaping and irrigation plans. The plans for a
screening fence or wall must be prepared and sealed by a Texas registered
design professional.
      (2)   Four sets of engineering plans, including a grading plan, fire
hydrant map, a plan showing the public utilities required during drilling and
production operations, and the designation of the water source to be used;
      (3)   An electronic copy of the site plan in accordance with city's
current established policy;
      (4)   The ambient noise report required by §
114.13(E) hereof and a noise management plan;
      (5)   A storm water pollution prevention plan;
      (6)   A copy of the approved Texas Railroad Commission permit to drill
including attachments and survey plats that are applicable to the drill site
and operation site;
      (7)   A copy of the determination by the Texas Railroad Commission of the
depth of useable quality groundwater;
      (8)   Evidence of insurance and security required by §§
114.07 and
114.08 hereof;
      (9)   A tree survey;
      (10)   An exhibit showing the placement and coverage of security cameras
on the drill site and operation site;
      (11)   If the operator is a corporation, the state of incorporation, and
if the operator is a partnership, the name and addresses of the general
partners;
      (12)   The written approval of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers if the
gas well operation is on property within the Corps’ jurisdiction;
      (13)   A hazardous materials management plan prepared in accordance with
the Fire Code:
      (14)   An emergency action response plan in accordance with §
114.15(P) hereof; and
      (15)   Any other information deemed necessary by the city to verify
compliance with this chapter.
   (D)   No gas well permit shall be issued if the proposed activities are not
in conformance with the approved specific use permit and associated site plan,
provisions of this chapter, Building Code, Fire Code and all other applicable
city ordinances.
   (E)   A decision to deny an application for a gas well permit shall be
provided to the operator in writing, including the reason for the decision. The
operator may appeal any such denial to the City Council.
   (F)   If an application for a gas well permit is denied, nothing herein
contained shall prevent a new application from being submitted to the city for
the same well. A new application fee shall accompany each new application.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15)
§ 114.07 INSURANCE; INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   The operator shall provide or cause to be provided the insurance
described below for each well for which a gas well permit is issued. Such
insurance must continue until the well is abandoned and the site restored. The
operator may provide the required coverage on a "blanket" basis for multiple
wells if the site of each well is sufficiently identified, the limits of
coverage are sufficient as determined by the city within its sole discretion,
and the blanket policy is otherwise approved by the city. The operator must
provide to the city sufficient documentation that the operator's insurance
complies with the requirements of this section before the issuance of the gas
well permit.
   (B)   General requirements - indemnification and express negligence
provisions.
      (1)   Each gas well permit issued by the city shall include the following
language and regardless of whether such language is actually included in the
gas well permit it shall be deemed to be included therein:
   OPERATOR DOES HEREBY EXPRESSLY AND IRREVOCABLY RELEASE AND DISCHARGE ALL
CLAIMS, DEMANDS, ACTIONS, JUDGMENTS, AND EXECUTIONS OF ANY AND ALL KINDS WHICH
IT OR ITS SUCCESSORS OR ASSIGNS EVER HAD, OR NOW HAS OR MAY HAVE, OR CLAIMS TO
HAVE, AGAINST THE CITY OF MANSFIELD, TEXAS, ITS DEPARTMENTS, AGENTS, OFFICERS,
SERVANTS, EMPLOYEES, SPONSORS, OR VOLUNTEERS, THE GAS WELL INSPECTOR, AND EACH
OF THEIR RESPECTIVE HEIRS, PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVES, SUCCESSORS, AND ASSIGNS
(THE CITY OF MANSFIELD, TEXAS AND ALL OTHER FOREGOING PARTIES BEING HEREIN
REFERRED TO COLLECTIVELY AS THE "INDEMNIFIED PARTIES") CREATED BY OR ARISING
OUT OF PERSONAL INJURIES, KNOWN OR UNKNOWN, OR INJURIES TO PROPERTY, REAL OR
PERSONAL, OR IN ANY WAY INCIDENTAL TO OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE PERFORMANCE OF
THE WORK PERFORMED BY THE OPERATOR UNDER A GAS WELL PERMIT. OPERATOR AGREES TO
FULLY DEFEND, PROTECT, INDEMNIFY, AND HOLD HARMLESS THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES
FROM AND AGAINST EACH AND EVERY CLAIM, DEMAND, OR CAUSE OF ACTION AND ANY AND
ALL LIABILITY, DAMAGES, OBLIGATIONS, JUDGMENTS, LOSSES, FINES, PENALTIES,
COSTS, FEES, AND EXPENSES INCURRED BY THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES CAUSED BY OR
ARISING OUT OF, INCIDENTAL TO, OR OTHERWISE IN CONNECTION WITH ANY WORK
PERFORMED BY OPERATOR UNDER A GAS WELL PERMIT OR ARISING OUT OF THE USE OF THE
DRILL SITE, PIPELINE OR ANY OTHER ASSOCIATED APPURTENANCES THERETO, INCLUDING,
WITHOUT LIMITATION, PERSONAL INJURIES AND DEATH IN CONNECTION THEREWITH WHICH
MAY BE MADE OR ASSERTED BY OPERATOR, HIS AGENTS, ASSIGNS, OR ANY THIRD PARTIES.
OPERATOR AGREES TO FULLY DEFEND, PROTECT, INDEMNIFY, AND HOLD HARMLESS THE
INDEMNIFIED PARTIES FROM ANY CLAIMS, LIABILITIES, OR DAMAGES SUFFERED AS A
RESULT OF CLAIMS, DEMANDS, COSTS, OR JUDGMENTS AGAINST THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES,
CREATED BY OR ARISING OUT OF THE ACTS OR OMISSIONS OF THE CITY OF MANSFIELD OR
ANY OF THE OTHER INDEMNIFIED PARTIES, OCCURRING ON THE DRILL SITE OR OPERATION
SITE IN THE COURSE AND SCOPE OF INSPECTING AND PERMITTING THE GAS WELLS
INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, CLAIMS, LIABILITIES, AND DAMAGES ARISING IN
WHOLE OR IN PART FROM THE NEGLIGENCE OF ANY OF THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES,
INCLUDING THE SOLE NEGLIGENCE OF ANY INDEMNIFIED PARTY, OCCURRING ON THE DRILL
SITE OR OPERATION SITE IN THE COURSE AND SCOPE OF INSPECTING AND PERMITTING THE
GAS WELLS. IT IS UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED THAT THE INDEMNITY PROVIDED FOR IN THIS
SECTION IS AN INDEMNITY EXTENDED BY THE OPERATOR TO INDEMNIFY AND PROTECT THE
CITY OF MANSFIELD, TEXAS AND THE OTHER INDEMNIFIED PARTIES FROM THE
CONSEQUENCES OF THE NEGLIGENCE OF ANY OF THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES, WHETHER THAT
NEGLIGENCE IS THE SOLE OR CONTRIBUTING CAUSE OF THE RESULTANT INJURY, DEATH
AND/OR DAMAGE. THE FOREGOING IS NOT INTENDED TO REQUIRE THE OPERATOR TO
INDEMNIFY THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES FROM THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES' GROSS
NEGLIGENCE OR INTENTIONAL HARM, IRRESPECTIVE OF WHETHER THAT GROSS NEGLIGENCE
OR INTENTIONAL HARM IS THE SOLE OR CONTRIBUTING CAUSE OF THE RESULTANT INJURY,
DEATH, AND/OR DAMAGE.
      (2)   All policies shall be endorsed to read: “This policy will not be
cancelled or non-renewed without 30 days’ advanced written notice to the owner
and the City of Mansfield, Texas, except when this policy is being cancelled
for nonpayment of premium, in which case ten days' advance written notice is
required."
      (3)   Liability policies shall be written by:
         (a)   Carriers licensed to do business in Texas and with companies
with A: VIII or better rating in accordance with the current Best Key Rating
Guide; or
         (b)   Non-admitted carriers that have a financial rating comparable to
carriers licensed to do business in Texas and which are approved by the city.
      (4)   Liability policies shall name as "additional insured" the city and
other indemnified parties. Waivers of subrogation shall be provided in favor of
all indemnified parties.
      (5)   Copies of the pertinent portion of the insurance policies
evidencing all coverages and endorsements required by this section must be
presented to the city before the issuance of the gas well permit, and the
acceptance of a policy without the required limits and/or coverages shall not
be deemed a waiver of these requirements. The city may, in its sole discretion,
accept a certificate of insurance in lieu of a copy of the pertinent portion of
the policy pending receipt of such document by the city. After the issuance of
the gas well permit, the city may require the operator to provide a copy of the
most current insurance coverages and endorsements for review at any time. An
administration fee shall be assessed to cover the cost of the review, in the
amount set forth in the development fee schedule.
      (6)   Claims-made policies shall not be accepted except for excess
policies and environmental impairment (or seepage and pollution) policies.
   (C)   Required insurance coverage.
      (1)   Commercial or comprehensive general liability insurance.
         (a)   Coverage should be a minimum combined single limit of $1,000,000
per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage, with a $2,000,000 annual
general aggregate. This coverage must include premises, operations, blowout or
explosion, products, completed operations, blanket contractual liability,
underground property damage, underground reservoir (or resources) damage, broad
form property damage, independent contractors protective liability and personal
injury.
         (b)   Underground reservoir (or resources) damage shall be on an
occurrence basis, shall not be limited to sudden and accidental occurrences,
shall not have a discovery or reporting limitation and shall not exclude damage
to water tables, formation or strata.
         (c)   Environmental impairment (or seepage and pollution) shall be
either included in the coverage or written as separate coverage. Such coverage
shall not exclude damage to the lease site. If environmental impairment (or
seepage and pollution) coverage is written on a "claims made" basis, the policy
must provide that any retroactive date applicable precedes the effective date
of the issuance of the permit. Coverage shall apply to sudden and accidental
pollution conditions resulting from the escape or release of smoke, vapors,
fumes, acids, alkalis, toxic chemicals, liquids, gases, waste material, or
other irritants, contaminants or pollutants. Coverage shall be a minimum
combined single limit of $1,000,000 per occurrence. A discovery period for such
peril shall not be less than 30 days after the occurrence.
      (2)   Automobile liability insurance. Minimum combined single limit of
$1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. Such coverage
shall include owned, non-owned, and hired vehicles.
      (3)   Workers' compensation insurance. In addition to the minimum
statutory requirements, coverage shall include employers’ liability limits of
at least $1,000,000 for each accident. $1,000,000 for each employee, and a
$1,000,000 policy limit for occupational disease, and the insurer agrees to
waive rights of subrogation against any of the indemnified parties for any work
performed for the city by the operator.
      (4)   Excess (or umbrella) liability insurance. Minimum limit of
$10,000,000 covering in excess of the preceding liability insurance policies.
      (5)   Control of well insurance.
         (a)   Minimum limit of $10,000,000 per occurrence, with a maximum
deductible of $250,000 per occurrence.
         (b)   Policy shall cover the cost of controlling a well that is out of
control, re-drilling or restoration expenses, and seepage and pollution damage.
Damage to property in the operator's care, custody, and control with a sub-
limit of $500,000 may be added.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.08 SECURITY.
   (A)   A security instrument that covers each well must be delivered to the
city before the issuance of the gas well permit for the well. The instrument
must provide that it cannot be cancelled without at least 30 days’ prior
written notice to the city.
   (B)   As to each well, the instrument shall secure the obligations of the
operator to:
      (1)   Comply with the road repair agreement and the insurance provisions
set forth in this chapter; and
      (2)   Pay fines and penalties imposed upon the operator by the city for
any breach of the gas well permit, this chapter or the applicable specific use
permit.
   (C)   The security instrument may be in the form of an irrevocable letter of
credit issued by a bank located in the City of Mansfield, Texas and approved by
the city or a payment bond issued by a surety approved by the city. The
instrument shall run to the city for the benefit of the city, shall become
effective on or before the date the gas well permit is issued, and shall remain
in force and effect for a period not less than six months after the expiration
or termination of the gas well permit or after the well is plugged and
abandoned and the site restored.
   (D)   A certificate of deposit may be substituted for the letter of credit
or payment bond. The certificate shall be issued by a bank located in the City
of Mansfield, Texas and approved by the city, shall be payable to the order of
the city to secure the obligations of the operator described above, and shall
be pledged to the city with evidence of delivery provided to the city and an
appropriate control agreement signed by the issuing bank sufficient to perfect
the city's interest in the deposit. Interest on the certificate of deposit
shall be payable to the operator.
   (E)   The amount of the security shall be $100,000 for any single well and
$200,000 for multiple wells on a "blanket" basis under the same gas well
permit.
   (F)   The form and substance of the documents evidencing the security
instruments described above must be acceptable to the city within its sole
discretion.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.09 PERIODIC REPORTS.
   (A)   The operator shall notify the Director of Planning of any change to
the following information within one business day after the change occurs:
      (1)   The name, address, or phone number of the operator;
      (2)   The name, address, or 24-hour phone number of the person(s) with
supervisory authority over drilling or operations activities;
      (3)   The name, address, or phone number of the person designated to
receive notices from the city, which person must be a resident of Texas that
can be served in person or by registered or certified mail;
      (4)   The air quality monitoring plan as required by §
114.15(R) hereof; or
      (5)   The operator's site specific emergency action response plan. In
addition, each operator shall meet with the City's Fire Department personnel at
least once a year, or more frequently if deemed necessary by the Fire Marshal,
to conduct a review of the operator's emergency action response plan, incident
command system, and on-site familiarization that may be deemed necessary by the
Fire Marshal or Gas Well Inspector.
   (B)   The operator shall provide a copy of any incident reports or written
complaints submitted to the Railroad Commission or any other state or federal
agency within 30 days after the operator has notice of the existence of such
reports or complaints.
   (C)   Beginning on December 31 after each well is completed, and continuing
on each December 31 thereafter until the operator notifies the city that the
well has been abandoned and the site restored, the operator shall prepare a
written report to the city identifying any changes to the information that was
included in the application for the applicable gas well permit that have not
been previously reported to the city.
   (D)   Beginning on December 31 and annually thereafter each operator shall
provide an operational status report to the city for every well permitted by
the city. The report shall include the well name, API number, lease name, city
case number, Railroad Commission permit number, Railroad Commission lease ID
number and current status whether pending, drilling, completing, producing,
plugged or abandoned.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.10 AMENDED GAS WELL PERMITS.
   (A)   An operator must submit an application to the Planning Department to
amend an existing gas well permit, to commence drilling from a new drill site
that is not shown on (or incorporated by reference as part of) the existing
permit, to relocate a drill site or operation site that is shown on (or
incorporated by reference as part of) the existing permit, or to otherwise
amend the existing permit.
   (B)   Applications for amended gas well permits shall be in writing on forms
provided by the city and signed by the operator, and shall include the
following:
      (1)   An application fee in the amount set forth in the development fee
schedule. The application fee is not refundable regardless of the outcome of
the application;
      (2)   A description of the proposed amendments;
      (3)   Any changes to the information submitted with the application for
the current gas well permit (if such information has not previously been
provided to the city);
      (4)   Such additional information as is reasonably required by the Gas
Well Inspector or city staff to demonstrate compliance with the applicable
specific use permit and associated site plan and the provisions of this
chapter; and
      (5)   Such additional information as is reasonably required by the Gas
Well Inspector or city staff to prevent imminent destruction of property or
injury to persons.
   (C)   If, in the judgment of the city or the Gas Well Inspector, the
activities proposed by the amendment require an inspection, an inspection fee
in the amount set forth in the development fee schedule shall be assessed. The
operator must pay the fee before the amended gas well permit will be issued.
   (D)   Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant. The city
shall return any application as incomplete if there is a dispute pending before
the Railroad Commission regarding the determination of the operator.
   (E)   If the activities proposed by the amendment are materially different
and, in the judgment of the city or the Gas Well Inspector, might create a risk
of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons that was not
associated with the activities covered by the existing permit or that was not
otherwise taken into consideration by the current permit, the amendment must be
processed as a new gas well permit application under the provisions of §
114.05.
   (F)   A decision to deny an amendment to a gas well permit shall be provided
to the operator in writing, including an explanation of the basis for the
decision. The operator may appeal any such denial to the City Council.
   (G)   No amended gas well permit shall be issued if the proposed activities
are not in conformance with the approved specific use permit and associated
site plan, provisions of this chapter, Building Code, Fire Code, and all other
applicable city ordinances.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.11 TRANSFER OF GAS WELL PERMITS.
   (A)   A gas well permit may be transferred upon written request by the
operator with the consent of the city:
      (1)   If the transferee agrees to be bound by the terms and conditions of
the current gas well permit and road repair agreement:
      (2)   If all information previously provided to the city as part of the
current gas well permit application is updated to reflect any changes; and
      (3)   If the transferee provides the insurance and security required by
this chapter.
   (B)   The insurance and security provided by the transferor shall be
released if a copy of the written transfer is provided to the city. The
transfer shall not relieve the transferor from any liability to the city
arising out of any activities conducted prior to the transfer.
   (C)   Applications for the transfer of gas well permits shall be filed with
the Planning Department. An administration fee shall be charged for each
application, in the amount set forth in the approved development fee schedule.
   (D)   Within five days of the issuance of a transferred gas well permit, the
new operator shall send notice, in a form acceptable to the city, to the
occupants of all protected uses within 1,000 feet of a drill site or operation
site of such a change. The notice shall include the new operator's name and
emergency and non-emergency telephone numbers.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15)
OPERATION REQUIREMENTS
§ 114.12 ON-SITE OPERATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Erosion control for each drill and operation site or line compressor
facility shall comply with the storm water pollution prevention plan approved
by the City Engineering Department.
   (B)   No drill site, operation site, or line compressor facility may be
located in a floodplain without the approval of the city and, where applicable,
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
   (C)   There shall be a locked entrance gate to the drill site, operation
site or line compressor facility.
   (D)   The following signs shall be required on all drill sites and operation
sites:
      (1)   Address sign. An address sign shall be immediately and prominently
displayed at the entrance of the access road. The numbers and letters of the
address must be at least six inches in height and having a one-half inch brush-
stroke.
      (2)   911 sign. A 911 sign shall be immediately and prominently displayed
at the entrance to a drill site or operation site. Unless otherwise required by
the Railroad Commission, the sign shall have a surface area of not less than
two square feet or more than four square feet, and shall be lettered with the
following:
         (a)   The emergency 911 number;
         (b)   The well name and number;
         (c)   Name of the operator;
         (d)   The address of the site and city pad ID number, as assigned by
the city;
         (e)   A 24-hour emergency telephone number of the operator; and
         (f)   City of Mansfield jurisdiction.
      (3)   No smoking sign. Signs reading "DANGER NO SMOKING ALLOWED" in both
English and Spanish as shown in the figure below shall be posted at the
entrance of each site and tank battery and in any other location approved or
designated by the Fire Marshal. Sign lettering shall be four inches in height
and shall be red on a white background or white on a red background.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6619.png]
      (4)   The appropriate National Fire Prevention Association fire diamond
hazard placard is required on each tank.
      (5)   Non-potable water signs shall be displayed on all tanks containing
non-potable water.
      (6)   The operator shall post a sign at the entrance of a drill site to
notify the public whenever flaring will take place on the drill site.
      (7)   All signs required under this division shall be made of waterproof,
durable materials and shall be maintained in a good condition at all times.
   (E)   All facilities used for parking, loading, unloading, driveways and all
other vehicular access to each drill site, operation site, and line compressor
facility shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt or an alternative equivalent
strength surface which complies with all Fire Code standards, provided that the
drive approach from the street be constructed of concrete. The surface for such
facilities and drive approach must always be maintained in good condition and
repair.
   (F)   All gates into a drill site or operation site shall remain locked at
all times when the operator's personnel are not present. Unless otherwise
approved by the Fire Marshal, each gate shall be equipped with a Knox Box with
a key or a Knox Lock for emergency access to the site.
   (G)   The permanent screening of a site shall consist of a landscaped
enclosure with a minimum height of eight feet and a maximum height of ten feet.
The enclosure must be installed along the perimeter of the site. Low-profile
equipment or facilities shall be used on the site and shall not exceed the
height of the enclosure. Permanent screening shall comply with the following:
      (1)   A site shall be enclosed with a) a wrought iron fence with double
row of dense evergreen plantings, each row staggered, to form a solid screen
that is at least eight feet tall at the time of planting; or b) with a
screening wall constructed of at least two complimentary masonry construction
materials with non-dwarf variety shrubs planted three feet on center, with a
minimum height of three feet at planting and reaching a mature height of at
least six feet. The type and dimensions of fence or wall, its dimensions, and
plantings for the enclosure shall be approved as proposed by the applicant or
may be modified as deemed appropriate by the City Council as part of the
specific use permit and associated site plan. For the purpose of this Division
(G)(1), masonry construction material shall mean brick or natural or
manufactured stone units at least two inches thick, laid up unit by unit and
set in mortar. A fence or wall required under this division shall meet the
following:
         (a)   Fences or walls shall be designed by a Texas registered design
professional licensed based on soil analysis and geotechnical data. Prior to
the construction of the fence or wall, the operator shall submit plans sealed
by the registered design professional indicating the design specifications of
the fence or wall. Upon completion of the fence or wall, the operator shall
provide a letter to the city sealed by the registered design professional
certifying that the fence or wall was installed according to the design
specifications.
         (b)   A fence or wall that is leaning by ten degrees or more beyond
plumb or is missing portions of the fence or wall panels shall be considered
structurally unsafe and a hazard to safety, health and public welfare. The
operator shall commence repairs or replacement of the fence or wall within 48
hours of receipt of notice from the city.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6621.png]
      (2)   Trees shall be planted around the site in the following proportion:
a maximum of 70% of the trees shall be at least three and one-half caliper
inches, and a minimum of 30% of the trees shall be at least five caliper
inches. Trees shall be of an evergreen variety and container grown.
      (3)   Trees shall be planted in a manner so as to achieve a more natural
appearance. The number of required trees shall be established at rate of one
tree for each 25 linear feet along each side of the site.
      (4)   The permanent screening, landscaping, and irrigation shall be
installed within 120 days from setting surface casing on the first well on a
drill site. Irrigation shall be designed to ensure that water is evenly
distributed to the soil on the interior and exterior sides of the screening
wall or fence.
      (5)   A temporary chain link fence or other approved type of fence with a
minimum height of six feet shall be required around a drill site until the
permanent screening has been installed in accordance with this section. The
fence shall have slats that provide 90% opaqueness.
      (6)   Other screening and landscaping materials may be approved by the
City Council as established by the approved specific use permit and associated
site plan.
      (7)    A wrought iron or ornamental gate shall be required for any
entrance to the site. The gate shall have no openings greater than four inches
in width.
      (8)   The operator shall be responsible for maintaining all landscaping
in a healthy, neat, orderly and live-growing condition at all times.
   (H)   The raw soil in disturbed areas or embankments around each drill site,
operation site, line compressor facility, fracturing pit or open reserve pit,
where permitted, shall be seeded or covered with grass to be maintained in a
healthy and live-growing condition.
   (I)   No refining process, or any process for the extraction of products
from gas, shall be carried on at a drill site or operation site, except that a
dehydrator and separator may be maintained for the separation of liquids from
gas. Any such dehydrator or separator may serve more than one well. All
production equipment on an operation site shall be maintained at all times.
   (J)    No person shall place, deposit, or discharge or cause or permit to be
placed, deposited, or discharged any oil, naphtha, petroleum, asphalt, tar,
hydrocarbon substance, refuse, wastewater, brine or hazardous substance from
any gas well or line compressor operation or the contents of any container used
in connection with any gas well or line compressor operation in, into, or upon
any public right-of-way, storm drain, ditch or sewer, sanitary drain or sewer,
any body of water, or any private property.
   (K)   Electric lines to the drill site, operation site or line compressor
facility shall be located underground.
   (L)   All fire suppression and prevention equipment required by any
applicable federal, state, or local law at each drill site, operation site and
line compressor facility shall be provided by the operator, at the operator's
cost, and the maintenance and upkeep of such equipment shall be the
responsibility of the operator.
   (M)   No operator shall excavate or construct any lines for the conveyance
of fuel, water, oil, gas or petroleum liquids on, under, or through the
streets, alleys or other properties owned by the city without an easement or
right-of-way license from the city, at a price to be agreed upon, and then only
in strict compliance with this chapter, other city ordinances, and the
specifications established by the Department of Public Works.
   (N)   The digging up, breaking, excavating, tunneling, undermining, breaking
up, or damaging of any public street or leaving upon any public street any
earth or other material or obstruction, is prohibited unless the operator has
first obtained written permission from the city, and then only in compliance
with specifications established by the city.
   (O)   No gas well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within
any of the public street or alley rights-of-way of the city and/or future
streets shown on the master thoroughfare plan. No street shall be blocked or
encumbered or closed due to any exploration, drilling, or production activities
unless prior consent is obtained from the city, and then only temporarily.
   (P)   In all cases, blowout prevention equipment shall be used on all wells
being drilled, worked-over or in which tubing is being changed. Protection
shall be provided to prevent blowout during gas operations as required by and
in conformance with the requirements of the Railroad Commission and the
recommendations of the American Petroleum Institute. The operator must equip
all drilling wells with adequate blowout preventers, flow lines and valves
commensurate with the working pressures involved as required by the Railroad
Commission.
   (Q)   All unpaved access roads or unpaved drill sites or operation sites
shall be treated with an approved polymer based emulsion agent, magnesium
chloride, or other city-approved equivalent agent prior to the commencement of
drilling operations. Operators shall follow manufacturer's application and
maintenance schedule or re-apply agent as directed by the Inspector.
   (R)   All production equipment shall be painted and maintained in proper
working condition at all times, including, but not limited to, wellheads,
pumping units, tanks, and buildings or structures. When requiring painting of
such facilities, the Inspector shall consider the deterioration in the quality
of the material of which such facility or structure is constructed, the degree
of rust, and its appearance. Paint shall be of a neutral color, compatible with
surrounding uses. Neutral colors shall include sand, gray and unobtrusive
shades of brown, or other neutral colors approved by the Inspector. Except as
approved by the city in writing, pipes in the tank battery shall be elevated
off the ground.
   (S)   Upon completion of the construction of a drill site, fracturing pit,
access road and other surface appurtenances, an operator shall provide to the
city a survey, prepared by a licensed professional surveyor, depicting the
existing conditions of the drill site, fracturing pit, access road, in a format
acceptable to the city, to demonstrate that all surface facilities are within
the boundaries established by the applicable specific use permits and
associated site plans. The cost of said surveys shall be borne by the operator.
A survey shall be required whenever a change is made to the existing conditions
of a drill site, fracturing pit, or access road as depicted on the previous
survey.
   (T)   Explosive charges shall be prohibited within the city limits unless an
appropriate permit has first been obtained from the Fire Department.
   (U)   Operators shall keep drill sites and operation sites free of debris,
pools of water or other liquids, contaminated soil, weeds, brush, trash, or
other waste material and an area outside ten feet of the entrance to a drill
site or operation site. The area around signage required by the city must be
maintained so as to provide clear visibility to the signage.
   (V)   The operator shall provide notice as follows:
      (1)   Any operator who intends to perform the following activities shall
give written notice to the designated city official and the Gas Well Inspector
at least 48 hours before the activities begin:
         (a)   Drill a well, including site construction and/or preparation;
mobilization and demobilization of drilling equipment, and operations related
to advancing the well bore such as spudding, setting surface casing, and
cementing;
         (b)   Re-work a well using a drilling rig;
         (c)   Fracture stimulate a well;
         (d)   Perform flow back operations;
         (e)   Plug a well; or
         (f)   Perform any other maintenance at a drill site or operation site.
      (2)   An operator shall send notice, in a form acceptable to the city, to
the occupants of all dwellings within 1,000 feet of a drill site or operation
site in accordance with the following provisions:
         (a)   Notice shall be sent at least ten days prior to the commencement
of any of the following activities:
            1.   Site construction or preparation;
            2.   Mobilization or demobilization of drilling equipment;
            3.   Drilling operations;
            4.   Hydraulic fracturing operations;
            5.   Flowback operations, together with a disclaimer that flaring
may or may not occur;
            6.   Re-working a well; and
            7.   Plugging and abandoning a well.
         (b)   The notice shall identify the above activities that will be
conducted and shall include the number of wells to be drilled and the estimated
duration of the activities. If the activities are to be conducted continuously,
they may be listed on one notice. Separate notices shall be required if an
activity does not occur within 90 days of the last activity on the drill site
or operation site.
         (c)   The notice shall provide the address and-24 hour phone number of
the person conducting the activities, and the telephone numbers to file
complaints with the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality and the Texas
Railroad Commission.
         (d)   The operator shall provide an affidavit certifying that notice
has been sent to the above-referenced dwellings.
   (W)   After hydraulic fracturing or re-fracturing, an operator shall employ
appropriate equipment and processes to prevent natural gas and associated vapor
releases to the environment. All salable gas shall be directed to the sales
pipeline or shut-in and conserved. All wells that have a sales pipeline shall
be required to employ Reduce Emission Completion techniques and methods. If
authorized by the city, flaring may be used in some instances as a temporary
alternative to venting. In such a case, open flames shall not be located closer
than 300 feet from any building not used in operations on the drill site and
such open flame shall be screened in such a way as to minimize nuisance and
detrimental effects to surrounding properties.
   (X)   At all times after the permanent screening is in place around a drill
site, operation site or compressor station, a minimum of one security camera
shall be mounted inside the enclosure for drill sites located within a 1,000
foot radius of any protected use, residential subdivision or public park. Signs
shall be posted on the fence or wall of the site to indicate that activity on
the site may be recorded by video surveillance. Camera systems shall be
maintained in proper operating condition and shall be designed and located so
as to meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Capture clear video images (day and night) of all traffic entering
and exiting the gate(s);
      (2)   Capture clear video images (day and night) of all production
equipment located on the site;
      (3)   Be equipped with motion detection technology;
      (4)   Be equipped with panning technology to pan immediately to any
motion detected on the site;
      (5)   Show the date and time of all activity on the footage; and
      (6)   Be capable of being viewed at the monitoring facility.
      (7)   Operator shall maintain video data for a period of 72 hours. At the
request of the city, the operator shall provide to the city any recorded views
of the enclosed area. Data from videos may only be requested by the City
Manager, his designee, or law enforcement officials.
   (Y)   No construction activities including, but not limited to, the
erection, excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair of any access road,
fracturing pit, drill site, operation site, or any structure or flatwork on
such sites shall occur during nighttime hours.
   (Z)   Drill stem testing shall be done during daytime hours. Drill stem
tests may be conducted only if the well effluent during the test is produced
through an adequate gas separator to storage tanks and the effluent remaining
in the drill pipe prior to the time the tool is closed is flushed to the
surface by circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the drill pipe.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.13 OPERATIONS AND EQUIPMENT PRACTICES AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   Adequate nuisance prevention measures shall be taken to prevent or
control offensive odor, fumes, dust, noise and vibration at each drill site,
operation site and line compressor facility.
   (B)   Electric power.
      (1)   An operator shall only use electricity to power a drilling rig and
all permanent compressors, excluding temporary lift compressors as described in
§
114.03(B) hereof. The electricity shall be provided by the electric delivery
utility company using a ground-mounted transformer located on the drill site or
operation site.
      (2)   The city may approve an alternative power source or equipment such
as diesel generators if the drill site or operation site is located more than
1,000 feet from a property with a protected use, or if the electric delivery
utility company reports that there is insufficient capacity to serve a drill
site or operation site.
      (3)   An operator may use temporary diesel generators during a disruption
of electric service until such service is restored, provided that noise
produced by such equipment does not exceed the maximum limits established for
the drill site or operation site.
   (C)   No person shall permit any lights located on any drill site, operation
site or line compressor facility to be directed in such a manner so that they
shine directly on public streets, adjacent property or property in the general
vicinity of the drill site, operation site or line compressor facility. Site
lighting shall be shielded and directed downward and internally so as to avoid
glare on public streets and buildings within 300 feet.
   (D)   The operator shall at all times comply with all applicable federal,
state and city requirements.
   (E)   Noise.
      (1)   Prior to the issuance of a gas well permit, the operator shall
report to the city ambient noise readings taken over a 72 hour period,
including at least one 24 hour reading during a Saturday or Sunday. During the
72 hour period, readings shall be taken from the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m. to establish the pre-drilling or pre-installation ambient noise level for
daytime operations and from the hours of 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. to establish
the pre-drilling or pre-installation ambient noise level for any nighttime
operations.
      (2)   The exterior noise level generated by any operations (including,
but not limited to, drilling, re-drilling, production, hydraulic fracturing,
and flowback) or any line compressor facility shall not exceed the pre-drilling
or pre-installation ambient noise level by more than five decibels for daytime
operations and shall not exceed the pre-drilling or pre-installation ambient
noise level by more than three decibels for nighttime operations when measured
at the nearest boundary of a property occupied by a protected use or 100 feet
from the nearest structure occupied by a protected use (as measured to the
closest exterior point of the structure), whichever is closer to the protected
use.
      (3)   Adjustments to the noise standards as set forth above in division
(D)(2) of this section may be permitted in accordance with the following:
 
Permitted Increase (dBA) Duration of Increase (minutes*)
10                       5
15                       1
20                       Less than 1
   * Cumulative minutes during any one hour
 
      (4)   During workover operations, all activities shall be restricted to
daytime hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 9:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m., Saturday and Sunday.
      (5)   During hydraulic fracturing, all activities shall be restricted to
hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. on Saturdays. Hydraulic fracturing shall be prohibited on Sundays and
holidays. Notwithstanding the foregoing, hydraulic fracturing pumping shall be
prohibited on Saturdays for drill sites or operation sites located within 1,000
feet of a protected use as measured from the edge of the drill site or
operation site to nearest property line of the protected use.
      (6)   An operator shall not drill or re-drill a well or operate any
equipment in such a manner so as to create pure tones where one-third octave
band sound-pressure level in the band with the tone exceeds the arithmetic
average of the sound-pressure levels of two contiguous one-third octave bands
by five dB for center frequencies of 500 Hertz and above, and by eight dB for
center frequencies between 160 and 400 Hertz, and by 15 dB for center
frequencies less than or equal to 125 Hertz.
      (7)   An operator shall not drill or re-drill a well or operate any
equipment in such a manner so as to create low-frequency outdoor noise levels
that exceed the following decibel levels:
 
16 Hertz octave band: 65 dB
32 Hertz octave band: 65 dB
64 Hertz octave band: 65 dB
 
      (8)   The exterior noise level generated by the drilling, re-drilling or
other operations on a drill site or an operation site located within 600 feet
of a property occupied by a protected use shall be continuously monitored to
ensure compliance. The continuous noise monitoring equipment shall be capable
of wireless transmission of real-time noise and audio data. Access to this
real-time data shall be made available to the city's Inspectors. The cost of
such monitoring shall be borne by the operator. Where continuous monitoring is
not required, and a complaint is received by the city from the occupants of any
protected use on property located more than 600 feet from a drill site or
operation site, the operator shall, if required by the city, and within 24
hours of notice of the complaint, continuously monitor the exterior noise level
generated by the drilling, re-drilling or other operations for a 72 hour period
to ensure compliance. At the request of the city, the operator shall monitor
the exterior noise level at the source of the complaint.
      (9)   Acoustical blankets, sound walls or other alternative methods as
approved by the Gas Inspector may be used to ensure compliance. All
soundproofing shall comply with accepted industry standards and be subject to
approval by the city.
      (10)   The sound level meter, instrument, or analyzing device used in
conducting noise evaluations shall meet the American National Standard
Institute's Standards.
      (11)   Prior to the issuance of a gas well permit and the commencement of
operations, the operator shall submit a noise management plan, approved by the
city, detailing how the equipment used in the drilling, completion,
transportation, or production of a well complies with the maximum permissible
noise levels of this section. The operator shall be responsible for verifying
compliance with this section and the noise management plan after the
installation of any noise generating equipment.
      (12)   A citation may be issued immediately for failure to comply with
the provisions of this section. However, if the operator is in compliance with
the approved noise management plan, and a violation still occurs, the operator
will be given 24 hours from notice of non-compliance to correct the violation
from an identified source before a citation is issued. Additional extensions of
the 24-hour period may be granted in the event that the source of the violation
cannot be identified after reasonable diligence by the operator.
      (13)   Exhaust from any internal combustion engine or compressor,
stationary or mounted on wheels, used in connection with the drilling of any
well or for use on any production equipment shall not be discharged into the
open unless equipped with a hospital grade exhaust muffler or mufflers.
   (F)   An operator is allowed to construct, use, and operate such storage
equipment and separation equipment as shown on the applicable specific use
permit and associated site plan and gas well permit. The use of centralized
tank batteries is permitted only as shown on the applicable specific use permit
and associated site plan and gas well permit.
   (G)   In parallel to gas gathering pipeline, a flow back line may be
installed to handle water and gas flow back following well fracture treatment.
   (H)   All surface facilities used for drilling, production or compression,
including, but not limited to, a drill site, operation site, line compressor
facility, fracturing pit, access road, and areas disturbed by grading or other
means to accommodate such facilities shall be constructed within the boundaries
established by the applicable specific use permit and associated site plan. All
equipment, machinery, vehicles shall be stored and drilling and production
operations shall be conducted within such boundaries as established by the
applicable specific use permit and associated site plan and gas well permit.
The use of public rights-of-way or property outside of the established
boundaries for drilling, production or compression operations is prohibited.
   (I)   Except in the case of an emergency, well servicing operations and any
deliveries to the site or to a line compressor facility shall be scheduled to
occur between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and
9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Saturday and Sunday, only. The time limits set forth
herein do not apply during the drilling of a well, except that the mobilization
and demobilization of any equipment used for drilling and related operations,
trailers, and vehicles shall be permitted only during daytime hours.
   (J)   Air, gas, or pneumatic drilling shall not be permitted.
   (K)   The operator shall immediately notify the city of any substantial
accumulations of dirt, dust, mud or other debris deposited on city
thoroughfares by vehicles involved in the well drilling or servicing or
pipeline installation process. If for safety or other reasons, the city elects
to perform the removal, the cost of such removal shall be paid by the operator.
   (L)   Within 60 days of the completion of the well or within 60 days of re-
working a well, the area around the well shall be cleaned up and cleared of all
material and equipment, holes or excavations filled, and the land graded and
returned to its original condition including replanting of vegetation to match
the surrounding area.
   (M)   An operator shall connect to a city water supply line or outlet for
water used in the preparation, drilling, completion, production, and operation
of gas wells, drill sites, operation sites and line compressor facilities when
such facilities are located within 1,500 feet of a city water supply line or
outlet. This provision shall not apply if above-referenced facilities are
located more than 1,500 feet from a city water supply line or outlet, or if the
city's Water Department reports that there is insufficient capacity to serve a
drill site, operation site or line compressor facility.
   (N)   No vehicle, equipment, materials or other similar items shall be
placed or stored on a drill site or operation site when not in use or are not
necessary for the operation of such site, as determined by the Inspector.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.14 PIPELINES.
   (A)   A natural gas pipeline permit shall be required for natural gas
pipelines and an application shall be submitted to the Planning Department on
forms provided by the city. Incomplete applications shall be returned to the
applicant. The city shall return any application as incomplete if there is a
dispute pending before the Railroad Commission regarding the determination of
the operator. In addition to the application, the following must be submitted:
      (1)   An electronic copy of the pipeline easement map in accordance with
current established policy;
      (2)   A pipeline easement map indicating the location of the destination
transmission pipeline or line compressor, where applicable, and the alignment
of the pipeline(s) connecting the operation site to the transmission pipeline
or line compressor;
      (3)   A copy of any easement agreements, leases or other documentation
required by the city to verify the route shown on the pipeline easement map;
      (4)   A nonrefundable application fee for each natural gas pipeline
permit in the amount set forth in the city's most recent fee schedule;
   (B)   Where a pipeline is being installed to serve a drill site, no natural
gas pipeline permit shall be issued if the proposed pipeline and its related
facilities are not in conformance with the approved specific use permit and
associated site plan for that drill site, the provisions of this section,
building code, fire code and all other applicable city ordinances;
   (C)   A decision to deny an application for a natural gas pipeline permit
shall be provided to the operator in writing, including the reason for the
decision. The operator may appeal any such denial to the City Council;
   (D)   If an application for a natural gas pipeline permit is denied, nothing
herein contained shall prevent a new application from being submitted to the
city for the same pipelines. A new application fee shall accompany each new
application;
   (E)   An approved natural gas pipeline permit shall expire on the one year
anniversary of its date of issuance unless installation of the pipeline
authorized by the permit has commenced;
   (F)   All surface appurtenances, excluding pipeline markers, serving a
pipeline, including, but not limited to, valve stations, metering stations, pig
launchers and other similar equipment, shall be screened in accordance with §
114.12(G) of this chapter. A landscape and irrigation plan must be submitted
with the application for a natural gas pipeline permit;
   (G)   An operator shall place a pipeline marker, in English and Spanish, at
each point where the operator has constructed or caused to be constructed a
pipeline across a public street or road;
   (H)   An operator shall place a pipeline marker, in English and Spanish,
over pipelines carrying hydrogen sulfide (H2S) gas as required by the Railroad
Commission;
   (I)   Pipelines shall be limited to the maximum allowable operating pressure
applicable to the pipes installed and shall be installed with at least the
minimum cover or backfill specified by the American National Safety Institute
Code, as amended;
   (J)   Structures shall not be built over pipelines;
   (K)   Pipelines shall be located underground. The location of all pipelines
must be marked with warning signs in accordance with industry standards. Within
the City of Mansfield, the distance between such signs shall not exceed 500
feet. In addition, during backfill of pipeline excavations, "buried pipeline"
warning tape shall be buried one foot above the pipeline to warn future
excavators of the presence of buried pipeline;
   (L)   Each pipeline operator shall maintain a public education program as
mandated by state and federal law.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.15 ADDITIONAL SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The drilling and production of gas and accessing the drill site or
operation site shall be in compliance with all state and federal environmental
regulations and shall not occur within environmentally sensitive areas.
   (B)   Gas wells may have a target location or bottom-hole location that is
under an environmentally sensitive area when the gas well is drilled
directionally from a location outside the environmentally sensitive area.
   (C)   Emergency shutdown controls:
      (1)   Each producing well shall be equipped with an automated valve that
closes the well in the event of an abnormal change in operating pressure. All
wellheads shall contain an emergency shut off valve to the well distribution
line.
      (2)   Each drill site, operation site, or line compressor facility must
have an emergency shutdown switch installed in a location approved by the Fire
Marshal. The device shall have a sign or label identifying the switch as the
emergency shutdown control.
      (3)   At least once a year, or as required by the Fire Marshal, the
operator shall test the emergency shutdown switch and monitoring system to
ensure that the equipment is working properly.
   (D)   Each storage tank shall be equipped with a level control device that
will automatically activate a valve to close the well or automatically call the
operator's response personnel to manually close the well in the event of excess
liquid accumulation in the tank.
   (E)   Storage tank facilities shall be equipped with a secondary containment
system including lining with an impervious material. The secondary containment
system shall be of a sufficient height to contain one and one-half times the
contents of the largest tank, and the impervious liner shall be covered with at
least one foot of sand. Drip pots shall be provided at pump out connections to
contain the liquids from the storage tank.
   (F)   Tank battery facilities shall be equipped with a remote foam line
utilizing a two and one-half inch national standard hose thread female inlet
connection in locations approved by the Fire Department. A lightning arrestor
system or lightning grounding system shall be installed according to the most
current edition of the National Electrical Code.
   (G)   An approved Hazardous Materials Management Plan shall be on file with
the Fire Department. The costs of cleanup operations due to hazards associated
with a well site or a line compressor facility shall be the responsibility of
the operator.
   (H)   No salt- or waste-water disposal wells shall be located within the
city.
   (I)   A closed loop mud system shall be used in conjunction with all
drilling and reworking operations for all gas well permits.
   (J)   The following inspections shall be required:
      (1)   Surface casing. An operator must set and cement sufficient surface
casing to protect all usable-quality water strata, as defined by state law. The
operator shall notify the Gas Well Inspector in writing at least 72 hours prior
to setting and cementing surface casing. In addition, the following shall be
required:
         (a)   Centralizers must be used at an interval of one centralizer per
100 feet, or ten centralizers per 1,000 feet.
         (b)   New surface casing is required.
         (c)   Proper floating equipment shall be used.
         (d)   Class "H" or Class "C" cement with accelerators shall be used.
         (e)   The operator shall circulate cement to surface; if not, the
operator shall cement with one-inch tubing and top off.
         (f)   The operator shall wait on cement a minimum of 8-12 hours prior
to commencing further drilling operations.
         (g)   The operator shall test the blowout preventer before drilling
out of surface casing to 1,000 psi.
      (2)   Completion. The operator shall notify the Gas Well Inspector in
writing at least 72 hours prior to starting completion procedures such as
hydraulic fracturing and perforating. The well must be equipped with a blowout
preventer before this operation is commenced. If a bridge plug is set over a
producing formation prior to additional completion, it must be pressure-tested
to a sufficient pressure to ensure that it is not leaking.
      (3)   Pipeline. The operator shall notify the Gas Well Inspector in
writing at least 72 hours prior to the first sale.
      (4)   Final inspection. After the site has been cleaned up and screened,
the operator shall notify the Gas Well Inspector for a final inspection. Prior
to the final inspection, the operator must provide the city with geographic
coordinates of the well bore, using the North American Datum 1983 (NAD 83),
Texas State Plane - North Central Zone (4202), in United States feet.
      (5)    Line compressor facility not part of an operation site. The Gas
Well Inspector shall inspect each line compressor facility established
independently of an operation site for compliance with all applicable
regulations of the State of Texas and city ordinances.
   (K)    The Gas Well Inspector shall conduct regular inspections at least
once a year of all permitted wells in the city to determine that the wells are
operating in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and all
regulations of the Railroad Commission. If a violation of the applicable
specific use permit and associated site plan or the gas well permit is found
during an annual inspection, a reinspection fee shall be assessed in the amount
set forth in the development fee schedule.
   (L)   If a gas field in the city is identified as a hydrogen sulfide (H2S)
gas field, the operator shall immediately cease operation.
   (M)   The following shall be required for all fracturing pits:
      (1)   All fracturing pits, excluding pre-existing water features, must be
filled in and the surface revegetated and returned to a state prior to the
creation of the pit after the drilling of all wells identified in the
application have been completed.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (M)(1) above, the filling of the
fracturing pit shall not be required where the approved specific use permit
indicates an intent to convert the fracturing pit into a permanent water
feature to serve as a neighborhood amenity and includes plans detailing the
design and conversion dale for the intended water feature. The city shall
determine whether a water feature is suitable for its intended location and
that the design of the water feature complements the surrounding present or
future development. Once a fracturing pit has been converted to a community
water feature, the water contents may no longer be used to fracture a well. The
permanent water feature must also comply with the landscape requirement in §
7300 of the Mansfield Zoning Ordinance for detention and retention ponds.
      (3)   No pre-existing body of surface water may be used as a fracturing
pit or a source of water for the hydraulic fracturing process without the
approval of the City Engineer. In addition, any detention or retention pond
used as a fracturing pit must be engineered and sized to accommodate both the
water for the hydraulic fracturing process and any drainage from surrounding
development or properties.
      (4)   Each new fracturing pit shall be enclosed with a chain link black
or dark green fencing on all four sides during drilling operations.
   (N)    Drill sites, operation sites, line compressor facilities and the
installation of natural gas pipelines shall not be exempt from the tree
protection and tree replacement requirements of the Natural Resources
Management Ordinance. Trees removed to accommodate drill sites, operation
sites, line compressor facilities or natural gas pipelines shall be mitigated
in accordance with the Natural Resources Management Ordinance (Chapter 99 of
this code).
   (O)   In the event of an emergency or incident at a well site that
necessitates or involves emergency provider response by the city, the city may
assess the reasonable cost of the emergency response services to the operator.
The operator shall be required to remit payment for services rendered within
three business days of receipt of the invoice.
   (P)   The operator shall submit an emergency action response plan. At a
minimum, the plan shall provide for:
      (1)   Prompt and effective response by the operator to emergencies
regarding leaks or releases that can affect public health, safety and welfare;
fire or explosions at or near a gas well; and natural disasters and severe
weather;
      (2)   Effective means to notify and communicate required and pertinent
information to local fire, police and public officials during an emergency;
      (3)   The availability of personnel, equipment, tools and materials as
necessary at the scene of an emergency;
      (4)   Measures to be taken to reduce public exposure to injury,
accidental death or exposure;
      (5)   Emergency shutdown of a gas well and related site;
      (6)   The safe restoration of service and operations following an
emergency or incident;
      (7)   A follow-up incident investigation to determine the cause of the
incident and require the implementation of corrective measures;
      (8)   An emergency notifications page that indicates all emergencies must
be reported to the Fire Department at 911 and to the Gas Well Inspector;
      (9)   Drive-to-maps from public rights-of-way to the drill site;
      (10)   The name, address, and 24-hour phone number of the operator's
representative with supervisory authority over drilling or operations
activities; and
      (11)   The name, address and 24-hour phone number of the person to be
notified in case of an emergency.
   (Q)    Each operator shall maintain a master services agreement with
applicable third party service providers dedicated to spill response, well
control, explosion, fire or other emergencies. As part of the emergency
response action plan, the operator shall provide a current list of each service
provider's name, a description of service(s), telephone number, anticipated
response time and business location.
   (R)   Within 30 days of receipt of a written request from the City Manager
or his designated representative, an operator of a drill site or operation site
within the city shall provide an air quality management plan. The air quality
management plan shall include a description of the air quality monitoring
techniques and equipment the operator will use to comply with all applicable
federal and state law, which may include the use of FLIR cameras, hand-held or
other air emission detection equipment, activities conducted during regular
inspections, operation and maintenance schedules for equipment checks, on-site
daily or weekly visual inspections, and use of third party leak detection or
air monitoring consultants, and frequency of monitoring.
   (S)   Within 30 days of receipt of a written request from the City Manager
or his designated representative, an operator of a drill site or operation site
within the city shall provide an extended gas analysis of raw produced gas from
a single well on a designated drill site, operation site or a line compressor
facility. The extended gas analysis must include testing for the following:
NITROGEN (N2); CARBON DIOXIDE (C02); METHANE; ETHANE; PROPANE; ISO-BUTANE;
BUTANE; ISO-PENTANE; PENTANE; ISO-HEXANES; HEXANE: BENZENE; CYCLOHEXANE; ISO-
HEPTANES; HEPTANE; TOLUENE; ISO-OCTANES; OCTANE; ETHYLBENZENE; META-, ORTHO-
and PARA-XYLENE; ISO-NONANES; NONANE; ISO-DECANES; DECANE; and ISO-UNDECANES.
The city may request an extended gas analysis no more than once every five
years; provided, however, should the city receive a written complaint regarding
emissions at a drill site, operation site or a line compressor facility, the
city may evaluate the complaint and may request additional analyses as
necessary within such five year period. All laboratory analyses shall be
performed by a third-party laboratory with National Environmental Laboratory
accreditation, where a method of accreditation is available and all samples
shall be collected, handled, and transported following proper chain-of-custody
protocol. If after reviewing an operator's extended gas analysis and air
quality management plan deficiencies or violations of federal or state law are
identified, the city may, as its sole remedy, notify the TCEQ, Railroad
Commission, the EPA or any other applicable state or federal regulatory
agencies to request enforcement.
   (T)   Within 30 days of receipt of a written request from the City Manager
or his designated representative, an operator of a drill site or operation site
within the city shall provide a produced water flash analysis for each drill
site or operation site. The analysis shall conform to the emission modeling
requirements promulgated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. The
city may request a produced water flash analysis no more than once every five
years; provided, however, should the city receive a written complaint related
to the produced water from a drill site or operation site, the city may
evaluate the complaint and may request additional samples as necessary within
such five year period. All laboratory analyses shall be performed by a third-
party laboratory with National Environmental Laboratory accreditation, where a
method of accreditation is available and all samples shall be collected,
handled, and transported following proper chain-of-custody protocol.
   (U)   The operator of a gas well shall provide the Gas Well Inspector with a
pre-drilling and post-drilling water analysis for total petroleum hydrocarbons
from any existing fresh water well registered by the state within 500 feet of
the gas well if requested by the owner(s) of those fresh water wells. All
laboratory analyses shall be performed by a third-party laboratory with
National Environmental Laboratory accreditation, where a method of
accreditation is available and all samples shall be collected, handled, and
transported following proper chain-of-custody protocol.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.16 SUPPLEMENTAL DRILLING.
   (A)   Supplemental drilling to deepen or directional drill a well that has
not been abandoned shall be conducted in accordance with the conditions of the
applicable specific use permit and associated site plan and the gas well permit
for the well.
   (B)   The operator shall provide the city with a copy of additional Railroad
Commission permits that allow drilling to a deeper depth.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.17 RE-WORKING OF WELL; NOTICE.
   Any person who intends to re-work a well using a drilling rig, to fracture
stimulate a well after initial completion, or to conduct seismic exploration
involving explosive charges shall give written notice to the city at least 20
days before the activities begin. The notice shall identify where the
activities will be conducted and shall describe the activities in reasonable
detail, including but not limited to the duration of the activities and the
time of day they will be conducted. The notice must also provide the address
and 24-hour phone number of the person conducting the activities. The person
conducting the activities shall post a sign, in English and Spanish, on the
property giving the public notice of the activities, including the name,
address, and 24-hour phone number of the person conducting the activities. No
well shall be re-worked without the approval of the Gas Well Inspector. If the
Gas Well Inspector determines that an inspection is necessary, the operator
must pay an inspection fee in the amount set forth in the development fee
schedule.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.18 ABANDONMENT OF WELLS, PIPELINES AND LINE COMPRESSORS.
   (A)   Upon abandonment of a well or well site, within 60 days, the well
shall be plugged in accordance with Railroad Commission standards, the site
shall be cleaned and cleared of all material and equipment, holes or
excavations filled, and the land graded and returned to its original condition
including replanting of vegetation to match the surrounding area. All well
casings shall be cut and removed to a depth of at least ten feet below the
surface.
   (B)   No structures shall be built within ten feet of an abandoned well.
   (C)   Upon abandonment of a pipeline, within 60 days of abandonment, a
pipeline must be purged and plugged in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the State of Texas in effect at that time.
   (D)   Within 60 days of abandonment of a line compressor facility, the
equipment at the facility shall be removed in accordance with Railroad
Commission standards, the facility shall be cleaned and cleared of all material
and equipment, holes or excavations filled, and the land graded and returned to
its original condition including replanting of vegetation to match the
surrounding area.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.185 TECHNICAL ADVISOR.
   The city at its own discretion may employ a Technical Advisor for the
purpose of advising, counseling or representing the city relative to an
operator’s unique and particular set of circumstances, case or request relating
to this chapter. The cost for such services of such Technical Advisor(s) shall
be assessed against and paid for by such operator in addition to any fees or
charges assessed pursuant to this chapter. Prior to the employment of a
Technical Advisor, the city shall inform the operator of the intended scope of
work and the estimated costs and expenses. The employment of a Technical
Advisor shall be approved by the City Council.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 114.19 REMEDIES OF CITY.
   (A)   If an operator or his or her officers, employees, agents, contractors,
subcontractors or representatives fails to comply with the conditions of the
applicable specific use permit and associated site plan or any requirement of a
gas well permit (including any requirement incorporated by reference as part of
the permit), or any applicable provisions of this chapter or any other city
ordinances, the city shall endeavor to give written notice to the operator
specifying the nature of the alleged failure and giving the operator a
specified time to cure, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the
alleged failure, the extent of the efforts required to cure, and the potential
impact on the health, safety, and welfare of the community. If circumstances
warrant proceeding without notice, no notice shall be required. In any case,
failure to give such notice shall not prohibit the city from pursuing any
available remedy.
   (B)   If the operator does not cure the alleged failure within the time
specified by the city, the city may notify the Railroad Commission and request
that the Railroad Commission take appropriate action. In addition, the city may
pursue all other remedies allowed by law, including but not limited to the
following:
      (1)   The City Manager may suspend the gas well permit until the alleged
failure is cured;
      (2)   The City Manager may revoke the gas well permit if the operator
fails to initiate and diligently pursue a cure; and
      (3)   The City Manager may seek recourse against the security delivered
pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   The operator may appeal a decision to suspend or revoke the gas well
permit to the City Council.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.20 ENFORCEMENT; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   The City Manager shall designate Inspectors, including a Gas Well
Inspector, who shall be a qualified employee or independent contractor familiar
with and educated in the gas industry, and any other city personnel deemed
necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter. An Inspector shall have
the authority to issue any orders or directives required to carry out the
intent and purpose of this chapter and its particular provisions. Failure of
any person to comply with any such order or directive shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
   (B)   The Inspectors are authorized and directed to enforce this chapter and
the provisions of any gas well permit. Whenever necessary to enforce any
provision of this chapter or a gas well permit, to perform regular inspections
of the site, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe there has been a
violation of this chapter or a gas well permit, the Gas Well Inspector, Fire
Department personnel or the Gas Well Coordinator may enter upon any property
covered by this chapter or a gas well permit to inspect or perform any duty or
requirement imposed by this chapter. To facilitate entry, the operator shall
furnish a key or the combination to the lock at the entrance to the site. If
entry is refused, the city shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law
and equity to gain entry.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.21 VARIANCE.
   (A)   A variance from the requirements of §§
114.12(W),
114.13(B),
114.13(E)(5),
114.13(M), and
114.15(M) may be sought by submitting a written request to the Director of
Planning. The request must include the following:
      (1)   Description of the requested variance and an explanation of why it
should be granted;
      (2)   Description of alternatives considered and why each is not the
preferred alternative;
      (3)   Description of the economic consequences if the variance is not
granted;
      (4)   Description of how the level of health, safety and welfare of the
public will be maintained if the variance is granted; and
      (5)   A site plan of the site visually depicting the requested variance
if the request for the variance involves the location or orientation of persons
or property.
   (B)   The Director of Planning shall review the application and may approve
or conditionally approve the variance, or may place the variance request on the
City Council agenda for consideration. In considering the variance, the
Director of Planning or the City Council may take into account the following:
      (1)   Whether the operations proposed are safe and reasonable under the
circumstances and conditions prevailing in the area, considering the particular
location and the character of the improvements located there;
      (2)   How the operations proposed compare to available alternatives;
      (3)   Whether the operations proposed would conflict with the orderly
growth and development of the city;
      (4)   The economic consequence if the variance is not granted;
      (5)   Whether the operations proposed adequately protect the health,
safety and welfare of the public; and
      (6)   Whether the operations proposed provide acceptable access for fire
personnel and fire fighting equipment.
   (C)   Approval of a variance requires that a minimum of four City Council
members vote in favor of the approval. The details of each action granting or
denying the requested variance shall be recorded and entered in the files of
the City Secretary, and the Director of Planning shall forward a letter to the
applicant stating whether the City Council has approved or denied the variance
request and listing any conditions placed upon an approval.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be fined not more than $2,000 for each offense. Each day
that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. OR-1942-15, passed 3-23-15)
CHAPTER 115: SEWAGE SLUDGE APPLICATION
Section
General Provisions
   
115.001   Purpose
   
115.002   Definitions
   
115.003   State regulations
Notification Requirements
   
115.020   Notification required
   
115.021   Timing of notification
   
115.022   Contents of notification
   
115.023   Director determination
General Requirements
   
115.040   Transport of sewage sludge
   
115.041   Posting signs
   
115.042   Incorporation
   
115.043   Buffer zones
   
115.044   Public health nuisances
   
115.045   Soil concentration information
Variance Procedure
   
115.060   Request for variance
 
   
115.999   Penalty
Cross reference:
   Liquid waste haulers, see §§
51.070 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 115.001 PURPOSE.
   This chapter establishes requirements applicable to those applying sewage
sludge and to the application of sewage sludge in the city to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare of the city.
(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)
§ 115.002 DEFINITIONS.
   All definitions in Tex. Admin. Code Title 30, § 312.8. "General
Definitions," as amended, are hereby adopted by reference as if set out herein,
for any and all purposes, and apply in this chapter. In addition, the following
definitions shall apply in this chapter:
   APPLICATION. The application, beneficial use, disposal, experimental use,
land application, staging, or treatment of sewage sludge.
   APPLICATION SITE. The facility or land where the application of sewage
sludge will be done.
   CITY. The authorized representatives of the City of Mansfield.
   DIRECTOR. The Environmental Manager, or a designated representative, for the
City of Mansfield.
   REGULATORY AUTHORITY. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)
§ 115.003 STATE REGULATIONS.
   The application of sewage sludge in the city shall comply with all
regulations and requirements of Tex. Admin. Code Title 30, Ch. 312, as amended,
and any other applicable state laws or regulations.
(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)
NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
§ 115.020 NOTIFICATION REQUIRED.
   The operator shall notify the city prior to the commencement of the
application of sewage sludge at an application site in the city.
(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)
§ 115.021 TIMING OF NOTIFICATION.
   A notification under this chapter must be filed with the city at least 15
days prior to the application.
(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)
§ 115.022 CONTENTS OF NOTIFICATION.
   A notification under this chapter must be made in writing and filed with the
City Secretary. The notification must contain the following:
   (A)   A copy of the application for the permit or registration that
authorizes the application;
   (B)   A copy of the permit or registration that authorizes the application;
   (C)   Location of the application site;
   (D)   Name, address, and phone number of the owner of the application site;
   (E)   Name, address, and phone number of the operator;
   (F)   Name, address, and phone number of the applier (if different from the
operator);
   (G)   Name, address, and phone number for the transporter;
   (H)   Approximate date and time of the application;
   (I)   Certification that all sewage sludge will be incorporated into the
soil within six hours of the application;
   (J)   Explanation of the procedures to be followed in the case of adverse
weather during the application; and
   (K)   Explanation of procedures to prevent nuisance odors during the
application. If an operator is required to provide an Odor Control Plan under §
115.044(C) of this chapter, a copy of the Odor Control Plan must be included
with the notification.
(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)
§ 115.023 DIRECTOR DETERMINATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a notification filed under this chapter, the Director
shall determine whether the planned application is in compliance with the
ordinances of the city. The Director shall investigate and determine whether
the planned application is in compliance with the ordinances of the city.
Director shall provide a written determination to the operator within seven
days after the notification is filed.
   (B)   If the Director determines that the planned application is not in
compliance with the ordinances of the city, the Director's written
determination shall state that the planned application is not in compliance
with the ordinances of the city, inform the operator why the planned
application is not in compliance with the ordinances of the city, and inform
the operator of its right to request a variance under this chapter.
(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 115.040 TRANSPORT OF SEWAGE SLUDGE.
   A transporter shall transport sewage sludge in a manner to prevent the loss
of liquid or solid material during transport.
(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)
§ 115.041 POSTING SIGNS.
   (A)   The operator of an application site shall post a sign on all publicly
accessible roads leading to the application site at a location within one-half
mile of the application site during the application. The signs shall be posted
at least three days prior to and up to 14 days after the commencement of the
application. The sign must include, with minimum two inch letters, the operator
name, the operator telephone number, the classification of sewage sludge and
the TCEQ authorization number (if applicable).
   (B)   In the event of reasonably unforeseen circumstances, such as weather
conditions or equipment failure, that necessitate a change in a planned
application site, the required signs may be posted on the day on which the
application commences. If signs are posted less than three days prior to
commencement of the application, the operator shall notify the Director of the
change in the application site prior to the commencement of the application and
shall provide a written statement detailing the circumstances that necessitated
the change in the application site to the Director within three days of the
commencement of the application.
(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)
§ 115.042 INCORPORATION.
   Sewage sludge or bulk sewage sludge shall be incorporated into the land
within six hours after application.
(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)
§ 115.043 BUFFER ZONES.
   The application of sewage sludge or bulk sewage sludge shall not be done at
an application site within one mile of any property owned by a school.
(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)
§ 115.044 PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCES.
   (A)   The operator shall operate the application site and perform all
applications in a manner to prevent public health nuisances, including
offensive odors.
   (B)   Upon the discovery of or upon notice from the city of the existence of
a public health nuisance, the operator shall immediately cease further
application until the condition is corrected.
   (C)   If an operator provides an Odor Control Plan to the regulatory
authority pursuant to Tex. Admin. Code Title 30, § 312.44(j)(4), the operator
shall provide a copy of the same to the Director.
(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)
§ 115.045 SOIL CONCENTRATION INFORMATION.
   (A)   The operator shall test the background soil concentration of metals,
nutrients, salinity, and PH at the application site no more than 30 days prior
to the application of sewage sludge.
   (B)   The operator shall maintain the results of the test required in
division (A) of this section for five years after the application. The operator
shall provide a copy of the results of the test to the city upon the city's
request.
(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)
VARIANCE PROCEDURE
§ 115.060 REQUEST FOR VARIANCE.
   (A)   The City Council shall hear and render judgment on requests for
variances under this section.
   (B)   An operator that is informed by the Director that a planned
application is in violation of this chapter may appeal to the City Council for
a variance from the regulations in this chapter.
   (C)   To appeal to the City Council for a variance under this section, an
operator must file a request for variance with the City Secretary.
   (D)   In the request for variance, the operator shall set out the conditions
that justify the variance and that warrant a variance that will not have the
effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations.
   (E)   The City Council may authorize a variance to any regulation set forth
in this chapter. In granting a variance under this chapter, the City Council
shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable in the
public interest. No variance shall be granted unless the Council finds that all
of the following conditions exist:
      (1)   That the use of the land in the vicinity will not be adversely
affected;
      (2)   That the persons who reside or work in the vicinity will not be
adversely affected;
      (3)   That any school related activities will not be adversely affected;
and
      (4)   That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety, convenience or welfare of the city.
   (F)   Such findings of the Council, together with the specific facts upon
which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes
of the Council meeting at which such variance is granted. Variances may be
granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this
chapter so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and
substantial justice done.
   (G)   The City Secretary shall provide a copy of a request for variance
filed under this section to the
Director. The Director shall submit to the City Council a copy of the
notification filed by the operator under this chapter, a copy of the Director's
written determination, and a letter containing all the specific facts and
pertinent data upon which the Director's decision was based and setting out any
conditions relevant to a determination of the effect of the planned application
on the public health, safety, convenience, or welfare in the vicinity, and such
documents shall be entered into the official minutes of the Council meeting.
The decision of the City Council relating to the approval or disapproval of a
variance shall be final.
(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)
§ 115.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   It is an offense for a person, firm, company, or corporation to
violate, disobey, omit, neglect or refuse to comply with or resist the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter. Each day that a violation
is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   An offense under division (A) is a Class C Misdemeanor punishable by a
fine of not more than $2,000 for each offense.
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of the buffer zone
requirement in §
115.043 of this chapter if the defendant presents a written determination from
the Director stating that the application is in compliance with the ordinances
of the city.
   (D)   It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this chapter if a
defendant presents a variance from the City Council providing relief from the
requirement of this chapter for which the defendant is being prosecuted.
(Ord. OR-1969-15, passed 9-28-15)
CHAPTER 116: DONATION BOX PERMITS AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
116.01   Definitions
Donation Box Permits
   
116.02   Permits
   
116.03   Maintenance
   
116.04   Revocation of permit
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 116.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Director of the Department designated by the City Manager
to enforce and administer this chapter, including the Director’s designees.
   CITY APPEAL OFFICER. The authorized person designated by the City Manager to
hear appeals from denials or revocations of permits.
   DONATION BOX. The definition of this term set forth in §
155.012 of the Mansfield Code of Ordinances is incorporated into this chapter.
(Ord. OR-2287-23, passed 1-23-23)
DONATION BOX PERMITS
§ 116.02 PERMITS.
   A donation box permit must be obtained from the Department of Regulatory
Compliance for all donation boxes to be located in the city, subject to the
following requirements:
   (A)   Donation boxes are only allowed as an accessory use as shown in §
155.054(B), “Permitted Use Table,” Table D. All donation boxes allowed under
Chapter 155, as an accessory use, require issuance of a permit under this
chapter.
   (B)   A separate permit is required for each donation box located in the
city.
   (C)   The property owner, property owner’s designated agent, property
manager, or property’s lawful occupant, shall sign and notarize the donation
box permit application authorizing the placement of a donation box on the
property.
   (D)   A decal to allow a donation box to be placed and used at a designated
location shall be issued by Regulatory Compliance at the time of the approval
of the donation box permit. The decal shall be placed on the donation box in a
visible location to identify the donation box as an allowed use on the
property.
   (E)   The operator of the donation box shall be the applicant on a donation
box permit application. If the donation box operator changes, the new operator
must obtain a new donation box permit prior to the change in operation.
   (F)   The donation box permit application shall detail a service plan for
each donation box. The operator of each donation box shall be responsible for
collecting the contents of the donation box to prevent overflow and littering
and shall pick up all donated items at least once per week. The service plan
shall include information regarding how many times a week donated items will be
collected, the time of day the items will be collected, a vehicular circulation
plan and a graffiti and litter abatement plan.
   (G)   Upon submission of a complete permit application meeting all the
requirements of this chapter, the Department of Regulatory Compliance shall
issue a donation box permit to the applicant within 20 business days.
(Ord. OR-2287-23, passed 1-23-23; Am. Ord. OR-2342-24, passed 1-22-24)
§ 116.03 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Donation boxes and drop-off collection areas shall be properly
maintained and comply with the following regulations:
      (1)   The operator of each donation box shall keep the real property
situated within 25 feet of the location of a donation box clean and free of
trash, debris, broken glass, clothes hangers, clothes, clothing accessories or
excess donations.
      (2)   The donation box operator and the real property owner, property
owner’s designated agent, property manager, or property’s lawful occupant
listed on the permit application shall be jointly and severally liable and
responsible for the maintenance, upkeep and servicing of the donation box and
the cleanup and removal of any donations left on the property outside of the
donation box.
      (3)   Each donation box shall clearly indicate in writing on the front
side of each box that all donations must fit into and be placed within the
donation box. The size of lettering for the notice shall not be less than one-
half inch in height.
      (4)   A donation box operator or the real property owner, property
owner’s designated agent, property manager, or property’s lawful occupant
listed on the permit application that fails to maintain the cleanliness of the
surrounding real property may receive a notice of violation from the city. If
the city elects to send a notice of violation to the email address on file for
the operator, the operator shall have 48 hours to remedy the complaint. Failure
to comply with a notice of violation may result in the issuance of a citation
by the city. An operator who is issued more than one citation in a 12-month
period for the same offense on the same donation box is subject to revocation
of the approval for such donation box.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, leases, is in control of
or is entitled to possession of real property within the city to authorize or
allow any donation box to be placed on or remain on such real property without
a valid donation box permit in compliance with the provisions of this division
(B).
   (C)   A violation of any of the provisions of divisions (A) or (B) above
shall constitute a public nuisance, and the city shall have the authority to
abate any such violation as such. This provision does not exclude or limit the
use of any other remedy available to the city under this division (C), the code
of ordinances, or the laws of the State of Texas.
(Ord. OR-2287-23, passed 1-23-23; Am. Ord. OR 2304-23, passed 6-5-23; Am. Ord.
OR-2342-24, passed 1-22-24)
§ 116.04 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked by the Administrator if the
permit holder has:
      (1)   Received more than one citation for a violation of this chapter or
any other provision of this code within the preceding 12 month time period;
      (2)   Has knowingly made a false material statement in the application;
or
      (3)   Has otherwise become disqualified for the issuance of a permit
under the terms of this chapter.
   (B)   Notice of the revocation shall be given to the permit holder in
writing, with the reasons for the revocation specified in the notice, served
either by personal service or by certified United States mail to their last
known address. The revocation shall become effective the day following personal
service or if mailed, three days from the date of mailing.
   (C)   The permit holder shall have ten days from the date of such revocation
in which to file notice with the Administrator of their appeal from the order
revoking said permit.
   (D)   The Administrator shall provide for a hearing on the appeal in
accordance with the provisions of this section herein.
   (E)   Upon finalization of any revocation, the permit holder shall remove
said donation box no later than ten days after said final decision. Upon
expiration of this ten day grace period, the donation box shall acquire
noncompliant status and be subject to immediate impoundment without further
notice. Any donation box impounded by the city shall be released to the owner
upon payment of all applicable impoundment and storage fees. If a donation box
is impounded for longer than ten calendar days, it shall be considered
abandoned property subject to disposal or sale at the city’s sole discretion.
   (F)   In the event the permit of any permit holder is revoked by the
Administrator, no second or additional permit shall be issued to such person
within one year of the date such permit was revoked.
   (G)   Donation boxes that have been placed without a permit are subject to
the same impoundment regulations set forth in division (E) above after a notice
of violation has been issued and the ten day compliance period has expired.
(Ord. OR-2287-23, passed 1-23-23; Am. Ord. OR-2304-23, passed 6-5-23)
CHAPTER 117: PORTABLE ON DEMAND STORAGE UNITS
Section
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   Permit required
   
117.03   Placement of PODS restricted
   
117.04   Regulations of portable on demand storage units
   
117.05   Permit fee
   
117.06   Notice of denial or revocation; right of appeal
   
117.07   Abatement of violations
 
   
117.99   Penalty
§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Mansfield, Texas.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Mansfield, Texas or his/her
designee.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Regulatory Compliance Department.
   IMPROVED SURFACE. A surface area providing a stable base in an area not
subject to water run-off and/or flooding.
   PORTABLE ON DEMAND STORAGE UNIT or PODS. Any box-like container, storage
unit, shed-like container or other portable structure transportable by truck,
tractor or other vehicle that can be, or is, used for the storage of personal
property of any kind on a temporary basis and which is located for such
purposes on residentially-zoned properties, or on properties the primary use of
which is residential or mixed-use, outside an enclosed building. Also typically
known as PODS, MODS, etc.
   REGULATORY COMPLIANCE DEPARTMENT. The Regulatory Compliance Department and
its authorized representatives, acting through the City Manager or their
designated representative.
(Ord. OR-2305-23, passed 6-12-23)
§ 117.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place, store, locate or
allow the placement of a PODS or similar unit on any residentially-zoned
properties, or on properties the primary use of which is residential or mixed-
use property, within the city without first submitting an application and
obtaining a permit for the placement of said PODS or similar unit from the
Regulatory Compliance Department.
   (B)   The permit shall be for a time period not to exceed 30 days during
which time the unit may be kept on the property. The 30 days shall include
loading and unloading time. No more than one permit may be issued for any lot
or parcel of property in any 12 month period.
   (C)   An extension of the permit may be granted by the Regulatory Compliance
Department and subject to conditions, for a reasonable additional period in an
amount not to exceed 30 days.
(Ord. OR-2305-23, passed 6-12-23) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.03 PLACEMENT OF PODS RESTRICTED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place, store, locate or
allow the placement of a PODS or similar unit in or upon any street, highway,
roadway, designated fire lane or sidewalk in the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place, store, locate or
allow the placement of a PODS or similar unit upon any lot or property in the
city without first having obtained a permit as required in this chapter.
(Ord. OR-2305-23, passed 6-12-23) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.04 REGULATIONS OF PORTABLE ON DEMAND STORAGE UNITS.
   (A)   A PODS or similar unit shall be situated so as to:
      (1)   Minimize the potential for interference with sight lines for
motorists on adjoining streets and nearby driveways;
      (2)   Not encroach into drainage easements/areas or rights-of-way;
      (3)   Not cause a person lawfully using the sidewalk to have to detour
into the street in order to get around the unit;
      (4)   Not cause hazardous conditions, constitute a threat to public
safety, or create a condition detrimental to the surrounding land use and
development; and
      (5)   If possible, toward the rear of the property line.
   (B)   A PODS or similar unit shall have a valid permit affixed to it in a
conspicuous location for the duration of the unit's placement.
   (C)   A PODS or similar unit shall be placed on an improved surface.
   (D)   Not more than one PODS or similar unit shall be parked, placed,
stored, or located on any single lot or parcel of land.
   (E)   A PODS or similar unit shall not be stacked on top of another or on
top of any other object.
   (F)   A PODS or similar unit shall be secured from entry by children and the
general public when not attended.
(Ord. OR-2305-23, passed 6-12-23) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.05 PERMIT FEE.
   For the purpose of defraying the administrative costs of processing the
application and ensuring compliance with this chapter, a non-refundable fee as
established in the Master Fee Schedule adopted by City Council, as amended from
time to time, shall be paid with the submission of a permit application under
this chapter.
(Ord. OR-2305-23, passed 6-12-23; Am. Ord. OR-2389-24, passed 10-28-24)
§ 117.06 NOTICE OF DENIAL OR REVOCATION; RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   (A)   The Regulatory Compliance Department may revoke a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter if a PODS or similar unit fails to remain in
compliance with any regulations of this chapter. A permit that has been revoked
shall still be included in determining the maximum number of permits that may
be issued according to this chapter in any 12 month period.
   (B)   If, after investigation, the Regulatory Compliance Department
determines that revocation or denial of a permit is appropriate, the Regulatory
Compliance Department shall notify the applicant or permittee in writing of the
determination and the reason for the denial or revocation.
   (C)   The applicant or permittee, not later than the 15th day after the date
the applicant or permittee is notified of the determination, may appeal the
denial or revocation by filing of a notice of appeal with the Director. The
Director shall consider the determination made by the Regulatory Compliance
Department and may receive and consider information from the applicant or
permittee. The Director shall render a decision either affirming or reversing
the Regulatory Compliance Department's determination within ten days from the
date the notice of appeal is filed and shall notify the applicant or permittee
of the decision in writing.
   (D)   The applicant or permittee, not later than the 15th day after the date
the applicant or permittee is notified of the Director's decision, may appeal
the Director's decision affirming the determination to the City Manager by
filing a notice of appeal with the Director. The City Manager shall consider
information submitted by the Regulatory Compliance Department and may receive
and consider information from the applicant or permittee. The City Manager
shall render a decision either affirming or reversing the determination of
denial or revocation within ten days from the date the notice of appeal of the
Director's decision is filed and shall notify the applicant or permittee of the
City Manager's decision in writing.
   (E)   A notice of appeal filed under this section shall be filed with the
Director and shall include the following:
      (1)   The name, address, phone number and email address of the applicant
or permittee;
      (2)   A designation of whether the applicant or permittee prefers to
receive notices by regular mail or by email;
      (3)   An explanation of the reason why the applicant or permittee
disagrees with the determination or decision being appealed; and
      (4)   A copy of the determination or decision being appealed.
(Ord. OR-2305-23, passed 6-12-23)
§ 117.07 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be considered a public nuisance for a PODS or similar unit to
be parked, placed, stored, located, used, or maintained in any manner contrary
to this chapter and the city shall have the authority to abate any such
violations.
   (B)   A PODS or similar unit that is not removed at the expiration of a
permit, or after 15 days upon revocation of a permit by the Regulatory
Compliance Department, the Regulatory Compliance Department may remove the PODS
or similar unit from the property.
   (C)   The Regulatory Compliance Department may remove immediately and
without notice a PODS or similar unit that is an immediate danger to health,
life or safety of any person.
   (D)   Prior to abatement or removal of a PODS or similar unit under this
section, the Regulatory Compliance Department shall send a written notice to
the permittee or the owner of the property where it is located that states that
if the violations are not corrected within ten days from the date of the notice
the Regulatory Compliance Department will abate the violations and remove the
PODS or similar unit.
   (E)   At the expiration of ten days after notification, the Regulatory
Compliance Department may do such work as necessary or cause the same to be
done in order that the PODS or similar unit is removed.
   (F)   If the Regulatory Compliance Department abates a violation under this
chapter by removing a PODS or similar unit, the Regulatory Compliance
Department may pay for the work and cause the expense thereof and a reasonable
administrative fee to be assessed against the property where the PODS or
similar unit was located or which the PODS or similar unit was serving. A bill
for the actual cost incurred by the Regulatory Compliance Department for the
abatement and a reasonable administrative fee shall be sent to the permittee or
owner of the property where it was located or which the PODS or similar unit
was serving. If the bill has not been satisfied within 30 days of the date the
bill was sent, the Regulatory Compliance Department may file a statement with
the County Clerk of the expenses incurred in the abatement and a reasonable
administrative fee, and the city shall have a privilege lien on the property
upon which the expense was incurred, second only to tax liens and liens for
street improvements, and 10% per annum interest on the amount from the date the
payment is due.
   (G)   For a lien established under this section, the city may bring a suit
to recover the amount secured by the lien, and the city may seek foreclosure on
the property subject to the lien. The statement of costs filed with the County
Clerk under this section shall be prima facie proof in a suit brought under
this section of the amount expended by the city for the work performed.
(Ord. OR-2305-23, passed 6-12-23) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   In addition to any other enforcement remedies that the city may have under
this chapter, other city ordinances or other applicable law, any person, firm
or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense. Each day that a violation
is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. OR-2305-23, passed 6-12-23)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      Chapter
         
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages in public parks
   
130.02   Unlawful conduct in public places
   
130.03   Defacing, mutilating or injuring city property
   
130.04   Discharging explosives
   
130.05   Unauthorized display of block parent sign
   
130.06   Interfering with police animals
   
130.07   Noises disrupting the peace
   
130.08   Urinating and defecating prohibited in certain locations
   
130.09   Sexual offender: residency restrictions
   
130.10   Property owners prohibited from renting real property to sexual
offenders
   
130.11   Notification of sex offenders residency
Advertising
   
130.20   Putting up placards and the like in public places
   
130.21   Banners and the like over public streets
   
130.22   Obscene advertising and displays
Obscenity
   
130.35   Definitions
   
130.36   Application of provisions
   
130.37   Commission of offense with knowledge
   
130.38   Commission of offense in business establishment
Graffiti
   
130.50   Definitions
   
130.51   Placement of graffiti
   
130.52   Failure to remove graffiti
   
130.53   Issuance of citation
   
130.54   Defense to prosecution
   
130.55   Responsibility of parent or guardian for graffiti created by a minor
Residential Outdoor Lighting
   
130.60   Purpose and intent
   
130.61   Conformance with applicable codes
   
130.62   Applicability
   
130.63   Definitions
   
130.64   Measurement
   
130.65   Prohibited lighting
   
130.66   Height
   
130.67   Building mounted lighting
 
   
130.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PARKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages in
any public park of the city, or for any person to possess any alcoholic
beverages with intent to consume such alcoholic beverages in any public park in
the city, unless the park area is leased to and operated by a private entity.
('78 Code, § 4-1) (Ord. 109, passed 5-27-58; Ord. 500, passed 8-1-83; Am. Ord.
1265, passed 7-13-99; Am. Ord. 1490, passed 7-26-04)
Penalty, see § 130.99
Cross reference:
   Parks and recreation, see
Ch. 96
§ 130.02 UNLAWFUL CONDUCT IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle of two or more wheels,
including but not limited to automobiles, trucks and motorcycles.
      PUBLIC PLACE. For the purpose of preserving public peace, health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of the city, the following are deemed and hereby
declared to a "public place:"
         (a)   The entire premises occupied by any commercial establishment
located in the city and customarily open to the public, together with the means
of ingress thereto and degree therefrom, parking or storage areas, property
appurtenant to the establishment and any buildings or structures located on the
premises.
         (b)   Any property in the city which is owned, used or maintained by
any governmental agency or authority.
('78 Code, § 11-1)
   (B)   Prohibited acts. The following acts or conduct of any person entering
or on any public place are hereby declared to be unlawful and any person found
guilty of any such act shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall be fined as provided in §
130.99:
      (1)   To enter upon the premise of a public place in a motor vehicle of
any description and park the vehicle and leave the premises for a period in
excess of two hours without getting the consent of the owner, operator or
custodian of the public place, in which event the vehicle may be impounded,
subject to the usual impounding charges.
      (2)   On the premises of a public place, to race the motor of any motor
vehicle, needlessly bring to a sudden start or stop any motor vehicle, blow any
horn of any motor vehicle or cause to be made any other loud or unseemly noise,
nuisance or disturbance whereby the quiet and good order of the premises or the
neighborhood are disturbed.
('78 Code, § 11-2)
(Ord. 255, passed 10-24-72)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.03 DEFACING, MUTILATING OR INJURING CITY PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to mutilate, deface or injure any public
building, fence, fountain or other kind of public property in the city owned or
controlled by the city.
('78 Code, § 11-3) (Ord. 175, passed 1-26-65)
Penalty, see § 130.99
Statutory reference:
   Criminal mischief, see Tex. Penal Code, § 28.03
§ 130.04 DISCHARGING EXPLOSIVES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any package or
container containing powder or other explosive or combustible material, except
in accordance with other ordinances of the city, and with the permission of the
governing body.
('78 Code, § 11-4)
Penalty, see § 130.99
Statutory reference:
   Possession of explosive weapons, see Tex. Penal Code, § 46.05
§ 130.05 UNAUTHORIZED DISPLAY OF BLOCK PARENT SIGN.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to display on or about premises
owned by or under the control of the person a "Block Parent" sign without
proper authorization.
   (B)   In this section, proper authorization means issuance of the sign from
the Parent Teacher Association Chairman of a City Independent School District
school without having the authorization revoked in writing by the Chairman.
   (C)   In this section, block parent sign means a sign which purports to be
or is an imitation of or resembles the design, regardless of size or color, set
forth in Exhibit A which is available in the office of the City Secretary.
('78 Code, § 11-51) (Ord. 887, passed 12-11-90)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.06 INTERFERING WITH POLICE ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly
or with criminal negligence do the following:
   (A)   Interfere with a police service dog or police patrol horse by
blocking, tripping, holding, luring or otherwise obstructing or hindering
performance of tasks while the animal is under the supervision of a duly
authorized police officer in the performance of official duties.
   (B)   Harass, agitate or injure a police service dog or police patrol horse
by making physical contact, throwing objects, waving or making loud noises of
any sort, thereby causing the animal to bolt or otherwise causing the animal's
actions to be altered while the animal is under performance of official duties.
('78 Code, § 11-61) (Ord. 888, passed 12-11-90)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.07 NOISES DISRUPTING THE PEACE.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to control noises and the nuisance
thereby created in such a manner as to cause the least hardship or offense to
the greatest number of people.
('78 Code, § 9-3)
   (B)   The following noises and other noises of the same characteristics,
intensity or annoyance shall be prohibited at all times and at all places
within the city, except as herein authorized.
      (1)   Horns, signaling devices and the like. The sounding of any horn or
signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle on any
street or public place of the city except as a danger warning; the creation by
means of any signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the
sounding of any device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the
use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use
of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of
any signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up.
      (2)   Radios, phonographs and the like. The use or operation of any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for
the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace,
quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder
volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person of normal
hearing who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which the machine or device
is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto or allowing the use or
operation. The operation of any set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner as to be plainly
audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in
which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section.
      (3)   Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising and the like. The use or
operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph,
loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of
commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any
building, product, service, merchandise or political candidate or allowing the
use or operation, except as authorized by the City Council.
      (4)   Yelling, shouting and the like. Yelling, shouting, hooting,
whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly, between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the
quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or
other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
      (5)   Animals, birds and the like. The keeping of any animal or bird
which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or
repose of any persons in the vicinity.
      (6)   Steam whistles.  The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any
stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or
as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authorities.
      (7)   Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle, except
through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises therefrom.
      (8)   Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noises.
      (9)   Loading, unloading and opening boxes and the like. The creation of
a loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any
vehicle, or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers
on Sundays, Christmas, New Year's Day or Thanksgiving or before 7:00 a.m. or
after 11:00 p.m.; provided, however, that under emergency conditions the City
Manager may, in his/her discretion, grant exceptions thereto.
      (10)   Adjacent to schools, courts, churches, hospitals and the like. The
creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school,
institution of learning, church or court while the same is in use, or adjacent
to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of the
institutions, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital,
provided, conspicuous signs are displayed in the streets indicating that the
same is a school, hospital, church or court street.
      (11)   Hawkers, peddlers and the like. The shouting or crying of
peddlers, hawkers or vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood.
      (12)   Drums and the like. The use of any drum or other instrument or
device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any
performance, show or sale.
      (13)   Firearms and fireworks. The explosion of firecrackers, skyrockets,
Roman candles, pinwheels or any other form of fireworks or the shooting of any
firearms, air guns, pellet guns, BB guns or any other type of firearms
discharge except as specifically authorized by law or the proper official.
      (14)   Transportation of metal rails, pillars and columns. The
transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material,
over and along the streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars,
trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to
disturb the peace and quiet on or adjacent to the streets or other public
places.
      (15)   Operation of public transportation buses. The causing, permitting
or continuing any excessive, unnecessary and avoidable noise in the operation
of a public transportation bus.
      (16)   Pile drivers, hammers and the like. The operation of any pile
driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or
other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise, except
on written permission of the City Manager prescribing the locality and the
hours during which the operation is permissible.
      (17)   Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan,
or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to
the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from the blower or
fan is muffled and the engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to
deaden the noise.
      (18)   Air-conditioning units. Self-contained, one-room air-conditioning
units, up to one-ton capacity attached to the outside walls or windows of
buildings within the city and operated for the comfort of the occupants of the
buildings shall not be deemed in violation of this section where proof is
established that the units are maintained in good mechanical condition. Air-
conditioning units of more than one-ton capacity may not be operated within the
city except where remote compressors are housed in soundproof rooms or where
attached or immediately adjoining compressors are sound treated or baffled and
cooling coil and condensation water is disposed of as prescribed by the City
Manager.
('78 Code, § 9-4) (Ord. 170, passed 7-28-64; Ord. 422, passed 8-11-80)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.08 URINATING AND DEFECATING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS.
   (A)   Offense. A person commits an offense if the person urinates or
defecates:
      (1)   On public property or in a public place, and is reckless about
whether another is present who will be offended or alarmed by the act, unless
the person is in an enclosed restroom or similar facility designed to handle
waste in a sanitary manner; or
      (2)   On private property that the person does not own, unless the person
has permission from the property owner, and is reckless about whether another
is present who will be offended or alarmed by the act; or
      (3)   On private property that the person owns, and is reckless about
whether another is present who will be offended or alarmed by the act.
(Ord. 1451, passed 10-13-03)
Penalty, see § 130.99(B)
§ 130.09 SEXUAL OFFENDER: RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Findings and intent. That repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders
that use physical violence and sexual offenders who prey on children are sexual
predators who present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders
are extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses and
most sexual offenders commit many offenses, have many more victims than are
ever reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This
makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to society at large, while
incalculable, clearly exorbitant. It is the intent of this section to serve the
city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas around locations
where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain
sexual offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from establishing
temporary or permanent residences.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DWELLING. A structure or building occupied as a residence.
      DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a single-family, duplex or townhouse
dwelling that:
         (a)   Are designed to be a single housekeeping unit to accommodate one
family; and
         (b)   Contain one or more kitchens, one or more bathrooms and one or
more bedrooms.
      PERMANENT RESIDENCE. A place where the person abides, lodges or resides
for 14 or more consecutive days.
      SCHOOL. Shall include any property owned by a school district which has
been designated, defined, platted or identified to the city as a future site
for any school.
      TEMPORARY RESIDENCE. A place where the person abides, lodges or resides
for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and
which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the person
routinely abides, resides or lodges for a period of four or more consecutive or
non-consecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent
residence.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person who is required to register as a sex
offender under Ch. 62 of the Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure, to establish a
permanent residence or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of a public or
private school, day care facility, playground, public or private youth center,
public swimming pool or video arcade facility, as those terms are defined in
Art. 481.134 of the Tex. Health and Safety Code.
   (D)   For the purpose of determining the minimum distance separation, the
measurement of the distance between the place of the person's residence shall
be:
      (1)   In a direct line from property line of the day care facility,
playground, public or private youth center, public swimming pool or video
arcade facility, to the property line of the person’s residence; or
      (2)   In a direct line from the property line of the public or private
school to the property line of the person's residence, and in a direct line
across intersections; or
      (3)   If the person’s residence is located on or above the fifth story of
a multi-story building, in a direct line from the property line of the public
or private school to the property line of the person's residence, in a direct
line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line
to the base of the floor on which the person's residence is located.
   (E)   Exceptions. A person residing within 1,000 feet of those places
identified in division (C) does not commit a violation of this section if any
of the following apply:
      (1)   The person established the permanent or temporary residence prior
to April 28, 2008, the date of adoption of the section, has complied, and
remains complicit with, all the sex offender registration laws of the state;
      (2)   The person was a minor when he or she committed the offense and was
not convicted as an adult;
      (3)   The person is a minor; or
      (4)   The premises specified in division (C) was opened after the person
established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex
offender registration laws of the state.
   (F)   A person who is a registered sex offender or required to register as a
sex offender under Ch. 62 of the Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure commits an
offense if the person establishes a temporary residence or permanent residence,
in the same dwelling unit with another registered sex offender or person
required to register as a sex offender under Ch. 62 of the Tex. Code of
Criminal Procedure.
   (G)   The owner, operator or person in control of a dwelling unit commits an
offense if he or she, either personally or through an employee or agent, allows
a registered sex offender or person required to register as a sex offender
under Ch. 62 of the Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure to establish a temporary
residence or permanent residence, in the same dwelling unit with another
registered sex offender or person required to register as a sex offender under
Ch. 62 of the Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure.
   (H)   It is a defense to prosecution under divisions (F) or (G) that:
      (1)   All registered sex offenders or person(s) required to register as a
sex offender under Ch. 62 of the Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure residing in
the dwelling unit were related to each other by one or any combination of the
following:
         (a)   Blood;
         (b)   Marriage;
         (c)   Adoption; or
         (d)   Foster care under a placement program authorized by the State
Department of Family and Protective Services pursuant to Ch. 264, Subch. B of
the Tex. Family Code, as amended.
      (2)   The violation for which the sex offender was required to register
was the only sex crime on the sex offender's record and, at the time of that
violation, the victim in the case was:
         (a)   Between 14 and 17 years of age;
         (b)   A willing participant in the sexual activity; or
         (c)   Not more than four years younger than the registered sex
offender.
      (3)   The dwelling unit was or is a lawfully established and lawfully
operating:
         (a)   Residential Reentry Center as defined by the State Department of
Criminal Justice; or
         (b)   Institute for special education that holds a valid certificate
of occupancy specifically for that use and that operates a program approved by
the state for the housing, rehabilitation and training of criminal offenders.
(Ord. 1688, passed 4-28-08; Am. Ord. OR-2410-25, passed 4-28-25) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.10 PROPERTY OWNERS PROHIBITED FROM RENTING REAL PROPERTY TO SEXUAL
OFFENDERS.
   (A)   It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure or part thereof,
manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it
will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person
prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence
pursuant to the terms of this section, if such place, structure or part
thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance, is located within
1,000 feet of any public or private school, day care facility, playground,
public or private youth center, public swimming pool, or video arcade facility,
as those terms are defined in Art. 481.134 of the Tex. Health and Safety Code.
   (B)   The determination of the distance between the residence described in
division (A) of this section and the public or private school, day care
facility, playground, public or private youth center, public swimming pool or
video arcade facility shall be the same as described in §
130.09(D) of this code.
(Ord. 1688, passed 4-28-08)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.11 NOTIFICATION OF SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY.
   Upon receipt of notice, that a person subject to registration as a sex
offender pursuant to the terms of this chapter will be establishing a place of
permanent residence within the city, the Police Department will take reasonable
steps to notify the community in the following manner:
   (A)   The Police Department may place information on the identity and
criminal history of the sex offender on the Police Department's internet
website to allow the public to readily secure information on the individual.
The website posting should identify the address where the individual will
reside and provide all information relating to his or her offense that is
available to the public as a matter of law.
   (B)   After the Police Department receives notice of the offender's
permanent residence designation, it will make reasonable efforts in order that
written notice identifying the registered offender, his or her criminal history
and his or her proposed permanent address is mailed to each address the
Department has, other than a post office box, within 1,000 feet of the boundary
of the property upon which the sex offender will reside.
   (C)   Written notice of a sex offender's permanent residence, as set forth
in division (B) above, shall be provided to the school district in accordance
with the law within which the sex offender's residence is located. Notice to
the school district may be provided in the same manner as notice to adjoining
residents and property owners as set forth division (B) above.
(Ord. 1688, passed 4-28-08)
ADVERTISING
§ 130.20 PUTTING UP PLACARDS AND THE LIKE IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fasten, tack, nail, tie, glue,
paste or maintain any placard, poster, banner or any other material anywhere on
the streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, signal light posts or bases, street
light posts or bases, telephone posts or electric posts in the city or to cause
the same to be done.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to any officer of the city, the state or
the United States who may place upon the objects, by tying with strings or
ties, any posters or placards in the interest of public health and safety.
('78 Code, § 3-1)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.21 BANNERS AND THE LIKE OVER PUBLIC STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, construct, fasten, tie or
maintain any banners, streamers or other similar materials anywhere in the city
in a manner that the same shall be above, over and across any public street
within the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to charitable
organizations or any person engaging in promoting a nonprofit civic enterprise
who has secured approval from the City Manager and has furnished a bond
indemnifying the city from any personal injury or property damage which might
result from the building, constructing, fastening, tying, disconnecting or
maintaining any banners, streamers or other similar material above, over or
across any public street within the city. Upon presenting to the Chief of
Police evidence of approval by the City Manager and evidence of securing the
bond as required above, the Chief of Police shall issue a permit to the
charitable organization or any person engaged in promoting a nonprofit civic
enterprise to engage in the activities otherwise herein prohibited.
('78 Code, § 3-2)
Penalty, see § 130.99
Cross reference:
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 98
§ 130.22 OBSCENE ADVERTISING AND DISPLAYS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint or have posted or
painted, or to display or distribute any bill, sign, bulletin, card or banner
containing pictures or illustrations or any other matter of an obscene or
immoral character at any point in the city where the same may be seen by
persons traversing any alley, street or public place.
('78 Code, § 3-3)
Penalty, see § 130.99
Statutory reference:
   Commercial obscenity, see Tex. Penal Code, § 43.23
OBSCENITY
§ 130.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMUNITY. The area within the corporate limits of the city.
   MATERIAL. Anything tangible that is capable of being used or adapted to
arouse interest, whether through the medium of reading, observation, sound or
in any other manner, but does not include an actual three dimensional obscene
device.
   OBSCENE. Material or a performance that meets the following conditions.
      (1)   The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient interest in sex.
      (2)   Depicts or describes the following:
         (a)   Patently offensive representations or descriptions of ultimate
sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, heterosexual or
homosexual, including sexual intercourse, sodomy and sexual bestiality.
         (b)   Patently offensive representations or descriptions of
masturbation, excretory functions, sadism, masochism, lewd exhibitions of
genitals, the male or female genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal, covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state or a device
designed and marketed as useful primarily for stimulation of the human genital
organs.
      (3)   Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political and
scientific value.
   OBSCENE DEVICE. A device, including a dildo or artificial vagina designed or
marketed as useful primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs.
   PATENTLY OFFENSIVE. So offensive on its face as to affront current community
standards of decency.
   PERFORMANCE. A play, motion picture, dance or other exhibition performed
before an audience.
('78 Code, § 11-36) (Ord. 484, passed 1-24-83)
Cross reference:
   Sexually-oriented businesses, see
Ch. 112
§ 130.36 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   It is not innocent but calculated purveyance which is prohibited. This
subchapter shall not apply to persons who may possess or distribute obscene
matter or participate in conduct otherwise proscribed by this subchapter when
the possession, distribution or conduct occurs in the course of law enforcement
activities or in the course of bona fide scientific, educational or comparable
research or study or like circumstances of justification.
('78 Code, § 11-39) (Ord. 484, passed 1-24-83)
§ 130.37 COMMISSION OF OFFENSE WITH KNOWLEDGE.
   A person commits an offense, if he/she knowingly does any of the following.
   (A)   He/she sells or possesses for sale any obscene material.
   (B)   He/she sells or possesses for sale any obscene device.
   (C)   He/she presents commercially an obscene performance or participates in
that portion of the performance that makes it obscene.
('78 Code, § 11-37) (Ord. 484, passed 1-24-83)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.38 COMMISSION OF OFFENSE IN BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT.
   A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons
under the age of 17 years, he/she displays or sells a book, pamphlet, newspaper
or magazine which depicts the following:
   (A)   Human sexual intercourse, masturbation or sodomy.
   (B)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breasts.
   (C)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks or
that portion of the female breast under the top of the areola.
   (D)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or
uncovered, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for
commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain.
('78 Code, § 11-38) (Ord. 484, passed 1-24-83)
Penalty, see § 130.99
GRAFFITI
§ 130.50 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GRAFFITI. An unauthorized inscription, work, signature, symbol, design,
painting or other marking which is etched, written, painted, drawn, sprayed or
applied in any other way to a structure, building or property, or to any
portion or element thereof.
   GUARDIAN. This term includes the following:
      (1)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor.
      (2)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   MINOR. Any person under 17 years of age.
   OWNER. A person who owns or is in control of property.
   PARENT. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of
another person.
   UNAUTHORIZED. Without the permission of the owner of property.
('78 Code, § 11-70) (Ord. 1113, passed 3-11-96)
§ 130.51 PLACEMENT OF GRAFFITI.
   A person commits an offense if the person places graffiti on property.
('78 Code, § 11-71) (Ord. 1113, passed 3-11-96)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.52 FAILURE TO REMOVE GRAFFITI.
   (A)   An owner of property commits an offense if the owner fails to remove
graffiti from the owner's property if the graffiti is visible from public or
private property, other than the property on which the graffiti exists.
   (B)   Before an owner may be issued a citation for failure to remove
graffiti, the city must provide notice of the violation to the owner. Notice
may be given as follows:
      (1)   In writing personally delivered to the owner.
      (2)   By letter addressed to the owner's address as listed on the most
recent ad valorem tax rolls.
      (3)   By publication in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general
circulation in the city at least twice within ten consecutive days if personal
service cannot be obtained or the owner's address is unknown.
('78 Code, § 11-72) (Ord. 1113, passed 3-11-96)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.53 ISSUANCE OF CITATION.
   The city may issue a citation for a violation of §
130.52(A) 21 calendar days after notice of the violation. Notice is deemed to
have occurred as follows:
   (A)   On the day notice is personally delivered to the owner.
   (B)   Three days after written notice was mailed to the owner.
   (C)   If notice is by publication, on the date that the second notice is
published.
('78 Code, § 11-73) (Ord. 1113, passed 3-11-96)
§ 130.54 DEFENSE TO PROSECUTION.
   It is a defense to prosecution under §
130.52(A) if the following occur.
   (A)   No notice was served on the property owner in compliance with §
130.52(B).
   (B)   Before being issued a citation, the property owner gave the city
written authorization to allow persons to enter onto the property and remove
the graffiti pursuant to a volunteer or community service program approved by
the City Council in which the property owner is eligible to participate.
('78 Code, § 11-74) (Ord. 1113, passed 3-11-96)
§ 130.55 RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN FOR GRAFFITI CREATED BY A MINOR.
   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he/she knowingly
permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to create graffiti on
property.
('78 Code, § 11-75) (Ord. 1113, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see §
130.99
RESIDENTIAL OUTDOOR LIGHTING
§ 130.60 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this subsection is to provide regulations for residential
outdoor lighting created in such a manner as to:
   (A)   Minimize the adverse offsite impacts of lighting such as trespass and
glare.
   (B)   Curtail light pollution, reduce sky glow, and improve the nighttime
environment.
   (C)   Conserve energy and resources to the greatest extent possible.
   (D)   Eliminate nuisance lighting.
(Ord. OR-2101-18, passed 11-12-18)
§ 130.61 CONFORMANCE WITH APPLICABLE CODES.
   All residential outdoor lighting shall be installed in conformance with the
provision of this subsection, applicable electrical and energy codes and
applicable section of the building code.
(Ord. OR-2101-18, passed 11-12-18)
§ 130.62 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of the residential outdoor lighting regulations provided in
this chapter shall apply in the following situation:
   (A)   New fixtures or additional lighting. This subsection shall apply to
all installations of new residential fixtures or additional lighting to any new
or existing residential use or structure.
   (B)   Nuisance lighting. Luminaires installed prior to the adoption of this
Subchapter from which this subsection is derived shall immediately be re-aimed
or shielded such that the fixture no longer creates a nuisance. Shielding may
be accomplished by louvers, baffles, visors, or shields placed on the
luminaires, or any other method whereby the light therefrom does not constitute
a nuisance.
   (C)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Street lighting installed by a governmental agency for public
benefit on public rights-of-way; and
      (2)   Public outdoor recreational sport fields and sport courts
complexes.
      (3)   Temporary seasonal lighting.
(Ord. OR-2101-18, passed 11-12-18)
§ 130.63 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FLOODLIGHTING. A system designed for lighting a scene or object to a
luminance greater than its surroundings. It can be for utility, advertising, or
decorative purposes.
   FOOTCANDLE. The amount of illumination provided by one lumen uniformly
distributed on one square foot of surface. See diagram below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6769.png]
 
   GLARE. Lighting entering the eye directly from luminaires or indirectly from
reflective surfaces that cause visual discomfort or reduced visibility.
   LAMP and LIGHT SOURCE. A device that produces visible energy, such as a
bulb.
   LIGHT INTRUSION OR TRESPASS. A light flow that spills outside the location
boundary causing a disturbance to adjacent areas.
   LIGHTING STANDARD. The light pole and the base measured at the highest point
on the pole or fixture including the base.
   LUMEN. The unit of measure used to quantify the amount of light produced by
a lamp or emitted from a luminaire (as distinct from “watt,” a measure of power
consumption).
   LUMINAIRE. A complete lighting unit including a light source and all
necessary mechanical, electrical, reflective and decorative parts.
   POINT METHOD PHOTOMETRICS. A lighting design procedure for predetermining
the illuminance at various locations in lighting installations by use of
luminaire photometric data.
   PRIVATE OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES. Any form of outdoor play or
amusement, including, but not limited to, games or sports conducted on property
not owned, operated, or leased for operation by the city, a school, school
district, county, or other governmental agency.
   PUBLIC OUTDOOR RECREATION SPORTS FIELDS AND SPORT COURTS COMPLEX. Any
outdoor community recreation facilities owned, operated, or leased for
operation by the city, a school, school district, county, or other governmental
agency and may include swimming pools, tennis courts, softball and baseball
facilities, soccer facilities, and other outdoor athletic facilities.
   RESIDENTIAL OUTDOOR LIGHTING NUISANCE. A nuisance created by light:
      (1)   Which if measured at the property line adjacent to residentially
zoned property or adjacent to a property used for residential purposes, is in
excess of two-tenths (0.2) of one footcandle;
      (2)   Which if measured at the property line adjacent to an arterial
street, is in excess of one and one-half (1-1/2) footcandles; or
      (3)   Which if measured at the property line adjacent to a collector or
residential street, is in excess of two-tenths (0.2) of one footcandle.
   SEASONAL LIGHTING. Temporary lighting installed and operated in connection
with holidays or traditions.
   VERTICAL ILLUMINANCE. Illuminance measured or calculated in a plane
perpendicular to the site boundary or property line.
(Ord. OR-2101-18, passed 11-12-18)
§ 130.64 MEASUREMENT.
   (A)   Metering equipment. Lighting levels shall be measured in footcandles
with a direct-reading, portable light meter.
   (B)   Method of footcandle measurement. The meter sensor shall not be more
than six inches above ground level in a horizontal position or six foot in a
vertical position. The reading shall be taken only after the cell has been
exposed long enough to provide a constant reading.
(Ord. OR-2101-18, passed 11-12-18)
§ 130.65 PROHIBITED LIGHTING.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person has or places outdoor
lighting on a residential property that involves or utilizes any of the
following:
      (1)   Any lighting source above 315 lumens that is not aimed to prevent
light trespass or glare beyond the property boundary;
      (2)   Any lighting source above 315 lumens unless it is shielded
sufficiently such that the luminous elements (lamp, reflective surface or lens
cover) of the fixture are not visible from any other property;
      (3)   The operation of searchlights, strobes, or pulsating lights;
      (4)   The use of low pressure sodium bulbs as a light source;
      (5)   An unshielded lighting source or drop lens, above 315 lumens;
      (6)   Any light or combination of lighting that creates a nuisance; or
      (7)   Any lighting installed to illuminate an unimproved surface or
private outdoor recreational activities that exceed requirements defined as a
residential outdoor lighting nuisance.
   (B)   A footcandle reading, as performed in accordance with §
130.64 and found to be in excess of those amounts defined as a residential
outdoor lighting nuisance shall be prima facie evidence of violation of this
chapter.
(Ord. OR-2101-18, passed 11-12-18)
§ 130.66 HEIGHT.
   The maximum height for residential outdoor lighting pole standards shall be
20 feet.
(Ord. OR-2101-18, passed 11-12-18)
§ 130.67 BUILDING MOUNTED LIGHTING.
   All building mounted luminaires exceeding 315 lumens shall be directed down.
(Ord. OR-2101-18, passed 11-12-18)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense.
Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of §
130.08 shall be fined not more than $2,000 for each offense.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of §
130.09 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500 for each offense. Each day
that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such.
(Ord. 1265, passed 7-13-99; Am. Ord. 1451, passed 10-13-03; Am. Ord. OR-2410-
25, passed 4-28-25)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      Chapter
         
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
         
151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
         
152.   EROSION CONTROL
         
153.   IMPACT FEES
         
154.   SUBDIVISIONS
         
155.   ZONING
         
156.   PARK LAND DEDICATION AND DEVELOPMENT FEE
         
157.   VACANT BUILDINGS
         
158.   STANDARDS, REGISTRATION, AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS FOR MULTI-FAMILY
DWELLING COMPLEXES
         
159.   EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Bond of permittee; collection of charges
   
150.002   National Electrical Code adopted
   
150.003   Electrical permits and licenses
   
150.004   International Residential Code adopted
   
150.005   International Energy Conservation Code adopted
   
150.006   Building permit fees
   
150.007   International Fuel Gas Code adopted
   
150.008   International Building Code adopted
   
150.009   International Mechanical Code adopted
   
150.010   International Plumbing Code adopted
   
150.011   Dangerous and substandard structures
   
150.012   International Property Maintenance Code adopted
   
150.013   International Existing Building Code adopted
   
150.014   International Fire Code adopted
   
150.015   International Swimming Pool and Spa Code adopted
Construction Codes Board of Adjustments and Appeals
   
150.020   Appointment
   
150.021   Term of office
   
150.022   Quorum
   
150.023   Records
   
150.024   Procedures and rules
   
150.025   Authority of the Board to abate substandard buildings
   
150.026   Appeals; time limit
   
150.027   Variations and modifications
   
150.028   Board decisions; procedure
   
150.029   Liability
Moving of Buildings
   
150.040   Permit required; fees
   
150.041   Exceptions
   
150.042   Permit application; plans
   
150.043   Inspection before permit issuance
   
150.044   Insurance and bond
   
150.045   Permit to state condition of moving; expeditions operation
   
150.046   Care in operation; revocation of permit
   
150.047   Repair of damage
   
150.048   Police approval; compliance with regulations
   
150.049   Notice to Fire Department
   
150.050   Violations
Asbestos Survey
   
150.060   Definitions
   
150.061   Issuance of permit
   
150.062   Residential buildings
   
150.063   Costs of survey
 
   
150.099   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 BOND OF PERMITTEE; COLLECTION OF CHARGES.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation or other entity engaged in services or
contracting for services governed by the Plumbing Code shall be issued a permit
under this chapter until the person has made, executed and delivered to the
City Secretary a good and sufficient bond in an amount at least equal to the
sum shown on the contract for the work by the person, but in no case for a sum
less than $3,000 payable to the city, with corporate surety authorized to do
business in the state and conditioned for the faithful performance of all work
entered upon or contracted for, and in strict accordance and compliance with
the terms, requirements and provisions of the Plumbing Code; and conditioned
further that the person shall without additional cost to the person for whom
the work is done, remedy any defects therein due to faulty workmanship or
material. That the person shall reconstruct or repair the work to the
satisfaction of the Inspector within 72 hours after notice of the inspection
and findings by him or her.
   (B)   Upon five days written notice to the principal of the bond and to the
City Secretary, the surety on the bond shall have the privilege of canceling
any such bond. Cancellation of any bond shall not cancel or reduce the surety's
liability on any transaction begun before 12:00 noon on the effective date of a
cancellation. The bond shall contain a provision stating the substance of this
requirement of notice of cancellation.
   (C)   The city may for itself, or for the use and benefit of any person
injured or damaged by reason of failure to repair any defective installation,
fitting or construction in connection therewith, or for failure or refusal to
pay any of the fees required by the plumbing code, maintain suit on the bond,
or suit may be maintained thereon by any person so injured.
   (D)   All bonds shall be for a period ending the next ensuing December
thirty-first, and should the coverage of any such bond be reduced by recovery,
or for any other reason, the surety on the bond shall immediately notify the
City Secretary. The principal will not be issued for any permit provided for
herein until the coverage of the bond is fully restored.
('78 Code, § 6-82) (Ord. 277, passed 5-14-74)
Statutory reference:
   Plumbing License Law, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6243-101
§ 150.002 NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED.
   The 2017 Edition of the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70) is adopted as the
official electrical code of the City of Mansfield, Texas. This electrical code
is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this ordinance in its
entirety. The material contained in the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70)
shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances but
shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the City Secretary and
will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business
hours.
(‘78 Code, § 6-50) (Ord. 251, passed 10-24-72; Ord. 491, passed 4-25-83; Ord.
931, passed 3-23-92; Am. Ord. 1174, passed 8-25-97; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 12-
10-01; Am. Ord. 1435, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1715-08, passed 10-27-08; Am.
Ord. OR-2134-19, passed 6-10-19)
§ 150.003 ELECTRICAL PERMITS AND LICENSES.
   (A)   To whom permits may be issued. As proof of the qualifications of those
electrical contractors and electricians engaging in the electrical trade in the
city, all work done in the city coming under the Electrical Code shall be done
by a person who holds an appropriate valid Electrical Contractor's license and/
or a Master Electrician's license duly issued by the Texas Department of
Licensing and Regulation. No permit shall be issued to any person to do or
cause to be done any work regulated by the Code, except to a person holding a
valid Master Electrician's License.
   (B)   Who may do the work. Master and Journeyman Electricians licensed by
the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation and registered with the city.
      (1)   A Master Electrician may contract for and engage in the business of
installing, repairing or replacing electrical wiring or equipment of any nature
on or in buildings or structures. The Master Electrician may employ and
supervise Journeyman Electricians, helpers and apprentice electricians.
      (2)   A Journeyman Electrician shall be able to perform any type of
electrical work under the supervision of a Master Electrician, but in no case
shall a Journeyman Electrician contract for or engage in the business of
electrical work of any nature. A Journeyman Electrician shall be able to lay
out work for and to supervise helper or apprentice electricians, but shall not
be able to employ same.
   (C)   Registration. Every person desiring to be registered by the city to
engage in the electrical business in a capacity for which a license is required
by the Code shall comply with the following: be the holder of a valid State of
Texas Electrical Contractor's license and Master Electrician's license issued
by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation.
   (D)   Registration fees. Fees for registration shall be in accordance with
the electrical permits and fees schedule set forth in the development services
permit fee schedule.
   (E)   Registration renewal. Electrical contractor registration shall expire
and be subject to renewal on the date of state license expiration.
('78 Code, § 6-54) (Ord. 251, passed 10-24-72; Ord. 931, passed 3-23-92; Am.
Ord. 1174, passed 8-25-97; Am. Ord. OR-1714-08, passed 10-27-08)
§ 150.004 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED.
   The 2018 Edition of the International Residential Code and Appendices A, B,
C, G, H, J, N, P, Q, and T are adopted as the official residential code of the
City of Mansfield, Texas. This residential code is fully incorporated by
reference as though copied into this ordinance in its entirety. The material
contained in the International Residential Code shall not be included in the
formal municipal codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public
record in the office of the City Secretary and will be available for public
inspection and copying during regular business hours.
(Ord. 1379, passed 12-10-01; Am. Ord. 1436, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1722-
08, passed 10-27-08; Am. Ord. OR-2130-19, passed 6-10-19)
§ 150.005 INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED.
   The 2018 Edition of the International Energy Conservation Code is adopted as
the official energy conservation code of the City of Mansfield, Texas. This
energy conservation code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied
into this ordinance in its entirety. The material contained in the
International Energy Conservation Code shall not be included in the formal
municipal codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record
in the office of the City Secretary and will be available for public inspection
and copying during regular business hours.
(Ord. 1379, passed 12-10-01; Am. Ord. OR-1716-08, passed 10-27-08; Am. Ord. OR-
1804-11, passed 4-11-11; Am. Ord. OR-2137-19, passed 6-10-19)
§ 150.006 BUILDING PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Building Permits - Residential Dwellings.
 
                                                                               Permit   Plan
Occupancy Type                                                                 Fee1,2   Review
                                                                                        Fee3
One- and Two-Family Dwelling to Include Townhomes:                             $0.60/   $100
New, alterations, remodels, repairs and additions.                             SF2
Multi-Family:                                                                  $0.52/   $200
New, alterations, remodels, repairs and additions.                             SF2
                                                                               $0.30/
Patio covers, carports, decks (that exceed 200 SF and are 30” above grade at SF2      $100
any point), and one-story accessory structures (that exceed 200 SF).           (minimum
                                                                               fee $75)
Foundation repair, reroof, window replacement, wind and solar energy           $150     $100
Note:
   1.   Permit fees calculated by the SF shall include the entire square footage of the
structure under the roof.
   2.   MEP fees are included in the permit fee.
   3.   The plan review fee per permit is required at the time of application submittal and is
non-refundable.
 
   (B)   Building Permits - Non-Residential Dwellings Regulated by IBC & IEBC.
 
Occupancy Type                  Permit Fee1,2                  Plan Review Fee3
Commercial, Retail, Assembly,
Business, Educational,          $0.75/SF2                      $200
Institutional, Mercantile, etc.
New structures and additions.
Industrial, Manufacturing,
Warehouse                       $0.50/SF2                      $200
New structures and additions.
All remodels, interior
finishes, repair, alterations
of non-residential structures
to include commercial, retail,  2.5% of valuation (minimum fee $200
assembly, business educational, $125)
factory, manufacturing,
institutional, storage,
mercantile, etc.
Note:
   1.   The value to be used in computing this fee shall be the total value of
all construction work for which the permit is issued, as well as all finish
work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and
any other permanent equipment.
   2.   MEP fees are included in the permit fee.
   3.   The plan review fee per permit is required at the time of application
submittal and is non-refundable.
 
   (C)   Other Building Permits & Fees.
Permit Type Fee
Permit Type                                Fee
Building Permit for Structure Being Moved  $300 each
into City (Includes MEP)
Construction Trailer/Sales Trailer         $200 each
(Includes MEP)
Premanufactured Structure (Includes MEP)   $300 each
In-Ground Swimming Pool (Includes MEP)     $300 each
Prefabricated Above Ground Swimming Pools, $100 each
Spas, and Portable Hot Tubs (Includes MEP)
Fence                                      $25 each
Screening Walls & Retaining Walls          $100 each
Drive Approach                             $60 each
Demolition                                 $100 each
Certificate of Occupancy                   $75 each
Building Mechanical                        $75
Building Plumbing                          $75
Building Electrical                        $75
Inspection Outside of Normal Business      $50 per hour
Hours                                      (minimum charge of 2 hours)
Reinspection Fee                           $100 each
Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance     100% of the original permit fee in
                                           addition to the regular permit fee
Inspections, For Which No Fee Is           $75 per hour
Specifically Indicated                     (minimum charge of 1 hour)
Additional Plan Review Required by         $100 per hour
Changes, Additions, or Revisions to Scope  (minimum charge of 1 hour)
of Work Submitted or Approved Plans.
Miscellaneous Building Permit Fee for Item $75 each
(s) Not Listed Above
Notice of Appeal                           $50
 
   (D)   Miscellaneous Permits & Fees.
 
Permit Type                                   Fee
Carnival, Temporary Amusement                 $300 + $600 deposit for clean-up
Development & Advertising Signs               $140 each
Garage Sale Permit                            No fee (application only)
Pole, Ground & All Other Signs Not Classified $100 each
As Wall Signs
Tent Permit                                   $60 each
Wall Signs, Temporary Signs & Promotional     $75 each
Displays
 
   (E)   Mechanical permits and fees.
 
New SFR and Multi-Family Dwellings
Permit type          Fee
0 to 1,500 s.f.      $70
1,501 to 2,500 s.f.  $80
2,501 to 3,500 s.f.  $90
3,501 to 5,000 s.f.  $100
5,001 s.f. or larger $110
 
New Commercial or Addition, Alteration or Repair to Commercial or Residential
Permit type Fee
New Commercial or Addition, Alteration or Repair to Commercial or Residential
Permit type                             Fee
Mechanical contractor annual            $100
registration
Permit issuance fee                     $30
Complete HVAC system new or replacement First unit - $50
(Furnace, condensing unit, etc.)        Each additional - $25
Individual Unit/Appliance               First unit - $30
(Unit heater, air handler, etc.)        Each additional - $15
Boilers                                 First unit - $40
                                        Each additional - $20
Repair, alteration or addition to       $15
heating and/or cooling appliances
Miscellaneous item (not listed above)   $15
Reinspection fees, assessed under       1st - $50, 2nd - $75, 3rd and
provisions of Section 107.2.3, 2000 IMC subsequent - $100 each
and Section R109.5, 2000 IRC
Work commencing before permit issuance,
assessed under provisions of Section    100% of original permit fee in addition
106.5.1, 2000 IMC and Section R108.6,   to regular permit fee
2000 IRC
 
   (F)   Electrical permits and fees.
 
New SFR and Multi-Family Dwellings
$0.06 per s.f. (under roof) + add $20 for a T-pole permit (if purchased at the
same time)
Example: for a 2,000 s.f. structure (including T-pole permit) = $140
2,000 s.f. x $0.06 = $120 + $20 (T-pole permit) = $140
 
New Commercial or Addition, Alteration or Repair to Commercial or Residential
Permit type Fee
New Commercial or Addition, Alteration or Repair to Commercial or Residential
Permit type                             Fee
Electrical contractor annual            $100
registration
Permit issuance fee                     $30
Outlets (receptacles/switches)          $0.60
Permit type                             Fee
Lighting fixtures                       $0.60
Swimming pool                           $40
Temporary power pole                    $20
Motors                                  First motor - $30
                                        Each additional - $15
Services - 600 volts or less (to 200    $25
Amps)
Services - 600 volts or less (over 200  $50
Amps to 1,000 Amps)
Services - Over 600 volts (over 1,000   $100
Amps)
Sign circuit                            $18
Miscellaneous item (not listed above)   $12
Reinspection fees, assessed under       1st - $50, 2nd - $75, 3rd and
provisions of Section 109.7, 2000 IBC   subsequent - $100 each
and Section R109.5, 2000 IRC
Work commencing before permit issuance,
assessed under provisions of Section    100% of original permit fee in addition
108.4, 2000 IBC and Section R108.6,     to regular permit fee
2000 IRC
 
   (G)   Plumbing permits and fees.
 
New SFR and Multi-Family Dwellings
Permit type          Fee
0 to 1,500 s.f.      $100
1,501 to 2,500 s.f.  $110
2,501 to 3,500 s.f.  $120
3,501 to 5,000 s.f.  $130
5,001 s.f. or larger $140
 
New Commercial or Addition, Alteration or Repair to Commercial or Residential
Permit type Fee
New Commercial or Addition, Alteration or Repair to Commercial or Residential
Permit type                             Fee
Plumbing contractor annual registration
(includes licensed plumbers, irrigators $100
and backflow testers)
Permit issuance fee                     $30
Each plumbing fixture                   $7
Repair or alteration of drainage or     $7
vent piping (each fixture)
Building sewer                          $7
Interceptor/separator (grease, oil,     $7
sand, etc.)
Water heater and/or vent                $7
Water piping (installation or repair)   $7
Lawn sprinkler system (including        $10
backflow protection)
Backflow protection device              $7
Pool/hot tub/spa/jacuzzi (water and/or  $14
sewer connection)
Gas line                                $7
Gas outlet                              $2
Miscellaneous item (not listed above)   $7
Reinspection fees, assessed under
provisions of Section 107.3.3, 2000     1st - $50, 2nd - $75, 3rd and
IPC, Section 107.2.3, 2000 IFGC and     subsequent - $100 each
Section R109.5, 2000 IRC
Work commencing before permit issuance,
assessed under provisions of Section    100% of original permit fee in addition
106.6.1, 2000 IPC, Section 106.5.1,     to regular permit fee
2000 IFGC and Section R108.6, 2000 IRC
 
(Ord. 1281, passed 9-27-99; Am. Ord. 1437, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-2379-24,
passed 9-9-24; Am. Ord. OR-2416-25, passed 8-25-25)
§ 150.007 INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED.
   The 2018 Edition of the International Fuel Gas Code and Appendices A, B, and
C are adopted as the official fuel gas code of the City of Mansfield, Texas.
This fuel gas code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into
this ordinance in its entirety. The material contained in the International
Fuel Gas Code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of
ordinances but shall be  maintained as a public record in the office of the
City Secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during
regular business hours.
(Ord. 1434, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1718-08, passed 10-27-08; Am. Ord. OR-
2133-19, passed 6-10-19)
§ 150.008 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   The 2018 Edition of the International Building Code and Appendices C, E, F
and I are adopted as the official building code of the City of Mansfield. This
building code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this
ordinance in its entirety. The material contained in the International Building
Code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances
but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the City Secretary
and will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business
hours.
(Ord. 1431, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1713-08, passed 10-27-08; Am. Ord. OR-
2129-19, passed 6-10-19)
§ 150.009 INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED.
   The 2018 Edition of the International Mechanical Code and Appendix A is
adopted as the official mechanical code of the City of Mansfield, Texas. This
mechanical code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this
ordinance in its entirety. The material contained in the International
Mechanical Code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of
ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the City
Secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during
regular business hours.
(Ord. 1433, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. OR-1719-08, passed 10-27-08; Am. Ord. OR-
2135-19, passed 6-10-19)
§ 150.010 INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.
   The 2018 Edition of the International Plumbing Code and Appendices C and E
are adopted as the official plumbing code of the City of Mansfield, Texas. This
plumbing code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this
ordinance in its entirety. The material contained in the International Plumbing
Code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances
but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the City Secretary
and will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business
hours.
(Ord. 1432, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. (OR-1720-08, passed 10-27-08; Am. Ord. OR-
2136-19, passed 6-10-19)
§ 150.011 DANGEROUS AND SUBSTANDARD STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Purpose and scope.
      (1)   Purpose.  It is the purpose of this section to provide a just,
equitable and practical method, to be cumulative with and in addition to any
other remedy provided by the building code, electric code, fire code,
residential code, mechanical code, plumbing code, maintenance code, other
ordinances and regulations of the city, Texas Local Government Code, Ch. 214,
or otherwise available at law, whereby buildings, as defined herein, which from
any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare
of the general public, or their occupants, and may be required to be repaired,
vacated, demolished, removed or secured. The purpose of this section is also to
provide minimum standards for the continued use and occupancy of all structures
to safeguard life, limb, health, property and public welfare.
      (2)   Scope.  The provisions of this section shall apply to all buildings
which are hereinafter defined as dangerous or substandard buildings, whether
now in existence or whether they may hereafter become dangerous.
      (3)   Designation. The regulations set forth in this section may be
referred to as the city substandard building ordinance.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   BOARD. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals as authorized to
implement the substandard building ordinance by § 150.025 of this code, as
amended.
      (2)   BUILDING. Any building, fence, awning, canopy, sign, shed, garage,
house, tent or other structure whatsoever, or any portion thereof. The
enumeration of specific types of structures shall not be deemed to exclude
other types of structures to which the sense and meaning of the provisions
hereof in context reasonably have application.
      (3)   BUILDING CODE.  The International Building Code as adopted and
amended by the city.
      (4)   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The person designated by the City Manager to
enforce this section.
      (5)   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Mansfield, Texas.
      (6)   ELECTRIC CODE. The National Electrical Code as adopted and amended
by the city.
      (7)   FIRE CODE. The International Fire Code as adopted and amended by
the city.
      (8)   MAINTENANCE CODE. The International Property Maintenance Code as
adopted and amended by the city.
      (9)   MECHANICAL CODE. The International Mechanical Code as adopted and
amended by the city.
      (10)   PLUMBING CODE. The International Plumbing Code as adopted and
amended by the city.
      (11)   RESIDENTIAL CODE. The International Residential Code as adopted
and amended by the city.
   (C)   Enforcement.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   Administration.  The Building Official is hereby authorized to
enforce the provisions of this section. The Building Official shall have the
power to render interpretations of this section, and to adopt and enforce rules
and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application of its
provisions. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformity
with the intent and purpose of this §
150.011.
         (b)   Inspections.  The Building Official and the Fire Marshal, or
their designees, are hereby authorized to make such inspections and take such
actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this §
150.011.
         (c)   Right of entry.  When it is necessary to make an inspection to
enforce the provisions of this section, or when the Building Official, or his
or her designee, has a reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a
building or upon a premises a condition contrary to or in violation of this
section that makes it unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the Building Official,
or his or her designee, may enter the building or premises at reasonable times
to inspect or perform the duties imposed by this section; provided that, if
such building or premises is occupied, that credentials shall be presented to
the occupant and entry shall be requested. If the building or premises be
unoccupied, the Building Official, or his or her designee, shall first make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control
of the building or premises, and shall then request entry. If entry is refused,
the Building Official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to
secure entry, including, but not limited to, obtaining an administrative search
warrant.
      (2)   Abatement of dangerous or substandard buildings. All buildings, or
portions thereof, determined after inspection by the Building Official to be
dangerous or substandard, as defined by this section, are hereby declared to be
public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, vacation, demolition, removal
or securing in accordance with the procedures specified in this section.
      (3)   Unlawful to violate section. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to erect, construct, or use, occupy or maintain any
building that is deemed herein to be a nuisance or cause or permit the same to
be done in violation of this §
150.011.
      (4)   Inspection authorized.  All buildings within the scope of this
section and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be
subject to inspection by the Building Official.
   (D)   Substandard building declared.
      (1)   For the purposes of this section, any building, regardless of the
date of its construction, having any or all of the conditions or defects
hereinafter described shall be deemed to be a substandard building, and a
nuisance:
         (a)   Whenever any building is dilapidated, deteriorated, decayed or
damaged to the extent that it is unfit for human habitation and a hazard to the
public health, safety and welfare, in the opinion of the Building Official.
         (b)   Whenever any building, regardless of its structural condition,
is unoccupied by its owners, lessees or other invitees and is unsecured from
unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants
or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used
by children.
         (c)   Whenever any building is boarded up, fenced or otherwise secured
in any manner if:
            1.   The building constitutes a danger to the public even though
secured from entry; or
            2.   The means used to secure the building are inadequate to
prevent unauthorized entry or use of the building in the manner described by
paragraph (l)(b) of this division.
         (d)   Whenever any building, because of obsolescence, dilapidated
condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-
resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating
apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the Fire Marshal to be a fire
hazard.
         (e)   Whenever any building is in such a condition as to make a public
nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence.
         (f)   Whenever any portion of a building remains on a site after the
demolition or destruction of the building.
         (g)   Whenever any building is abandoned so as to constitute such
building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.
         (h)   Whenever any building is defined as substandard by any provision
of the building code, maintenance code, electric code, fire code, plumbing
code, mechanical code, residential code, or other ordinance or regulation of
the city, or constructed and still existing in violation of any provision of
any of these codes of the city, to the extent that the life, health or safety
of the public or any occupant is endangered.
         (i)   Whenever a fence or any portion thereof is leaning by ten
degrees or more beyond plumb, or have 10% or more of its pickets missing, it
shall be considered structurally unsafe and a hazard to safety, health, or
public welfare; and if 25% of an existing picket is rotten, missing, or
decayed, it shall be considered missing.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, any building, regardless of the
date of its construction, which has any or all of the conditions or defects
hereinafter described, to an extent that it endangers the life, limb, health,
property, safety or welfare of the public, or the occupants thereof, shall be
deemed and hereby is declared to be a dangerous and substandard building, and a
nuisance:
         (a)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of
exit is not of sufficient width or size, or is not so arranged as to provide
safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
         (b)   Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway
or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as
to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
         (c)   Whenever the stress in any materials, or members or portion
thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one half times
the working stress or stresses allowed in the building code for new buildings
of similar structure, purpose or location.
         (d)   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire,
earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the
structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before
such catastrophe, and is less than the minimum requirements of the building
code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
         (e)   Whenever any portion, member or appurtenance thereof is likely
to fail, to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse, and thereby injure
persons or damage property.
         (f)   Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance
or ornamentation on the exterior thereof, is not of sufficient strength or
stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be
capable of resisting a wind pressure of one half of that specified in the
building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location,
without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such
buildings.
         (g)   Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or
settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have
materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case
of similar new construction.
         (h)   Whenever the building, or any portion thereof, because of: 1.
dilapidation, deterioration or decay; 2. faulty construction; 3. the removal,
movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose
of supporting such building; 4. the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its
foundation; or 5. any other cause, is likely to partially or completely
collapse.
         (i)   Whenever, for any reason, the building, or any portion thereof,
is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.
         (j)   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members
list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the
center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one third of the base.
         (k)   Whenever the building, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33% or
more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50% or
more damage or deterioration of its non-supporting members, enclosing or
outside walls or coverings.
         (l)   Whenever the building has been so damaged by fire, wind,
earthquake, flood or other causes, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated
as to become:
            1.   An attractive nuisance to children; or
            2.   A harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons.
         (m)   Whenever any building has been constructed, exists or is
maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable
to such building provided by the building regulations of this jurisdiction, as
specified in the building code, electric code, fire code, residential code,
mechanical code, plumbing code, maintenance code, or of any law or ordinance of
this state or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location or structure of
buildings.
         (n)   Whenever any building which, whether or not erected in
accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any non-supporting
part, member or portion less than 50%, or in any supporting part, member or
portion less than 66%, of the: 1. strength; 2. fire-resisting qualities or
characteristics; or 3. weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required
by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and
occupancy in the same location.
         (o)   Whenever a building, used or intended to be used for dwelling
purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage,
faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation
facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the Building Official to be
unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or in such a condition that is likely
to cause sickness or disease, including, but not limited to, the following:
            1.   Lack of, or improper water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower
in a dwelling unit or lodging house.
            2.   Lack of, or improper water closets, lavatories and bathtubs or
showers per number of guests in a hotel.
            3.   Lack of, or improper kitchen sink in a dwelling unit.
            4.   Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a
hotel.
            5.   Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a
dwelling unit or lodging house.
            6.   Lack of adequate heating facilities.
            7.   Lack of, or improper operation of, required ventilating
equipment.
            8.   Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation
required by this section or the building code, electric code, fire code,
residential code, mechanical code, plumbing code, maintenance code, or other
ordinance or regulation of the city.
            9.   Room and space dimensions less than required by this section
or the building code, electric code, fire code, residential code, mechanical
code, plumbing code, maintenance code, or other ordinance or regulation of the
city.
            10.   Lack of required electrical lighting.
            11.   Dampness of habitable rooms.
            12.   Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents.
            13.   General dilapidation or improper maintenance.
            14.   Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system.
            15.   Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal
facilities.
         (p)   Whenever any building contains structural hazards, including but
not limited to, the following:
            1.   Deteriorated or inadequate foundations.
            2.   Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports.
            3.   Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry
imposed loads with safety.
            4.   Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that
split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration.
            5.   Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that
are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety.
            6.   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or
other horizontal members that sag, split or buckle due to defective material or
deterioration.
            7.   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or
other horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads
with safety.
            8.   Fireplaces or chimneys that list, bulge or settle due to
defective material or deterioration.
            9.   Fireplaces or chimneys that are of insufficient size or
strength to carry imposed loads with safety.
         (q)   Whenever any building is constructed or existing in violation of
the building code, fire code, plumbing code, mechanical code, electric code,
residential code, maintenance code, or other ordinance or regulation of the
city, or is defined as a dangerous building by any provision of the codes of
the city, or is constructed and still existing in violation of any provision of
any of the codes of the city to the extent that the life, health or safety of
the public or any occupant is endangered.
   (E)   Determination by Building Official.  When the Building Official has
inspected, or caused to be inspected, any building and has found and determined
that it is substandard, the Building Official may take any or all of the
following actions, as he or she deems appropriate:
      (1)   Issue notice to the record owner that the building is substandard
and must be repaired or demolished; or
      (2)   Issue citation(s) for violation(s) of this section; or
      (3)   Secure the building if permitted by division (L)(l) of this
section; or
      (4)   Recommend to the Board that abatement proceedings be commenced
pursuant to division (F) of section.
   (F)   Public hearing for abatement of substandard buildings.
      (1)   Commencement of proceedings. When the Building Official has found
and determined that a building is a substandard building, the Building Official
shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation and relocation of
occupants, and the removal, demolition or securing of the building.
      (2)   Public hearing to be held. Except when the Council or the Building
Official finds that a building is likely to immediately endanger persons or
property, a public hearing before the Board shall be held to determine whether
a building complies with the standards set out in division (D) of this section.
If the Council or Building Official determines that the building constitutes an
immediate danger, the procedures set forth in division (L) of this section
shall be followed.
      (3)   Notice. Not less than ten days prior to the date on which the
hearing is set, the Building Official shall issue a notice of the public
hearing, directed to the record owner of the building, and to all mortgagees
and lienholders. The city shall make diligent efforts to determine the identity
and address of any owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the building through
searching the county real property records of the county in which the building
is located; appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the
building is located; records of the Secretary of State; assumed name records of
the county in which the building is located; tax records of the city; and
utility records of the city. The notice shall contain:
         (a)   The name and address of the record owner;
         (b)   The street address or legal description sufficient for
identification of the premises upon which the building is located;
         (c)   A statement that the Building Official has found the building to
be substandard or dangerous, with a brief and concise description of the
conditions found to render the building dangerous or substandard under the
provisions of division (D) of this section;
         (d)   A statement that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee will be
required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be
required to comply with the section, and the time it will take to reasonably
perform the work;
         (e)   Notice of the time and place of the public hearing; and
         (f)   A statement that, if the building is found to be in violation of
this section, the Council may order that the building be vacated, secured,
repaired, removed or demolished within a reasonable time.
      (4)   Additional notice of public hearing. Prior to the public hearing,
the city may file a copy of the notice mailed pursuant to division (F)(3) in
the official public records of real property in the county in which the
property is located. If such notice is not filed of record, each identified
mortgagee and lienholder must be notified of any abatement order issued by the
Board at the public hearing, prior to any remedial action by the city.
      (5)   Burden of proof. At the public hearing, the owner, lienholder or
mortgagee has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may
be required to comply with this section, and the time it will take to
reasonably perform the work.
      (6)   Conduct of public hearing. At the public hearing, the owner of the
building, and all other interested persons may make their appearance and be
heard. Any evidence may be received and considered by the Board. The hearing
may be adjourned from day to day or continued upon a majority vote of the
Board, in compliance with the Open Meetings Act.
   (G)   Order of Board regarding substandard building.
      (1)   Findings of the Board.  If the Board, by a majority vote, finds
upon evidence presented at the public hearing that the building is in violation
of standards set out in division (D) of this section, the Board may order that
the building be repaired, vacated, secured, removed or demolished, or its
occupants be relocated, by the owner, mortgagee or lienholder within a
reasonable time as provided herein.
      (2)   Time allowed to complete work.
         (a)   The order must require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the
building to, within 30 days:
            1.   Secure the building from unauthorized entry; and/or
            2.   Repair, remove or demolish the building unless the owner or
lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be
performed within 30 days.
         (b)   If the Board allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than
30 days to repair, remove or demolish the building, the Board shall establish
specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the work, and
shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to secure the property in a
reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed, as
determined by the Board.
         (c)   The Board may not allow the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more
than 90 days to repair, remove or demolish the building, or fully perform all
work required to comply with the order, unless the owner lienholder or
mortgagee:
            1.   Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the
hearing; and
            2.   Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot be reasonably
completed within 90 days because of the scope and complexity of the work.
         (d)   If the Board allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than
90 days to complete any part of the work required to repair, remove or demolish
the building, the Board shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to
regularly submit progress reports to the Building Official to demonstrate that
the owner, lienholder or mortgagee has complied with the time schedules
established for commencement and performance of the work. The order may require
that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee appear before the Board or the Building
Official to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules.
      (3)   Contents of order. The order of the Board must contain, at minimum:
         (a)   An identification, which is not required to be a legal
description, of the building and the property on which it is located; and
         (b)   A description of the violation of minimum standards present in
the building; and
         (c)   A description of the ordered actions, including a statement that
the owner may repair, if feasible, or demolish or remove at his or her option;
and
         (d)   A statement that the city will vacate, secure, remove or
demolish the building, or relocate the occupants of the building, if the
ordered action is not taken within the time allowed, and charge the cost to the
property; and
         (e)   If the Board has determined that the building will endanger
persons or property and that the building is a dwelling with ten or fewer
dwelling units, a statement that the city may repair the building and charge
the costs to the property if the ordered action is not taken within the time
allowed.
   (H)   Notice of order of the board.
      (1)   Order shall be mailed.  After the public hearing, the Building
Official shall promptly mail, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a
copy of the order to the record owner of the building, and each identified
lienholder and mortgagee of the building.
      (2)   Order shall be filed with City Secretary. Within ten days after the
date that the order is issued by the Board, the Building Official shall file a
copy of the order in the office of the City Secretary.
      (3)   Order shall be published.  Within ten days after the date the order
is issued by the Council, the Building Official shall publish, in a newspaper
of general circulation within the city, a notice containing:
         (a)   The street address or legal description of the property; and
         (b)   The date the hearing was held; and
         (c)   A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and
         (d)   Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be
obtained.
      (4)   The order may be filed in the official public records of real
property in the county in which the property is located.
   (I)   Enforcement of the order of the Board.
      (1)   If order not complied with, the city may take action. If the
building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished within the
time specified by the order, the city may vacate, secure, repair, remove or
demolish the building, or relocate the occupants at its own expense, provided
however:
         (a)   The city may not act to remove or demolish a building until
after the Board has found:
            1.   That such defects or conditions exist to the extent that the
life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the building
are endangered; and
            2.   The building is infeasible of repair; or
            3.   There is no reasonable probability that the building will be
repaired within a reasonable period of time if additional time is given.
         (b)   The city may only repair a building, as provided herein, to the
extent necessary to correct the conditions which render the building dangerous,
and may not act to repair a building unless:
            1.   The Board has made a determination that the building is likely
to endanger person or property; and
            2.   The building is a residential dwelling with ten or fewer
dwelling units.
            3.   In the event there are mortgagors or lienholders, the city may
only repair, remove or demolish the building after allowing the lienholder or
mortgagee an additional 30 days, after the time prescribed in the order has
expired, to complete the required work.
      (2)   Posting of notice to vacate building.  If the order requires
vacation or if compliance is not had with the order within the time specified
therein, the Building Official is authorized to require that the building be
vacated. Notice to vacate shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the occupant(s) of the building, shall be posted at or upon each
entrance to the building, and shall be in substantially the following form:
“SUBSTANDARD BUILDING
DO NOT ENTER
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this
building or to remove or deface this notice.
___________________________________
Building Official
City of Mansfield"
      (3)   Remedial action by city. Any repair or demolition work, or securing
of the building shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered
in the manner hereinafter provided. Any surplus realized from the sale of the
building, or from its demolition, over and above the cost of demolition and
cleaning of the lot, shall be paid over to the person or persons lawfully
entitled thereto.
      (4)   Failure to obey order. Any person to whom an order pursuant to
division (G) of this section is directed who fails, neglects or refuses to
comply with the order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be prosecuted in
municipal court, in addition to any other remedies available to the city
provided herein.
      (5)   Interference prohibited. No person shall obstruct, impede or
interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative
of the city, or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in the
building that has been ordered repaired, vacated, demolished, removed or
secured under the provisions of this section; or with any person to whom the
building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this section,
whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the
city, person having an interest or estate in the building, or purchaser is
engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing,
removing or securing any such building pursuant to the provision of this
section, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to
such work authorized or directed pursuant to this section.
      (6)   Permit required.  Any work of closure, repair, removal or
demolition by the property owner, any lienholder or mortgagee, or their agents,
must be performed pursuant to valid, unexpired permits issued by the city. All
permits issued pursuant to an order of the Board shall expire upon expiration
of the time for compliance set forth in the order.
   (J)   Performance of work by the city.
      (1)   Procedure. When any work of repair, removal, demolition or securing
is to be performed by the city pursuant to the provisions of any order of the
Board, the work may be accomplished by city personnel or by private contract as
may be deemed necessary. Rubble and debris shall be removed from any premises
and the lot cleaned if removal or demolition is ordered. The building or
building materials may be sold if removal or demolition is ordered, and the
proceeds shall be used to offset other costs of the work.
      (2)   Costs.  The cost of such work shall be paid from city funds and
shall constitute a special assessment and a lien against such property to
secure payment thereof, together with 10% interest on such amount from the date
on which the work is performed.
      (3)   Repair to minimum standards only. The city may repair the building
at its own expense, and assess the expenses on the land on which the building
stands or to which it is attached, only to the extent necessary to bring the
building into compliance with minimum standards.
   (K)   Recovery of cost of securing, repair, removal or demolition.
      (1)   Itemized account and notice of lien.  The Building Official shall
keep an itemized account of the expenses incurred by the city in the securing,
repair, removal or demolition of any building pursuant to this section. Upon
completion of the work, the Building Official shall prepare and file with the
City Secretary a sworn account and notice of lien, containing the following
information:
         (a)   The name and address of the owner if that information can be
determined with a reasonable effort;
         (b)   A legal description of the real property on which the building
is or was located;
         (c)   The type of work performed; and
         (d)   The amount of expenses incurred by the city in performing the
work and the balance due.
      (2)   Notice filed in county records.  The City Secretary shall file the
notice of lien, along with a copy of the order of abatement issued by the
Council, in the deed records of the county in which the premises are located.
      (3)   Personal obligation of property owner.  The expenses incurred by
the city, as set forth in the sworn account of the Building Official, shall be
a personal obligation of the property owner, in addition to a priority lien
upon the property. The City Attorney may bring an action in any court of proper
jurisdiction against the property owner to recover the costs incurred by the
city.
      (4)   Lien shall be valid and privileged.  Upon filing of the notice of
lien in the deed records of Tarrant, Ellis, or Johnson County, Texas, as
applicable, the lien shall be valid against the property so assessed. The lien
shall be privileged and subordinate only to tax liens and existing special
assessment liens, and shall be paramount to all other liens. The lien shall
continue until the assessment and all interest due and payable thereon has been
paid.
      (5)   Assessment must be paid.  No utility service, building permit or
certificate of occupancy shall be allowed on any such property until the
assessment is paid and the lien is released by the city.
      (6)   Release of lien.  After the expenses incurred by the city, as set
forth in the sworn account of the Building Official, have been fully paid with
interest of 10% per annum from the date the work was performed, the Building
Official shall execute a release of lien, which shall be filed in the deed
records of Tarrant, Ellis, or Johnson County, Texas, as applicable.
   (L)   Additional authority to secure certain substandard buildings prior to
public hearing and secure, demolish, repair or remove certain dangerous
buildings.
      (1)   Securing of unoccupied, substandard building.  Notwithstanding any
other provisions of this section, the city may secure a building if the
Building Official determines that the building:
         (a)   Violates the minimum standards set forth in division (D) of this
section; and
         (b)   Is unoccupied or is occupied only by persons who do not have the
right of possession to the building.
      (2)   If building creates immediate danger. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this section, if it finds that a building is likely to
immediately endanger persons or property, the Board may:
         (a)   Order the owner of the building, the owner’s agent, or the owner
or occupant of the property on which the structure is located to repair, remove
or demolish the structure, or the dangerous part of the structure, within a
specified time; or
         (b)   Repair, remove or demolish the structure, or the dangerous part
of the structure, at the expense of the municipality, on behalf of the owner of
the structure or the owner of the property on which the structure is located,
and assess the repair, removal or demolition expenses on the property on which
the structure was located.
      (3)   Before the eleventh day after the date the building is secured
pursuant to division (L)(1), or action is ordered pursuant to division (L)(2)
(a), or the building is repaired, removed or demolished pursuant to division
(L)(2)(b), the Building Official shall give notice to the owner by:
         (a)   Personally serving the owner with written notice; or
         (b)   Depositing the notice in the United States mail, addressed to
the owner at the owner’s post office address; or
         (c)   Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten-day period, in
a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the building is
located, if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner’s post office
address is unknown; or
         (d)   Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building, if
personal service cannot be obtained and the owner’s post office address is
unknown; and
         (e)   In addition to the above, depositing notice in the United States
mail to all lienholders and mortgagees who can be determined from a reasonable
search of instruments on file in the office of the county clerk.
      (4)   The notice must contain:
         (a)   An identification, which is not required to be a legal
description, of the building and the property on which it is located;
         (b)   A description of the violation of the minimum standards present
in the building;
         (c)   A statement that the city will secure or has secured, as the
case may be, the building, or that the city has taken or will take the action
ordered pursuant to division (L)(2);
         (d)   An explanation of the owner’s entitlement to request a hearing
about any matter relating to the city’s securing, removing, demolishing or
repairing of the building.
      (5)   The Board shall conduct a hearing at which the owner may testify or
present witnesses or written information about any matter relating to the
city’s securing, repairing, removing or demolishing the building, if, within 30
days after the date the city has taken action pursuant to division (L)(2)(a) or
(2)(b), the owner files with the city a written request for the hearing. The
hearing shall be conducted within 20 days after the date the request is filed.
      (6)   If the city incurs expenses under this section, such expenses
incurred shall be a personal obligation of the property owner, in addition to a
priority lien upon the property, and costs shall be recovered as provided by
divisions (J) and (K) of this section.
      (7)   It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with an order issued
pursuant to this section.
   (M)   Civil penalty.
      (1)   Civil penally authorized.  In addition to any other enforcement
authority provided for by law, the Board may, by order at an administrative
hearing, assess a civil penalty against a property owner, as provided for
herein, for failure to comply with an order issued by the Board pursuant to
division (G) of this section.
      (2)   Showing required. The civil penalty may be assessed if it shown at
the administrative hearing that:
         (a)   The property owner was notified of the contents of the order
issued pursuant to division (G) of this section; and
         (b)   The property owner committed an act in violation of the order or
failed to take an action necessary for compliance with the order.
      (3)   Amount of penalty. The civil penalty may be assessed in an amount
not to exceed $1,000 a day for each violation or, if the owner shows that the
property is the owner’s lawful homestead, in an amount not to exceed $10 a day
for each violation.
      (4)   Notice of administrative hearing.  Not less than ten days prior to
the date on which the administrative hearing is set, the property owner shall
be sent a notice of the hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested.
The notice shall contain:
         (a)   A copy of the order issued by the Board pursuant to division (G)
of this section;
         (b)   A statement that the Building Official has determined that the
property owner committed an act in violation of that order, or failed to take
an action necessary for compliance with that order;
         (c)   A statement at the administrative hearing that the Council may
assess a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 a day for each violation or, if the
owner shows that the property is the owner’s lawful homestead, in an amount not
to exceed $10 a day for each violation; and
         (d)   Notice of the time and place of the hearing.
      (5)   Copy of order filed with district clerk. After the civil penalty is
assessed, the City Secretary shall file, with the district clerk of the county
in which the property is located, a certified copy of the order, assessing the
civil penalty, and stating the amount and duration of the penalty.
      (6)   Enforcement.  The civil penalty may be enforced by the city in a
suit brought by the city in a court of competent jurisdiction for a final
judgment in accordance with the assessed penalty. A civil penalty under this
division is final and binding and constitutes prima facie evidence of the
penalty in any suit.
   (N)   Authority not limited. Notwithstanding all other provisions of this
section, nothing herein shall be deemed a limitation on the duty of the city to
summarily order the demolition of any building or structure, where it is
apparent that its immediate demolition is necessary to the protection of life,
property or general welfare of the people in the city.
   (O)   Section cumulative. This section shall be cumulative of all provisions
of city ordinances, except where its provision are in direct conflict with the
provisions of such ordinances, in which event the conflicting provisions of
such ordinances and such ordinances are hereby repealed.
   (P)   General penalty. Any person, firm or corporation that violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with this section, or that
resists the enforcement of any of its provisions, shall be fined not more than
$2,000 for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (Q)   Savings clause. All rights and remedies of the city are expressly
saved as to any and all violations of the provisions of any ordinance related
to substandard or dangerous buildings as they may have been amended, or any
other ordinance or code provision that have accrued at the time of the
effective date of this section; and, as to such accrued violations and all
pending litigation, both civil and criminal, whether pending in court or not,
under such ordinances, the same shall not be affected by this section, but may
be prosecuted until final disposition by the courts.
(Ord. OR-2050-17, passed 5-24-17; Am. Ord. OR-2063-17, passed 9-11-17)
§ 150.012 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   The 2018 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code is
adopted as the official property maintenance code of the City of Mansfield,
Texas. This property maintenance code is fully incorporated by reference as
though copied into this ordinance in its entirety. The material contained in
the International Property Maintenance Code shall not be included in the formal
municipal codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record
in the office of the City Secretary and will be available for public inspection
and copying during regular business hours.
   (B)   The amendments set forth in Exhibit A, attached to Ordinance No. OR-
2409-25, to the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code are hereby adopted
by the city. When an amendment consists of a revision of an existing article,
section, subsection, table or other portion of the 2018 International Property
Maintenance Code, the language of such amendment, to the extent that it is not
in conflict with this section, shall supersede the language of the respective
portion amended. Amendments to the 2018 International Property Maintenance
Code, consisting of the addition of new articles, sections, subsections,
errata, tables or other portions shall constitute supplements to such code. Any
references to the code, property maintenance code, minimum building standards
code, this code, etc., shall mean this article and any adopted appendixes and
supplements.
(Ord. OR-1721-08, passed 10-27-08; Am. Ord. OR-2138-19, passed 6-10-19; Am.
Ord. 2409-25, passed 3-24-25)
§ 150.013 INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   The 2018 Edition of the International Existing Building Code and Appendices
B and C are adopted as the official existing building code of the City of
Mansfield. This existing building code is fully incorporated by reference as
though copied into this ordinance in its entirety. The material contained in
the International Existing Building Code shall not be included in the formal
municipal codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record
in the office of the City Secretary and will be available for public inspection
and copying during regular business hours.
(Ord. OR-2131-19, passed 6-10-19)
§ 150.014 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE ADOPTED.
   The 2018 Edition of the International Fire Code and Appendices B, C, D E, F,
G, H, I, J, K, L and N, and as further described in §§
91.15 through
91.99 of
Ch. 91 of the Code of Mansfield, Texas, are adopted as the official fire code
of the City of Mansfield. This fire code is fully incorporated by reference as
though copied into this section in its entirety. The material contained in the
International Fire Code shall not be included in the formal municipal
codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record in the
office of the City Secretary and will be available for public inspection and
copying during regular business hours.
(Ord. OR-2132-19, passed 6-10-19; Am. Ord. OR-2271-22, passed 9-26-22)
§ 150.015 INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE ADOPTED.
   The 2018 Edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is adopted
as the official swimming pool and spa code of the City of Mansfield, Texas.
This swimming pool and spa code is fully incorporated by reference as though
copied into this ordinance in its entirety. The material contained in the
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code shall not be included in the formal
municipal codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record
in the office of the City Secretary and will be available for public inspection
and copying during regular business hours.
(Ord. OR-2139-19, passed 6-10-19)
CONSTRUCTION CODES BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS
§ 150.020 APPOINTMENT.
   There is established a board to be called the Construction Codes Board of
Adjustments and Appeals (hereinafter called “the Board”), which shall consist
of seven members who are residents of the city. The Board shall be composed of
one registered professional architect, one registered professional engineer,
one licensed master plumber, one licensed master electrician, one licensed air-
conditioning and refrigeration contractor, as well as two alternate members,
selected at large from the building industry. Board members and alternate
members shall be appointed by the City Council. In addition, the City Manager
or the City Manager's designee shall sit as an ex-officio, non-voting member of
the Board.
(‘78 Code, § 6-95) (Ord. 1118, passed 4-8-96; Am. Ord. OR-2097-18, passed 9-12-
18; Am. Ord. OR-2203-21, passed 3-8-21)
§ 150.021 TERM OF OFFICE.
   Place numbers shall be assigned to each member of the Board. Places that are
odd-numbered shall be appointed in odd-numbered years, and even-numbered places
shall be appointed in even-numbered years. The term of office for Board members
shall be for two years. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the
same manner as the original appointments. Continued absence of any member from
regular meetings of the Board shall, at the discretion of the City Council,
render any such member liable to immediate removal from office. Members shall
serve at the will and pleasure of the City Council.
('78 Code, § 6-96) (Ord. 1118, passed 4-8-96)
§ 150.022 QUORUM.
   Four members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. In the case of an appeal to the Board involving a specific trade such
as electrical, mechanical, plumbing or air-conditioning and refrigeration, at
least one member of that specific trade is required to be present before any
board action. A simple majority of members present shall be required to vary
the application of any provision of the International Code Council construction
codes and the National Electrical Code, as adopted by the city. Alternate
members will be requested, by city staff, to attend meetings in place of
regular members of the Board on an as-needed basis.
(‘78 Code, § 6-97) (Ord. 1118, passed 4-8-96; Am. Ord. OR-2203-21, passed 3-8-
21)
§ 150.023 RECORDS.
   The Building Official, or their designated representative, shall act as
Secretary of the Board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings.
The Secretary shall maintain a complete record of the meetings and minutes of
the action of the Board, together with the other records as the Board may
direct.
(‘78 Code, § 6-98) (Ord. 1118, passed 4-8-96; Am. Ord. OR-2203-21, passed 3-8-
21)
§ 150.024 PROCEDURES AND RULES.
   The Board shall select a Chairman and shall further establish rules and
regulations for its own procedures not inconsistent with the provisions of the
construction codes. The Board shall meet at regular intervals to be determined
by the Chairman, and the Board shall render a decision on an appeal without
unreasonable or unnecessary delay.
('78 Code, § 6-99) (Ord. 1118, passed 4-8-96)
§ 150.025 AUTHORITY OF BOARD TO ABATE SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS.
   In addition to other powers and duties conferred upon the Board by this
subchapter, the Board shall enforce the provisions of Ordinance 1143, (the
Substandard Building Ordinance) and carry out the functions established by that
ordinance to abate substandard buildings. In abating substandard buildings, the
Substandard Building Ordinance shall govern the procedures of the Board and the
rights and duties of the property owners.
(Ord. 1144, passed 1-13-97)
§ 150.026 APPEALS; TIME LIMIT.
   (A)   The owner of premises who seeks to erect or alter a building or
structure on the premises, or his/her authorized agent, may appeal from a
decision of the Building Official to the Board if the following occur.
      (1)   The Building Official shall reject or refuse to approve the mode or
manner of construction proposed to be followed, or the materials proposed to be
used, in the erection or alteration of the building or structure.
      (2)   The owner claims that the provisions of the construction codes do
not apply to his/her proposed construction.
      (3)   The owner claims that an equally good or more desirable form of
construction or materials can be employed in his/her construction than the
Building Official requires.
      (4)   The owner claims that the true intent and meaning of the
construction codes or of any of its regulations have been misconstrued or
wrongly interpreted.
   (B)   The notice of appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the Building
Official renders his/her decision. Provided, however, that the Building
Official may, in his/her decision, limit the time for appeal to a shorter
period in cases involving buildings or structures that are, in the Building
Official's opinion, unsafe or dangerous.
   (C)   The Secretary shall notify the Board within 48 hours after receipt of
an appeal.
   (D)   An administrative fee of $50 shall accompany the notice of appeal
which the owner or his/her authorized agent must file in writing with, and on a
form provided by, the Building Official.
('78 Code, § 6-100) (Ord. 1118, passed 4-8-96)
§ 150.027 VARIATIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The Board, when appealed to, shall conduct a hearing and after the
hearing may vary in part or in whole the application of any provision of the
construction codes to any particular case, when, in its opinion, the
interpretation of the Building Official should be modified or reversed for any
reason.
   (B)   The Board may approve alternate methods of construction or materials
where it is impractical to meet the adopted standards of the construction
codes, provided the Board finds the same degree of suitability, strength,
effectiveness, durability and safety exists in the alternate method or material
as intended by the standards.
   (C)   The Board may approve new methods of construction or materials not
covered by the construction codes, provided that the Board finds the same
degree of suitability, strength, effectiveness, durability and safety exists in
the new methods or materials as intended by the standards of the construction
codes. The Board, in approving new standards or processes, shall rely on
recognized standards or practices.
   (D)   A decision of the Board to vary the application of any provision of
the construction codes or to modify an order of the Building Official shall
specify in what manner the variation or modification is made, the conditions
upon which it is made and the reasons therefor.
('78 Code, § 6-101) (Ord. 1118, passed 4-8-96)
§ 150.028 BOARD DECISIONS; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Every decision of the Board shall be final, subject, however, to such
remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. The decision
shall be in writing and shall indicate the vote upon the decision. Every
decision shall be promptly filed in the office of the Building Official and
shall be open to the public for inspection. A true and correct copy of the
decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant at the address
shown on the appellant notice of appeal.
   (B)   The Board shall in every case reach a decision without unreasonable or
unnecessary delay.
   (C)   If a decision of the Board reverses or modifies any decision of the
Building Official or varies the application of any provision of the
construction codes, the Building Official shall immediately take action in
accordance with the decision.
   (D)   The Board will not render a decision upon any appeal which is contrary
to any state or federal statutes or mandates.
   (E)   Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by any decision of the Board
may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that
the decision is illegal in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the
illegality. Unless the petition (appeal) shall be presented to the court within
ten days of the decision of the Board, the decision of the Board shall become
final.
('78 Code, § 6-102) (Ord. 1118, passed 4-8-96)
§ 150.029 LIABILITY.
   The Board, or any of its members charged with the enforcement of the
construction codes and acting in good faith and without malice for the
jurisdiction in the discharge of its duties, shall not thereby render him/
herself liable personally and are thereby relieved from all personal liability
for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act
required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of their duties.
('78 Code, § 6-103) (Ord. 1118, passed 4-8-96)
MOVING OF BUILDINGS
§ 150.040 PERMIT REQUIRED; FEES.
   (A)   No person shall move any building into the city or from one site
within the city to another within or without the city until the person shall
have first secured a permit to do so from the Building Official. The fees for
the permits where buildings are moved in, through or upon streets, alleys,
avenues or public grounds shall be $25 for all buildings.
   (B)   Where it is necessary to cut a building into sections for removal, the
fee shall be based on the area of the entire building plus $10 for each section
moved after the first.
   (C)   The above fees are based on the moving being accomplished in one day
of 24 hours from the time the building is moved onto a public street, alley,
avenue or other public ground, and the mover shall pay $10 for each additional
day or fraction thereof that the building is in or on public ground.
   (D)   In addition to the moving permit and fees provided for in this
section, the owner or his/her agent shall secure a building permit for
foundations, repairs and alterations.
('78 Code, § 6-30) (Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64)
Penalty, see § 150.099
§ 150.041 EXCEPTIONS.
   No moving permit fee shall be charged for the moving of any building having
a width of ten feet or less and a floor area of 300 feet or less, provided, the
building when being moved is loaded on a truck or trailer and the loaded height
does not exceed 15 feet. The mover shall, however, notify the Building Official
of each such moving.
('78 Code, § 6-31) (Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64)
§ 150.042 PERMIT APPLICATION; PLANS.
   (A)   The application for a moving permit shall state the route to be
followed and shall bear the signed approval of proper representatives of the
public utilities affected, including city utilities, such as those furnishing
electric power and telephone service. Where railway tracks are to be crossed,
the mover shall make necessary arrangement for the crossing and shall certify
that he/she has the approval of the proper railroad officials.
   (B)   The Building Official may require the plans and specifications as he/
she finds necessary to insure that the building, at its new site, if within the
city, will meet these requirements.
('78 Code, § 6-32) (Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64)
§ 150.043 INSPECTION BEFORE PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   The Building Official shall inspect the building before issuing a permit for
moving, and if he/she deems the building to be in a condition that would make
it unsafe or dangerous to move over public streets or grounds; or if the
building does not reasonably meet the requirements of this code and other
building regulations pertaining thereto and cannot be made to meet the
requirements at its new site, if within the city; no permit shall be issued.
('78 Code, § 6-33) (Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64)
§ 150.044 INSURANCE AND BOND.
   (A)   Before any permit for the moving of a building is granted by the
Building Official, the person applying therefor shall have on file, in the City
Secretary's office, a certificate showing that the person has taken out and is
maintaining automobile bodily injury and property damage liability insurance
and owner's and contractor's protective liability insurance as follows:
automobile, truck, trailer and dolly bodily liability insurance in an amount of
not less than $25,000 for injuries, including accidental death, to any one
person, and in an amount of not less than $50,000 on account of one accident
and property damage insurance in an amount of not less than $50,000.
   (B)   No person shall move any building for which a permit is required for
moving a building in the city until the person shall first have on file with
the City Secretary a satisfactory surety bond in the sum of $1,000 approved by
the City Manager. The bond shall be conditioned for the moving of buildings in
accordance with the ordinance of the city regulating same and shall provide for
the indemnification of the city for all damages or liability that may accrue to
or against it by reason of the moving of buildings by or under the direction of
the maker of the bond. The bond shall be submitted to the Building Official for
filing with the City Secretary after approval by the City Manager and shall be
maintained by renewal as long as the maker is engaged in the business of moving
buildings.
('78 Code, § 6-34) (Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64; Ord. 163A, passed 3-22-66)
Penalty, see § 150.099
§ 150.045 PERMIT TO STATE CONDITION OF MOVING; EXPEDITIOUS OPERATION.
   (A)   A permit issued by the Building Official to a house mover shall state
specifically the conditions to be complied with in moving and shall designate
the route to be taken, and in no case shall streets, alleys, avenues or public
grounds be used for that purpose unless same are on the route designated in the
permit.
   (B)   The moving of a building under a permit when commenced shall be
continuous during all hours of the day and/or night unless the removal is
stopped by conditions beyond the control of the mover, in which case the mover
shall immediately notify the Building Official. Where the moving of a building
has been stopped, the building shall not be left unattended, but the mover
shall at all times have watchmen or flagmen present at the structure to
maintain proper warning signals and lights.
('78 Code, § 6-35) (Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64)
Penalty, see § 150.099
§ 150.046 CARE IN OPERATION; REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   All house movers shall proceed in a careful manner with the moving of a
building and shall not in any manner injure or destroy trees, grass plots,
signs, curbing or sidewalks, nor in any manner interfere with the private
property of individuals. The Building Official shall have the power to revoke
any permit whenever in his/her judgment a house mover is proceeding in a
reckless and careless manner in the removal of a building.
('78 Code, § 6-36) (Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64)
Penalty, see § 150.099
§ 150.047 REPAIR OF DAMAGE.
   Every person receiving a moving permit from the Building Official shall,
within one day after the building has reached its destination in the city, or
has reached the city limits, report that fact to the Building Official, who
shall thereupon inspect the streets, alleys, avenues and public grounds over
which the building has been moved and ascertain the condition thereof. If the
moving of the building has caused any damage to the streets, alleys, avenues or
public grounds or to trees, traffic signals, street lights, sidewalks or other
improvements properly located thereon, the house mover shall forthwith place
same in good repair as they were before the permit was granted. Upon his/her
failure to do so within ten days thereafter, the Building Official may cause
the necessary repairs to be made, and the mover shall be held responsible for
payment of costs. Future permits shall be withheld from the mover until
satisfactory settlement of claims for damages have been made and recovery by
the city of the damages shall be had out of the bond or insurance.
('78 Code, § 6-37) (Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64)
Penalty, see § 150.099
§ 150.048 POLICE APPROVAL; COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Before proceeding with the moving of a building over any street,
alley, avenue or public grounds, the holder of a permit from the Building
Official shall file a copy of the permit with the Police Department, which
shall designate the time of day during which the moving shall be accomplished
and instruct the movers in the regulations and requirements designed to reduce
traffic congestion and hazards.
   (B)   The mover shall provide proper warning lights at all extreme corners
of the building or as directed by the police and shall provide flagmen when the
police deem it necessary.
('78 Code, § 6-38) (Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64)
Penalty, see § 150.099
§ 150.049 NOTICE TO FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   Every house mover shall report to the Fire Chief, or his/her assistant at
the central fire station, the time at which the moving of a building or
structure is to start and shall give the route to be followed and the estimated
approximate time period the building or structure will be on a public street,
alley or avenue. If for some reason it is found necessary to leave the building
or structure to stand in a street, alley or avenue for more than one hour
during the night, the exact location shall be immediately reported to the Fire
Chief or his/her assistant.
('78 Code, § 6-39) (Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64)
Penalty, see § 150.099
§ 150.050 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person found to be moving any building on the streets of the city
without first having provided insurance and bond coverage, without having
procured requisite inspection, without having procured a permit, without having
procured police approval or without having given notice to the Fire Department,
each or all as required by the terms of this subchapter, shall be prohibited
from moving the building from the point beyond where the person is found moving
the building until the person first complies with the requisites of this
subchapter.
('78 Code, § 6-40(a)) (Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64; Ord. 519, passed 11-28-83;
Ord. 773, passed 4-11-88)
Penalty, see § 150.099
ASBESTOS SURVEY
§ 150.060 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASBESTOS SURVEY. An inspection of a building or facility to determine the
location, quantity and condition of asbestos containing material therein by
taking samples for analysis or by visual inspection.
   COMMERCIAL BUILDING. All other buildings which are not defined herein as
residential buildings.
   DEMOLITION. Operations in which load-bearing structural members of a
building are wrecked or removed.
   RENOVATION. Additions to or alterations of the interior surfaces of a
building for purposes of restoration by removal, repairing and rebuilding.
   RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS. A single family structure primarily used or capable
of being used for human habitation.
(Ord. 1272, passed 8-23-99)
§ 150.061 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   Prior to issuance of a permit to any person for the renovation or demolition
of any commercial building within the city limits, an asbestos survey shall be
conducted of the areas to be renovated or demolished.
(Ord. 1272, passed 8-23-99)
Penalty, see § 150.099
§ 150.062 RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS.
   An asbestos survey shall not be required prior to the issuance of a permit
for the renovation or demolition involving more than two contiguous residential
building sites which are part of a commercial or public project such as an
urban renewal project, a highway construction project, a project to develop a
shopping center or mall, the construction of an industrial facility or other
large private development.
(Ord. 1272, passed 8-23-99)
§ 150.063 COSTS OF SURVEY.
   Any asbestos survey required herein shall be conducted by an individual
licensed by the state to do an asbestos survey. The cost of the asbestos survey
under §§
150.061 and
150.062 shall be borne by the person seeking the permit.
(Ord. 1272, passed 8-23-99)
§ 150.099 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person in violation of any of the terms of §§
150.040 et seq. shall be fined as in a sum not exceeding $500.
('78 Code, § 6-40(b))
   (C)   Any person who shall fail to have performed an asbestos survey as
defined in §
150.060, under the circumstances when required herein by §§
150.061 and
150.062 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $1,000.
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of §
150.006 shall be fined no more than $2,000 for all violations involving zoning,
fire safety or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, and
shall be fined not more than $500 for all other violations of §
150.006. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 163, passed 2-13-64; Ord. 519, passed 11-28-83; Ord. 773, passed 4-11-88;
Ord. 1272, passed 8-23-99; Am. Ord. 1437, passed 6-23-03)
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Statutory authorization
   
151.02   Findings of fact
   
151.03   Approved plats
   
151.04   Statement of purpose
   
151.05   Methods of reducing flood loss
   
151.06   Definitions
   
151.07   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
151.08   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
151.09   Establishment of development permit
   
151.10   Compliance
   
151.11   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.12   Interpretation
   
151.13   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
151.25   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
   
151.26   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
151.27   Permit procedures
   
151.28   Variance procedures
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
151.40   General standards
   
151.41   Specific standards
   
151.42   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
151.43   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones)
   
151.44   Floodways
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control Insurance
Act, Texas Water Code § 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
Therefore, the City of Mansfield Texas does ordain as follows.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)
§ 151.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (a)   The flood hazard areas of Mansfield are subject to periodic
inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (b)   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)
§ 151.03 APPROVED PLATS.
   Platted lots approved prior to the adoption of this chapter with minimum
finished floor elevations will not be affected by the finished floor elevation
requirements of this chapter. Approved finished floor elevation prior to the
adoption of this chapter shall be in compliance with previous ordinance
requirements.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)
§ 151.04 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   (G)   Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)
§ 151.05 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage;
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)
§ 151.06 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan
or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-
velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
   APEX. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow
path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial
fan flooding can occur.
   APPURTENANT STRUCTURE. A structure which is on the same parcel of property
as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to
the use of the principal structure.
   AREA OF FUTURE CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD. The land area that would be
inundated by the 1% annual chance (100 year) flood based on future conditions
hydrology.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual chance
of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may
be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed
rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone
A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE,
AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Zones
A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation
resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that
level in any given year - also called the BASE FLOOD.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or supporting foundation system.
   CRITICAL FEATURE. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. For insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which
has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls,
shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. EXISTING
CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD OR FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
      (2)   the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an
examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or
flood-related erosion hazards.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). See FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY.
   FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source (see definition of flooding).
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a floodplain ordinance, grading  ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which funds
have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent
of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized
flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound
engineering standards.
   FLOOD PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. See REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use, which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior or;
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LEVEE. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirement of § 60.3 of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means structures for which the “start of
construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. See AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION (for other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)).
Includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building,
including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as
well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before “start of construction” of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial
damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to
correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions
or (2) Any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic
structure”.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain
management regulation. (For full requirements see § 60.6 of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations).
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)
(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time
as that documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)
§ 151.07 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the City of Mansfield, Texas.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)
§ 151.08 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled,
“The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Tarrant County, Texas And Incorporated
Areas”, dated September 25, 2009, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps
dated September 25, 2009, “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Johnson County,
Texas And Incorporated Areas”, dated December 4, 2012, with accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Maps dated December 4. 2012, “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
for Ellis County, Texas And Incorporated Areas”, dated June 3. 2013, with
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps dated June 3. 2013, and any revisions
thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)
§ 151.09 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)
§ 151.10 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.11 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)
§ 151.12 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)
§ 151.13 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OR LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.25 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Public Works Director or designee is hereby appointed the Floodplain
Administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and
other appropriate sections of 44 C.F.R. (Emergency Management and Assistance -
National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain
management.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)
§ 151.26 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
   (A)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   Review permit applications to ensure that the proposed building site
project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe
from flooding;
   (C)   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter;
   (D)   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments
of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required;
   (E)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation;
   (F)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State
Coordinating Agency which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and also
the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency;
   (G)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained;
   (H)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with §
151.08, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a
federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of §§
151.40 through
151.44;
   (I)   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain
Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and
AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot at any point within the community; and
   (J)   Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. Chapter 1, § 65.12, of the National
Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in Zones Al-30, AE, and AH on the community’s FIRM which increases
the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided
that the community first completes all of the provisions required by § 65.12.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)
§ 151.27 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to
the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her and may include,
but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
      (1)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
      (2)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure shall be floodproofed;
      (3)   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing
criteria of §
151.41(B)(2);
      (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
      (5)   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with §
151.41(B)(1);
   (B)   Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the Flooplain
Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
      (1)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (3)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (4)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (5)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (6)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      (7)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      (8)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (9)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
      (10)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)
§ 151.28 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The City Council, shall hear and render judgment on requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The City Council shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
   (C)   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the City Council
may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
   (D)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
   (E)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
   (F)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to
and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in §
151.27(B) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/
2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
   (G)   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
chapter, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
chapter (§
151.03).
   (H)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (I)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
   (J)   Prerequisites for granting variances.
      (1)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon: (i) showing a good and
sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that
the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
      (3)   Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
   (K)   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that (i) the criteria outlined in
divisions (A) through (I) of this section are met, and (ii) the structure or
other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during
the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 151.40 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required
for all new construction and substantial improvements:
   (A)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
   (B)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
   (C)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage;
   (D)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding;
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)
§ 151.41 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   (A)   In unnumbered A zones (flood hazard areas without base flood
elevations where use of the best available data is required) it shall be
required that the base flood elevation be established through an engineering
study using fully urbanized hydrology, and such data shall be used for
requiring the lowest floor elevation as specified herein below unless waived by
the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data
has been provided as set forth in (i) §
151.08, (ii) §
151.26(H), or (iii) §
151.42(C), the following provisions are required:
      (1)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement), elevated to three feet above the base flood elevation where FEMA
Flood Insurance Study data exists or two feet above the base flood elevation as
determined by a study using fully urbanized hydrology. A registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this subsection as
proposed in §
151.27(A)(1), is satisfied.
      (2)   Nonresidential construction. new construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to three feet
above the base flood elevation where FEMA Flood Insurance Study data exists or
two feet above the base flood elevation as determined by a study using fully
urbanized hydrology or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect
shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for
the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction
are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this
subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
      (3)   Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and
which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net
area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      (4)   Manufactured homes.
         (a)   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A
on a community’s FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices
which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured
homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
         (b)   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s FIRM on sites (i)
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a
result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest
floor of the manufactured home is elevated to three feet above the base flood
elevation where FEMA Flood Insurance Study data exists or two feet above the
base flood elevation as determined by a study using fully urbanized hydrology
and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
         (c)   Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with
Zones Al-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM that are not subject to the
provisions of division (B)(4) of this section be elevated so that either:
            1.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to three
feet above the base flood elevation where FEMA Flood Insurance Study data
exists or two feet above the base flood elevation as determined by a study
using fully urbanized hydrology; or
            2.   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers
or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less
than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      (5)   Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s FIRM either (i) be on
the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or (ii) be fully licensed and
ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements of §
151.27(A), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for “manufactured
homes” in division (B)(4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)
§ 151.42 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with §§
151.02 through
151.04 of this chapter.
   (B)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain
development permit requirements of §
151.09; §
151.27; and the provisions of §§
151.40 through
151.44.
   (C)   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever
is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to §
151.08 or §
151.26(H).
   (D)   Base flood elevation data shall be generated by a detailed engineering
study using fully urbanized hydrology for all Zone A areas, within 100 feet of
the contour lines of Zone A areas, and other streams not mapped by FEMA, as
indicated on the community’s FIRM.
   (E)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.
   (F)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)
§ 151.43 STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES).
   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in §
151.08, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special
flood hazards associated with flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable,
and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply.
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to three feet
above the base flood elevation where FEMA Flood Insurance Study data exists or
two feet above the base flood elevation as determined by a study using fully
urbanized hydrology or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least three feet if no
depth number is specified).
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential
structures:
      (1)   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to three feet
above the base flood elevation where FEMA Flood Insurance Study data exists or
two feet above the base flood elevation as determined by a study using fully
urbanized hydrology or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified); or
      (2)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed
so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO Zone, or below the Base
Flood Elevation in an AH Zone, level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads of effects of buoyancy.
   (C)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this
section, as proposed in §
151.27 are satisfied.
   (D)   Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)
§ 151.44 FLOODWAYS.
   Floodways are designated as areas of special flood hazard established in §
151.08. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity
of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion
potential, the following provisions shall apply.
   (A)   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   (B)   If division (A) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of §§
151.40 through
151.44.
   (C)   Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. Chapter 1, § 65.12, of the National
Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may permit encroachments
within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base
flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the
provisions required by § 65.12.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee
thereof who violates any provision of this chapter or fails to comply with any
of its requirements shall upon conviction be found guilty of a misdemeanor and
be fined not more than $2,000 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all
costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day a violation occurs is a
separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. OR-1871-13, passed 4-8-13)
CHAPTER 152: EROSION CONTROL
Section
   
152.01   Adoption of erosion control regulations
§ 152.01 ADOPTION OF EROSION CONTROL REGULATIONS.
   The erosion control ordinance, copies of which are on file in the office of
the City Secretary, is adopted and incorporated as part of this code of
ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Ord. 1089, passed 9-11-95)
CHAPTER 153: IMPACT FEES
Section
General Provisions
   
153.01   Short title
   
153.02   Intent
   
153.03   Statutory authorization
   
153.04   Definitions
   
153.05   Applicability of impact fees
   
153.06   Impact fees as conditions of development approval
   
153.07   Establishment of roadway service areas
   
153.08   Land use assumptions
   
153.09   Service units
   
153.10   Impact fees per service unit
   
153.11   Roadway Improvement Plan
   
153.12   Updates to plan and revision of fees
Impact Fees; Use of Proceeds
   
153.25   Assessment of impact fees
   
153.26   Calculation of impact fees
   
153.27   Collection of impact fees
   
153.28   (Reserved)
   
153.29   Offsets and credits against impact fees
   
153.30   Establishment of accounts and records
   
153.31   Use of proceeds of capital recovery fee accounts
Administration and Enforcement
   
153.45   Appeals
   
153.46   Refunds
   
153.47   Functions of Advisory Committee
   
153.48   Agreement for capital improvements
   
153.49   Use of other financing mechanisms
   
153.50   Impact fees as additional and supplemental regulation
   
153.51   Relief procedures
Cross reference:
   Sewer and water impact fees, see §§
51.095 et seq.
   Subdivisions, see
Ch. 154
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the Roadway Impact Fee Ordinance.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)
§ 153.02 INTENT.
   This chapter is intended to impose roadway impact fees, as established in
this chapter, in order to finance public facilities, the demand for which is
generated by new development in the designated service area or areas.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)
§ 153.03 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The city is authorized to enact this chapter by the Texas Local Government
Code, Ch. 395, and its successors, which authorize home-rule cities, among
others, to enact or impose impact fees on land within their corporate
boundaries or extraterritorial jurisdictions, as charges or assessments imposed
against new development in order to generate revenue for funding or recouping
the costs of capital improvements or facility expansions necessitated by and
attributable to the new development and by the City Charter. The provisions of
this chapter shall not be construed to limit the power of the city to adopt the
chapter pursuant to any other source of local authority, nor to utilize any
other methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set
forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this chapter.
Guidelines may be developed by resolution or otherwise to implement and
administer this chapter.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)
§ 153.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASSESSMENT. The determination of the amount of the maximum impact fee per
service unit which can be imposed on new development pursuant to this chapter.
   BUILDING PERMIT. Written permission issued by the city for the construction,
repair, alteration or addition to a structure.
   CAPITAL CONSTRUCTION COST OF SERVICE. Costs of constructing capital
improvements or facility expansions, including and limited to the construction
contract price, surveying and  engineering fees, land acquisition costs
(including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees and expert
witness fees) and the fees actually paid or contracted to be paid to an
independent qualified engineer or financial consultant preparing or updating
the Capital Improvements Plan who is not an employee of the city.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS ADVISORY COMMITTEE (ADVISORY COMMITTEE). Advisory
committee, appointed by the City Council, consisting of at least five members,
not less than 50% of which shall be representatives of the real estate,
development or building industries which are not employees of the city, and if
impact fees are to be applied within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
city, including one member representing the extraterritorial jurisdiction,
which committee is appointed to regularly review and update the capital
improvements program in accordance with the requirements of the Local
Government Code, Ch. 395, and its successors.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM (CIP). Plan which identifies water and
wastewater capital improvements or facility expansions pursuant to which impact
fees may be assessed.
   CITY PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR (DIRECTOR). Public Works Director of the city.
   COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT. All development which is neither residential nor
industrial.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN (MASTER PLAN). The comprehensive long-range plan, adopted
by the City Council, which is intended to guide the growth and development of
the city which includes analysis, recommendations and proposals for the city
regarding such topics as population, economy, housing, transportation,
community facilities and land use.
   CREDIT. The amount of the reduction of a impact fee for fees, payments or
charges for the same type of capital improvements for which the fee has been
assessed.
   EXISTING DEVELOPMENT. All development within the service area which has a
water or wastewater tap on the city's water or sewer system as of the date of
the adoption of this chapter.
   FACILITY EXPANSION. The expansion of the capacity of an existing facility
which serves the same function as an otherwise necessary new capital
improvement in order that the existing facility may serve new development.
FACILITY EXPANSION does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization or
expansion of an existing facility to better serve existing development.
   FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT. The map, drawing or chart meeting the requirements
of the city's subdivision ordinance on which is provided a subdivider's plan of
a subdivision, and which has received final approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission or City Council and which is recorded with the office of the County
Clerk.
   GROWTH-RELATED COST. Capital construction costs of service related to
providing additional service units to new development, either from excess
capacity in existing facilities, from facility expansions or from new capital
facilities. Growth-related costs do not include the following:
      (1)   Construction, acquisition or expansion of public facilities or
assets other than capital improvements or facility expansions identified in the
Capital Improvements Plan.
      (2)   Repair, operation or maintenance of existing or new capital
improvements or facility expansions.
      (3)   Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing capital
improvements to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety,
efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards.
      (4)   Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing capital
improvements to provide better service to existing development.
      (5)   Administrative and operating costs of the city.
      (6)   Principal payments and interest or other finance charges on bonds
or other indebtedness, except for such payments for growth-related facilities
contained in the capital improvements program.
   IMPACT FEE. Fee to be imposed upon new development, calculated based upon
the costs of facilities in proportion to development creating the need for the
facilities. IMPACT FEES do not include dedication of rights-of-way or
easements, or construction or dedication of site-related water distribution or
wastewater collection facilities or internal roadways required by other
ordinances of the city code; or lot or acreage fees placed in trust funds for
the purpose of reimbursing developers for oversizing or constructing water or
sewer mains or lines.
   INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT. Development which will be assigned to the industrial
customer class of the water or wastewater utilities; generally development in
which goods are manufactured, or development which is ancillary to the
manufacturing activity.
   LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS. Description of the service area and projections of
changes in land uses, densities, intensities and population therein over at
least a ten-year period, adopted by the city, as may be amended from time to
time, upon which the Capital Improvements Plan is based.
   LIVING UNIT EQUIVALENT (LUE). Basis for establishing equivalency among and
within various customer classes and land uses.
   NEW DEVELOPMENT. Subdivision of land; the construction, reconstruction,
redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of
any structure; or any use or extension of the use of land; any of which
increases the number of service units for water, wastewater or roadway service
units. New development includes the sale of water taps resulting from the
conversion of an individual well to the city's water utility and includes the
sale of wastewater taps resulting from the  conversion of an individual septic
or other individual waste disposal system to the city's wastewater utility.
   OFFSET. The amount of the reduction of a capital recovery fee designed to
fairly reflect the value of system-related facilities, pursuant to rules herein
established or administrative guidelines provided and funded by a developer
pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations or requirements.
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. A lot developed for use and occupancy as a
residence or residences, according to the city's zoning ordinance.
   ROADWAY FACILITY. Improvement for providing roadway service including, but
not limited to pavement, right-of-way, drainage and traffic-control devices.
ROADWAY FACILITY excludes roadways which are constructed by developers, the
costs of which are reimbursed from charges paid by subsequent users of the
facilities. ROADWAY FACILITIES also exclude dedication of rights-of-way or
easements or construction or dedication of off-site roadways required by valid
ordinances of the city and necessitated and attributable to the new
development.
   ROADWAY FACILITY EXPANSION. Expansion of the capacity of any existing
roadway improvement for the purpose of serving new development, not including
the repair, maintenance, modernization or expansion of the existing roadway
facility to serve existing development.
   ROADWAY IMPROVEMENTS PLAN. Portion of the CIP, as may be amended from time
to time, which identifies the roadway facilities or roadway expansions and
their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable to
new development and which are to be financed in whole or in part through the
imposition of roadway impact fees pursuant to this chapter.
   SERVICE AREA. Area within the corporate boundaries to be served by the
capital improvements or facility expansions specified in the Capital
Improvements Plan applicable to the service area.
   SERVICE UNIT. Standardized measure of consumption, use, generation or
discharge attributable to an individual unit of development calculated in
accordance with generally accepted engineering or planning standards for a
particular category of capital improvements or facility expansions.
   SITE-RELATED FACILITY. Improvement or facility which is for the primary use
or benefit of a new development and/or which is for the primary purpose of safe
and adequate provision of water, wastewater or roadway facilities to serve the
new development, which is not included in the Capital Improvements Plan, and
for which the developer or property owner is solely responsible under
subdivision and other applicable regulations.
   SYSTEM-RELATED FACILITY. A capital improvement or facility expansion which
is designated in the Capital Improvements Plan and which is not a site-related
facility. A system-related facility may include a capital improvement which is
located off-site, within or on the perimeter of the development site.
   TAP PURCHASE. The filing with the city of a written application for a water
or wastewater tap and the acceptance of applicable fees by the city. The term
TAP PURCHASE shall not be applicable to a meter purchased for and exclusively
dedicated to fire protection.
   WASTEWATER FACILITY. Improvement for providing wastewater service,
including, but not limited to land or easements, treatment facilities, lift
stations or interceptor mains. Wastewater facility excludes wastewater lines or
mains which are constructed by developers, the costs of which are reimbursed
from charges paid by subsequent users of the facilities and which are
maintained in dedicated trusts. Wastewater facilities also exclude dedication
of rights-of-way or easements or construction or dedication of on-site
wastewater collection facilities required by valid ordinances of the city and
necessitated by and attributable to the new development.
   WASTEWATER FACILITY EXPANSION. Expansion of the capacity of any existing
wastewater improvement for the purpose of serving new development, not
including the repair, maintenance, modernization or expansion of an existing
wastewater facility to serve existing development.
   WASTEWATER IMPROVEMENTS PLAN. Portion of the CIP, as may be amended from
time to time, which identifies the wastewater facilities or wastewater
expansions and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are
attributable to new development, for a period not to exceed ten years, which
are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of wastewater
impact fees pursuant to this chapter.
   WATER FACILITY. Improvement for providing water service, including, but not
limited to land or easements, water supply facilities, treatment facilities,
pumping facilities, storage facilities or transmission mains. Water facility
excludes water lines or mains which are constructed by developers, the costs of
which are reimbursed from charges paid by subsequent users of the facilities
and which are maintained in dedicated trusts. Water facilities also exclude
dedication of rights-of-way or easements or construction or dedication of on-
site water distribution facilities required by valid ordinances of the city and
necessitated by and attributable to the new development.
   WATER FACILITY EXPANSION. Expansion of the capacity of any existing water
improvement for the purpose of serving new development, not including the
repair, maintenance, modernization or expansion of an existing water facility
to serve existing development.
   WATER IMPROVEMENTS PLAN. Portion of the CIP, as may be amended from time to
time, which identifies the water facilities or water expansions and their
associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable to new
development, for a period not to exceed ten years, which are to be financed in
whole or in part through the imposition of water impact fees pursuant to this
chapter.
   VEHICLE MILE. A unit used to express both supply and demand provided by, and
placed on the roadway system. A combination of a number of vehicles traveling
during a given time period and the distance in which these vehicles travel in
miles.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. OR-2429-25, passed 11-10-25)
§ 153.05 APPLICABILITY OF IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   This chapter shall be uniformly applicable to new development which
occurs within the corporate limits of the city and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction.
   (B)   No new development shall be exempt from the assessment of impact fees
unless expressly made so by the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)
§ 153.06 IMPACT FEES AS CONDITIONS OF DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL.
   No application for new development shall be approved within the City without
assessment of impact fees pursuant to this chapter, and no water and wastewater
tap shall be issued and no building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be
issued unless the applicant has paid the impact fees imposed by and calculated
hereunder unless expressly executed by a provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)
§ 153.07 ESTABLISHMENT OF ROADWAY SERVICE AREAS.
   (A)   (1)   There are hereby established roadway service areas as depicted
on Exhibit A, attached to Ordinance No. OR-2280-22, and incorporated herein by
reference.
      (2)   The boundaries of the roadway service areas may be amended from
time to time, and new roadway service areas may be delineated, pursuant to the
procedures in division (B) of this section.
   (B)   The roadway service areas are established as shown on the service area
map, which is Exhibit A, incorporated herein by reference, for this chapter.
Additions to any service area may be designated by the City Council consistent
with the procedure set forth in the Local Government Code, Ch. 395, and its
successors.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. 1509, passed 11-22-04; Am. Ord. OR-1757-
09, passed 11-23-09; Am. Ord. OR-1955-15, passed 7-27-15; Am. Ord. OR-2280-22,
passed 11-14-22)
§ 153.08 LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS.
   Land use assumptions used in the development of the impact fees are
contained in Exhibit B, incorporated herein by reference, of this chapter.
These assumptions may be revised by the City Council according to the procedure
set forth in the Local Government Code, Ch. 395, and its successors. The
updated land use assumptions set forth in Exhibit B, attached to Ordinance No.
OR-2280-22, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. 1509, passed 11-22-04; Am. Ord. OR-1757-
09, passed 11-23-09; Am. Ord. OR-1955-15, passed 7-27-15; Am. Ord. OR-2280-22,
passed 11-14-22)
§ 153.09 SERVICE UNITS.
   (A)   Service units are established in accordance with generally accepted
engineering and planning standards.
   (B)   A single family residential household will generate 3.76 vehicle miles
of demand. Other developments will generate demand based upon size and type of
development. The demand factors are set forth in the updated Land Use/Vehicle-
Mile Equivalency Table, as set forth in Exhibit C, attached hereto and
incorporated herein by reference.
   (C)   The City Council may revise the service units designation according to
the procedure set forth in the Local Government Code, Ch. 395, and its
successors.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. 1509, passed 11-22-04; Am. Ord. OR-1757-
09, passed 11-23-09; Am. Ord. OR-1955-15, passed 7-27-15; Am. Ord. OR-2280-22,
passed 11-14-22)
§ 153.10 IMPACT FEES PER SERVICE UNIT.
   (A)   The updated maximum assessable roadway impact fees per service unit as
set forth in Exhibit D attached to Ordinance No. OR-2306-23, and the updated
current collected roadway impact fees per service unit as set forth in Exhibit
E attached to Ordinance No. OR-2398-24, are incorporated herein by reference.
This amendment shall also apply to § 153.25 of this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   The maximum impact fee per service unit for each service area
shall be computed by dividing the growth-related capital construction cost of
service in the service area, identified in the Capital Improvements Plan for
that category of capital improvements, by the total number of projected service
units anticipated within the service area which are necessitated by and
attributable to new development, based on the land use assumptions for that
service area. In addition, the calculation of the maximum impact fee per
service unit shall comply with the provisions of Local Government Code, §§
395.014(a)(7) and 395.015. Maximum assessable impact fees per service unit for
each service area shall be established by category of capital improvements and
shall be set forth in Exhibit D to this chapter, incorporated herein by
reference.
      (2)   Maximum assessable impact fees in Exhibit D may be amended by the
City Council according to the procedure set forth in Local Government Code, Ch.
395, and its successors.
      (3)   Current collected fees shall be set forth in Exhibit E to this
chapter, incorporated herein by reference, and shall not exceed the maximum
fees also set forth in Exhibit D. Current collected fees may be amended by the
City Council from time to time, provided they do not exceed the maximum
assessable fees.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. 1509, passed 11-22-04; Am. Ord. OR-1757-
09, passed 11-23-09; Am. Ord. OR-1955-15, passed 7-27-15; Am. Ord. OR-2280-22,
passed 11-14-22; Am. Ord. OR-2306-23, passed 6-12-23; Am. Ord. OR-2398-24,
passed 12-9-24)
§ 153.11 ROADWAY IMPROVEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   The updated Roadway Improvement Plan for the city as set forth in
Exhibit F attached to Ordinance No. OR-2280-22, is hereto incorporated by
reference herein.
   (B)   The Roadway Improvement Plan may be amended from time to time,
pursuant to the procedures set forth in the Local Government Code, Ch. 395, and
its successors.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. 1509, passed 11-22-04; Am. Ord. OR-1757-
09, passed 11-23-09; Am. Ord. OR-1955-15, passed 7-27-15; Am. Ord. OR-2280-22,
passed 11-14-22)
§ 153.12 UPDATES TO PLAN AND REVISION OF FEES.
   The city shall review the land use assumptions and Capital Improvements Plan
for roadway facilities at least every five years. The City Council shall then
make a determination of whether changes to the land use assumptions, Capital
Improvements Plan or impact fees are needed and shall, in accordance with the
procedures set forth in the Local Government Code, Ch. 395, or any successor
statute, either update the fees or make a determination that no update is
necessary.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. 1509, passed 11-22-04)
IMPACT FEES; USE OF PROCEEDS
§ 153.25 ASSESSMENT OF IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   Residential.
      (1)   The approval of any residential subdivision of land or of any new
residential development shall include as a condition the assessment of the
impact fee applicable to the development.
      (2)   Assessment of the impact fee for any new residential development
shall be made as follows.
         (a)   For a development which is submitted for approval pursuant to
the city's subdivision regulations following the effective date of this
chapter, assessment shall be at the time of final plat approval and shall be
the value of the impact fee per service unit then in effect, as provided in
Exhibit E, as set forth in §
153.10. The city may provide the subdivider with a copy of Exhibit E prior to
final plat approval, but such shall not constitute assessment within the
meaning of this chapter.
         (b)   For a development which has received final plat approval prior
to the effective date of this chapter and for which no replatting is necessary
prior to building permit issuance, assessment shall be upon building permit
issuance and shall be the value of the roadway impact fee per service unit set
forth in Exhibit E.
      (3)   Following assessment of the impact fee pursuant to subsection (A)
(2), no additional impact fees or increases thereof shall be assessed against
that development unless the number of service units increases, as set forth
under §
153.09.
      (4)   Following the lapse or expiration of approval of a residential
plat, a new assessment must be performed at the time a new application for
subdivision approval is filed.
   (B)   Nonresidential development.
      (1)   The character of nonresidential development does not lend itself to
the assessment of a roadway impact fee at the time of subdivision plat
processing. It is frequently not possible for a land owner or developer to
identify the specific type of use that will occur in a nonresidential
development at the subdivision platting point because a lease with a
perspective tenant may not yet have been executed.
      (2)   Assessment of the impact fee for any new nonresidential development
shall be made as follows.
         (a)   For a development which is submitted for approval pursuant to
the city subdivision regulations following the effective date of this chapter,
assessment shall be at the time of recordation of the final plat. The
assessment shall be at the maximum assessable impact fees per service unit then
in effect, as provided in Exhibit D to this chapter. The fee to be collected at
the time of building permit issuance shall be at the current collected roadway
impact fee per land use category per service area as provided in §
153.26.
         (b)   For a development which has received preliminary or final plat
approval pursuant to the city subdivision regulations before the effective date
of this chapter, an impact fee shall be assessed and collected on development
within the approved subdivision plat at the time of building permit issuance,
except for one year after the effective date of this chapter, the fee to be
collected at the time of building permit issuance shall be at the current
collected roadway impact fee per land use category per service area previously
adopted via Ordinance No. OR-1955-15.
      (3)   Following the assessment of the impact fee for nonresidential
development pursuant to the provisions of this section, no additional impact
fees or increases thereof shall be assessed against the development unless the
number of service units increases.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. 1509, passed 11-22-04; Am. Ord. OR-1757-
09, passed 11-23-09; Am. Ord. OR-1955-15, passed 7-27-15; Am. Ord. OR-2280-22,
passed 11-14-22; Am. Ord. OR-2306-23, passed 6-12-23)
§ 153.26 CALCULATION OF IMPACT FEES.
   Following the request for new development as provided in §
153.25 of this chapter, the city shall compute impact fees due for the new
development in the following manner.
   (A)   In calculating roadway impact fees for a new development, it is first
necessary to identify in which service area the development is located and then
classify the development in one of the land use categories depicted in the
updated current collected roadway impact fee per land use category per service
area as set forth in Exhibit G of Ordinance No. OR-2398-24, incorporated and
made a part hereof by reference.
   (B)   The final determination of the roadway impact fee to be charged each
new development is then calculated by multiplying the updated current collected
roadway impact fee for the corresponding service area and land use category
identified above by the total development units (in number of dwelling units,
square footage in 1,000 square foot increments or other development unit
increments as indicated in the second column of Exhibit G of Ordinance No. OR-
2398-24.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. 1509, passed 11-22-04; Am. Ord. OR-1757-
09, passed 11-23-09; Am. Ord. OR-1955-15, passed 7-27-15; Am. Ord. OR-2280-22,
passed 11-14-22; Am. Ord. OR-2306-23, passed 6-12-23; Am. Ord. OR-2398-24,
passed 12-9-24)
§ 153.27 COLLECTION OF IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   No final residential plat shall be signed and released for recording
until all impact fees, including roadway impact fees, have been assessed except
as provided otherwise by contract. For a residential development which is
submitted for preliminary plat approval pursuant to the city's subdivision
regulations subsequent to the effective date of this chapter, impact fees shall
be assessed at the time of final plat approval.
   (B)   All roadway impact fees shall be collected for residential development
at the time of building permit issuance.
   (C)   All roadway impact fees shall be collected for nonresidential
development at time of building permit issuance.
   (D)   For one year after the effective date of this section, the roadway
impact fees to be collected from development on lots within a subdivision that
has either preliminary or final plat approval from the city before the
effective date of this section shall be at the current collected roadway impact
fee per land use category per service area previously adopted via Ordinance No.
OR-1955-15. Following the expiration of one year from the effective date of
this section, development on lots previously platted shall be subject to the
current collected roadway impact fee per land use category per service area
then in effect, as provided in Exhibit F to Ordinance OR-2280-22.
   (E)   The city may, at its sole discretion, establish a different date of
fee collection than those provided in this section.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. OR-1757-09, passed 11-23-09; Am. Ord. OR-
1955-15, passed 7-27-15; Am. Ord. OR-2280-22, passed 11-14-22)
§ 153.28 (RESERVED).
§ 153.29 OFFSETS AND CREDITS AGAINST IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   The city may offset the present value of any system-related
facilities, pursuant to rules established in this section, which have been
dedicated to and have been received by the city, including the value of capital
improvements constructed pursuant to an agreement with the city as set forth in
§
153.48, against the value of the impact fee due for that category of capital
improvement.
   (B)   Any subdivision which has paid a perimeter street fee pursuant to the
provisions of the city subdivision ordinance shall be exempt from the payment
of a roadway impact fee for that development as the City Council has determined
that it is appropriate to give a 100% credit for roadway fee payments to such
developments. A development that has received a refund of a perimeter street
fee payment pursuant to § 10B of the city subdivision ordinance shall not be
entitled to such a credit. A subdivision that has received only preliminary
plat approval on the effective date of this chapter and has been identified as
being subject to the payment of a perimeter street fee prior to final plat
approval shall be required to pay the perimeter street fee prior to final plat
release but shall not be assessed roadway impact fees if the perimeter street
fee is paid within 12 months following the effective date of this chapter. A
development that has not paid its perimeter street fee within 12 months
following the effective date of this chapter shall lose its exemption and shall
be assessed an impact fee in the same manner as any other development of a
comparable character. Contemporaneously with the consideration of this chapter,
the City Council is contemplating an amendment of the subdivision control
ordinance to delete the requirement for certain subdivisions to pay perimeter
street fees unless the fee has already been assessed in a preliminary or final
plat approval prior to the effective day of this chapter.
   (C)   The city shall credit impact, pro rata, acreage or lot fees which have
been paid pursuant to other city ordinances prior to the effective date of this
chapter against the value of impact fees due for that category of capital
improvement, subject to guidelines established by the city.
   (D)   All offsets and credits against impact fees shall be subject to the
following limitations and shall be granted based on this chapter and additional
standards promulgated by the city which may be adopted as administrative
guidelines.
      (1)   No offset or credit shall be given for the dedication or
construction of site-related facilities.
      (2)   The unit costs used to calculate the offsets shall not exceed those
assumed for the capital improvements included in the Capital Improvements Plan
for the category of facility within the service area for which the impact fee
is imposed.
      (3)   If an offset or credit applicable to a plat has not been exhausted
within ten years from the date of the acquisition of the first tap purchase
made after the effective date of this chapter or within such period as may be
otherwise designated by contract, the offset or credit shall lapse.
      (4)   In no event will the city reimburse the property owner or developer
for an offset or credit when no impact fees for the new development can be
collected pursuant to this chapter or for any value exceeding the total impact
fees due for the development for that category of capital improvement, unless
otherwise agreed to by the city.
   (E)   An applicant for new development must apply for an offset or credit
against impact fees due for the development either at or before the time of fee
payment, unless the city agrees to a different time. The applicant shall file a
petition for offsets or credits with the city on a form provided for such
purpose. The contents of the petition shall be established by administrative
guidelines. The city must provide the applicant, in writing, with a decision on
the offset or credit request, including the reasons for the decision. The
decision shall specify the maximum value of the offset or credit which may be
applied against an impact fee, which value and the date of the determination
shall be associated with the plat for the new development.
   (F)   The available offset or credit associated with the plat shall be
applied against an impact fee in the following manner.
      (1)   The offset or credit shall be prorated equally among all living
units equivalent (LUE), as calculated in §
153.09, and remain applicable to the LUE's, to be applied at time of filing and
acceptance of an application for a building permit or tap purchase, as
appropriate, against impact fees due.
      (2)   If the total number of LUE's used by the city in the original
offset or credit calculation described in subsection (F)(1) is eventually
exceeded by the number of total LUE's realized by the actual development, the
city may, at its sole discretion, collect the full impact fee exclusive of any
associated offset or credits for the excess LUE's.
      (3)   At its sole discretion, the city may authorize alternative credit
or offset agreements upon petition by the owner in accordance with guidelines
promulgated by the city.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)
§ 153.30 ESTABLISHMENT OF ACCOUNTS AND RECORDS.
   (A)   The city shall establish separate interest-bearing accounts in a bank
authorized to receive deposits of city funds for each major category of capital
facility for which an impact fee is imposed pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Interest earned by each account shall be credited to that account and
shall be used solely for the purposes specified for funds authorized in §
153.31.
   (C)   The city shall establish adequate financial and accounting controls to
ensure that impact fees disbursed from the account are utilized solely for the
purposes authorized in §
153.31. Disbursement of funds shall be authorized by the city at such times as
are reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this chapter;
provided, however, that any fee paid shall be expended within a reasonable
period of time, but not to exceed ten years from the date the fee is deposited
into the account.
   (D)   The city shall maintain and keep adequate financial records for each
such account, which shall show the source and disbursement of all revenues,
which shall account for all monies received and which shall ensure that the
disbursement of funds from each account shall be used solely and exclusively
for the provision of uses specified in the capital improvements program as
system-related capital projects. The City Finance Department shall also
maintain such records as are necessary to ensure that refunds are appropriately
made under the provision in §
153.46 of this chapter and any other information as may be necessary for the
proper implementation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)
§ 153.31 USE OF PROCEEDS OF CAPITAL RECOVERY FEE ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   The impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter may be used to
finance or to recoup capital construction costs of service. Impact fees may
also be used to pay the principal sum and interest and other finance costs on
bonds, notes or other obligations issued by or on behalf of the city to finance
the capital improvements or facilities expansions.
   (B)   Impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall not be used to
pay for any of the following expenses:
      (1)   Construction, acquisition or expansion of capital improvements or
assets other than those identified for the appropriate utility in the Capital
Improvements Plan.
      (2)   Repair, operation or maintenance of existing or new capital
improvements or facilities expansions.
      (3)   Upgrading, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements to
serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency,
environmental or regulatory standards.
      (4)   Upgrading, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements to
provide better service to existing development; provided however, that impact
fees may be used to pay the costs of upgrading, expanding or replacing existing
capital improvements in order to meet the need for new capital improvements
generated by new development.
      (5)   Administrative and operating costs of the city.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 153.45 APPEALS.
   (A)   The property owner or applicant for new development may appeal the
following decisions to the Director, or his/her designate:
      (1)   The applicability of an impact fee to the development.
      (2)   The value of the impact fee due.
      (3)   The availability or the value of an offset or credit.
      (4)   The application of an offset or credit against an impact fee due.
      (5)   The amount of the refund due, if any.
   (B)   All appeals shall be taken within 30 days of notice of the action from
which the appeal is taken.
   (C)   The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate that the
value of the fee or the value of the offset or credit was not calculated
according to the applicable impact fee schedule or the guidelines established
for determining offsets and credits.
   (D)   The appellant may appeal the decision of the Director to the Council.
A notice of appeal to the Council must be filed by the applicant with the City
Secretary within 30 days following the Director's decision. If the notice of
appeal is accompanied by a bond or other sufficient surety satisfactory to the
City Attorney in an amount equal to the original determination of the impact
fee due, the development application, subdivision plat, tap purchase or
building permit issuance may be processed while the appeal is pending.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)
§ 153.46 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Any impact fee, or portion thereof, collected pursuant to this chapter
which has not been expended within ten years from the date of payment, shall be
refunded, upon application, to the record owner of the property at the time the
refund is paid, or, if the impact fee was paid by another governmental entity,
to the governmental entity.
   (B)   If a refund is due pursuant to division (A), the city shall pro-rate
the same by dividing the difference between the amount of expenditures and the
amount of the fees collected by the total number of service units actually
developed within the service area for the period to determine the refund due
per service unit. The refund to the record owner or governmental entity shall
be calculated by multiplying the refund due per service unit by the number of
service units for the development for which the fee was paid and interest due
shall be calculated upon that amount.
   (C)   Petition for refunds shall be submitted to the Director on a form
provided by the city for such purpose. Within one month of the date of receipt
of a petition for refund, the Director must provide the petitioner, in writing,
with a decision on the refund request, including the reasons for the decision.
If a refund is due to the petitioner, the Director shall notify the Finance
Director and request that a refund payment be made to the petitioner. The
petitioner may appeal the determination to the Council, as set forth in §
153.45.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)
§ 153.47 FUNCTIONS OF ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   The functions of the Advisory Committee are those set forth in the
Local Government Code, Ch. 395, or any successor statute, and shall include the
following:
      (1)   Advise and assist the city in adopting land use assumptions.
      (2)   Review the Capital Improvements Plan regarding water, wastewater
and roadway capital improvements and file written comments thereon.
      (3)   Monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital improvements
program.
      (4)   Advise the city of the need to update or revise the land use
assumptions, capital improvements program and impact fees.
      (5)   File a semiannual report evaluating the progress of the city in
achieving the Capital Improvements Plans and identifying any problems in
implementing the plans or administering the impact fees.
   (B)   The city shall make available to the Advisory Committee any
professional reports prepared in the development or implementation of the
Capital Improvements Plan.
   (C)   The Committee shall adopt procedural rules for carrying out its
duties.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)
§ 153.48 AGREEMENT FOR CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS.
   The City Council may authorize the owner of a new development to construct
or finance some of the public improvements identified in the CIP. In the case
of the approval, the property owner must enter into an agreement with the city
prior to fee collection. The agreement shall be on a form approved by the city
and shall establish the estimated cost of improvement, the schedule for
initiation and completion of the improvement, a requirement that the
improvement shall be completed to city standards and any other terms and
conditions the city deems necessary. The Director shall review the improvement
plan, verify costs and time schedules, determine if the improvement is
contained in the CIP and determine the method and timing of reimbursing the
owner for construction costs from impact fee or other revenues.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)
§ 153.49 USE OF OTHER FINANCING MECHANISMS.
   (A)   The city may finance roadway capital improvements or facilities
expansions designated in the Capital Improvements Plan through the issuance of
bonds, through the formation of public improvement districts or other
assessment districts, or through any other authorized mechanism, in such manner
and subject to such limitations as may be provided by law, in addition to the
use of impact fees.
   (B)   Except as herein otherwise provided, the assessment and collection of
an impact fee shall be additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution
of, any other tax, fee, charge or assessment which is lawfully imposed on and
due against the property.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)
§ 153.50 IMPACT FEES AS ADDITIONAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATION.
   (A)   Impact fees established by this chapter are additional and
supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by
the city on the development of land or the issuance of building permits or the
sale of water or wastewater taps or the issuance of certificates of occupancy.
The fees are intended to be consistent with and to further the policies of
City's Comprehensive Plan, Capital Improvements Plan, zoning ordinance,
subdivision regulations and other city policies, ordinances and resolutions by
which the city seeks to ensure the provision of adequate public facilities in
conjunction with the development of land.
   (B)   This chapter shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of
property, density of development, design and improvement standards and
requirements, or any other aspect of the development of land or provision of
public improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations or other
regulations of the city, which shall be operative and remain in full force and
effect without limitation with respect to all such development.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)
§ 153.51 RELIEF PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Any person who has paid an impact fee or an owner of land upon which
an impact fee has been paid may petition the Council to determine whether any
duty required by this chapter has not been performed within the time so
prescribed. The petition shall be in writing and shall state the nature of the
unperformed duty and request that the act be performed within 60 days of the
request. If the Council determines that the duty is required pursuant to this
chapter and is late in being performed, it shall cause the duty to commence
within 60 days of the date of the request and to continue until completion.
   (B)   The Council may grant a variance or waiver from any requirement of
this chapter upon written request by a developer or owner of property subject
to this chapter, following a public hearing, upon finding that a strict
application of the requirement would, when regarded as a whole, result in
confiscation of the property.
(Ord. 1293, passed 12-14-99)
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
   
154.01   Subdivision regulations adopted by reference
§ 154.01 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The comprehensive subdivision ordinance, as amended, copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Secretary, is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length in this code of
ordinances.
(Ord. 213, passed 5-13-69)
CHAPTER 155: ZONING
Section
Title and General Provisions
   
155.001   Title
   
155.002   Purpose of chapter
   
155.003   Relationship to other laws
   
155.004   Application of this chapter
   
155.005   Interpretation of chapter
Definitions
   
155.010   Purpose
   
155.011   Word usage
   
155.012   Definitions
Establishment of Zoning Districts
   
155.020   Establishment of zoning districts
   
155.021   Zoning districts enumeration
   
155.022   Zoning map adopted
   
155.023   Interpretation of district boundaries
   
155.024   District boundary uncertainty
Zoning District Regulations
   
155.030   General restrictions
   
155.031   Residential use restrictions
   
155.032   General purpose and description provisions
   
155.033   PR, Pre-Development District regulations
   
155.034   A, Agricultural District regulations
   
155.035   SF-5AC/24, Single-family Residential District regulations
   
155.036   SF-12/22, Single-family Residential District regulations
   
155.037   SF-9.6/20, Single-family Residential District regulations
   
155.038   SF-8.4/18, Single-family Residential District regulations
   
155.039   SF-8.4/16, Single-family Residential District regulations
   
155.040   SF-7.5/18, Single-family Residential District regulations
   
155.041   SF-7.5/16, Single-family Residential District regulations
   
155.042   SF-7.5/12, Single-family Residential District regulations
   
155.043   SF-6/12, Garden Home District regulations
   
155.044   2F, Two Family Residential District regulations
   
155.045   MF-1, Multi-family Residential District regulations
   
155.046   MF-2, Multi-family Residential District regulations
   
155.047   OP, Office Park District regulations
   
155.048   C-1, Neighborhood Business District regulations
   
155.049   C-2, Community Business District regulations
   
155.050   C-3, Commercial-Manufacturing District regulations
   
155.051   D, Downtown District regulations
   
155.052   I-1, Light Industrial District regulations
   
155.053   I-2, Heavy Industrial District regulations
   
155.054   Permitted uses
   
155.055   Area, setback and height regulations
   
155.056   Community design standards
   
155.057   Neighborhood design standards
Special Purpose District Regulations
   
155.065   General provisions
   
155.066   PD, Planned Development District regulations
   
155.067   FR, Freeway Overlay District regulations
   
155.068   MH, Manufactured Home District regulations
   
155.069   H, Historic Landmark Overlay District regulations
   
155.070   SE, Secondary Freeway Overlay District regulations
Form-Based Code Districts
   
155.071   Reserved
   
155.072   D, Downtown District
   
155.073   S, South Mansfield Form-Based Development District
Specific Use Permit, Special Exception and Other Permits
   
155.080   Specific use permit
   
155.081   Temporary uses
   
155.082   Special exception
   
155.083   Industrial use permit
Supplemental Provisions
   
155.090   Sign standards
   
155.091   Off-street parking and loading standards
   
155.092   Landscaping and screening standards
   
155.093   Supplemental requirements for screening of mechanical equipment and
service areas
   
155.094   General provisions for all fences and free standing walls
   
155.095   Residential proximity standards
   
155.096   Open storage regulations
   
155.097   Open air vending
   
155.098   Non-conforming use regulations
   
155.099   Special conditions
   
155.100   Industrialized housing and building regulations
   
155.101   Wireless telecommunication facility regulations
   
155.102   Gas well drilling and production
Administration, Amendments and Enforcements
   
155.110   Enforcement, violations and penalties
   
155.111   Issuance of building permits and utility service
   
155.112   Certificate of occupancy and compliance
   
155.113   Board of Adjustments
   
155.114   Planning and Zoning Commission
   
155.115   Changes and amendments
   
155.116   Historic Landmark Commission
   
155.117   Miscellaneous provisions
Editor’s Note:
   Previous versions of this zoning ordinance were amended by the following
ordinances: Ord. 293, passed 12-23-74; Am. Ord. 1170, passed 6-23-97; Am. Ord.
1182, passed 11-10-97; Am. Ord. 1356, passed 7-2-01; Am. Ord. 1403, passed 10-
14-02; Am. Ord. 1415, passed 2-10-03
TITLE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as and may be referred to as the "Mansfield
Zoning Ordinance".
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.002 PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to guide and accomplish a coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious development of the municipality and its environs which
will, in accordance with present and future needs best promote the public
health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been
designed to:
      (1)   Promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, property and
general welfare;
      (2)   Promote efficiency and economy in the process of development;
      (3)   Promote the healthful and convenient distribution of population;
      (4)   Preserve adequate air and light;
      (5)   Promote good civil design and arrangement;
      (6)   Promote wise and efficient expenditure of public funds; and
      (7)   Provide for adequate public utilities and other public
requirements.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.003 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.
   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances except
for the previously mentioned Ordinance No. 293 and Ordinance No. 416, or with
private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed, easement, or other
private agreement. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon land,
buildings or structures than is imposed or required by other ordinances,
covenants or agreements the provisions of this chapter shall govern, provided
nothing stated herein shall state or imply any liability of the city to enforce
private deed restrictions or agreements.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.004 APPLICATION OF THIS CHAPTER.
   No structure shall be constructed, erected, placed or maintained and no land
use commenced or continued within the city except as specifically, or by
necessary implication, authorized by this chapter. Specific use permits,
industrial use permits and/or variances are allowed only as granted by the City
Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Board of Adjustments upon
finding that the specified conditions exist.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.005 INTERPRETATION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   This chapter shall be interpreted, whenever an administrator or the
judiciary is called upon to do so, in conformance with the purposes intended by
the City Council, to be served by its enactment. The intent of the standards
and supporting definitions is to protect both individual property owners and
the general public from adverse impacts which might otherwise be the result of
a proposed use. To this end, those called upon to interpret this chapter shall
proceed as follows:
      (1)   Determine the public purpose(s) of the standard(s) with respect to
which an interpretation is required. Before any zoning interpretation is made,
there must be an explicit identification of the purpose(s) for which the
regulation was initially imposed. Each zoning regulation is intended to protect
the interests of both present and future neighbors and the general public. Each
standard is developed as a regulatory response to an identifiable negative
impact or potential impact. A sound interpretation of any such standard cannot
be insured without a careful analysis of the end to which the regulation is
directed.
      (2)   Determine the actual impact of a proposed interpretation. There is
a critical distinction between an interpretation which provides a greater
degree of design freedom to achieve a permitted land use and an interpretation
which permits a new or not previously permitted use or which allows a use to be
enlarged or have its intensity increased beyond the degree specified in the
ordinance.
      (3)   Determine that the proposed interpretation will insure a just
balance between the rights of the landowner and all others who will be affected
by that person's land use proposal. If an interpretation merely would allow a
design solution which is more flexible, albeit slightly different from the one
expressly stated and if it results in no less a degree of protection to any
affected party, such an interpretation may be appropriately made. Any
interpretation which would result in any identifiable loss of protection or
which would increase the nuisance potential of any use should not be made by an
administrator. Any interpretation which will result in any loss of protection
or increase in intensity beyond that already permitted should only be made when
the party interpreting the ordinance has the power to impose additional
restrictions or conditions to protect the public and exercises this power.
   (B)   All interpretation should be recorded in writing at the City
Secretary's office. Such records shall be used for future review as related
issues arise so that consistency between actions over time can be assured. All
records of ordinance interpretations shall include both consenting and/or
dissenting opinions from all parties.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
DEFINITIONS
§ 155.010 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to define words, terms, and phrases
contained within this chapter.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.011 WORD USAGE.
   In the interpretation of this chapter, the provisions and rules of this
section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly requires
otherwise:
   (A)   Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses
and derivative forms.
   (B)   Words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and
words in the plural number shall include the singular number.
   (C)   The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the feminine
gender shall include the masculine.
   (D)   The word "shall" is mandatory.
   (E)   The word "may" is permissive.
   (F)   The word "person" includes individuals, firms, corporations,
associations, trusts, and any other similar entities.
   (G)   The word "City" means the City of Mansfield, Texas.
   (H)   The words "City Council" means the City Council of the City of
Mansfield.
   (I)   The words "Planning and Zoning Commission" shall mean the Mansfield
Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (J)   The word "Board" shall mean the Mansfield Board of Adjustments.
   (K)   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text
of this chapter and any caption, illustration, or table, the text shall
control.
   (L)   The word "building" includes the word "structure."
   (M)   The word "lot" includes the words "parcel", "plot", or "tract."
   (N)   The words "residential zoning" mean the following zoning district
classifications: A, SF-5AC/24, SF-12/22, SF-9.6/20, SF-8.4/18, SF-8.4/16, SF-
7.5/18, SF-7.5/16, SF-7.5/12, SF-6/12, 2F, MF-1, MF-2, MH, as well as Planned
Development that consists of residential uses.
   (O)   “Fire code” means the fire code adopted by the City of Mansfield and
any amendment thereof.
   (P)   “Person” includes both the singular and plural and means an individual
person, corporation, association, partnership, limited partnership, limited
liability company, and any other type of legal entity and any receiver,
trustee, guardian, executor, administrator, and fiduciary or representative of
any kind.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.012 DEFINITIONS.
   When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them:
   ABUTTING.  Having a common border with, or being separated from such common
border by an alley or easement.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). A dwelling unit that is subservient to a
principal dwelling unit in size, location, and design, often located above
garages or in independent buildings towards the rear or the side of a lot.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT.  Shall be as defined in this code as now
existing or as hereafter amended.
   ALLEY. A public way which affords a secondary means of access to property
abutting thereon, and not intended for general traffic circulation.
   AMUSEMENT, COMMERCIAL (INDOORS).  An amusement enterprise wholly enclosed in
a building which is treated acoustically so that noise generated by the
enterprise is not perceptible at the bounding property line and including, but
not limited to, a bowling alley or billiard parlor.
   AMUSEMENT, COMMERCIAL (OUTDOORS). Any amusement enterprise offering
entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee or charge
wherein any portion of the activity takes place in the open including, but not
limited to, a golf driving range, archery range and miniature golf course.
   APARTMENT HOUSE. Any building or portion thereof used as a multiple dwelling
for the purpose of providing three or more separate dwelling units which may
share means of egress and other essential facilities.
   ART GALLERY or MUSEUM.  An institution for the collection, display and sales
of arts and with facilities open to the general public.
   ARTICULATION. Variation in the depth of the building façade and plane, roof
line, or height of a structure that breaks up plain, monotonous areas and
creates patterns of light and shadow. ARTICULATION includes, but is not limited
to, recesses and projections along a façade, such as bay windows, or other
architectural treatments including trim and transitions in building façade
materials or colors.
   BAR. An establishment licensed by the State of Texas for the sale of
alcoholic beverages that derives more than 75% of the establishment's gross
revenue from the on-premise sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premise
consumption. For the purposes of this definition, gross revenue shall be
calculated using the total amount of gross revenue received from the sale of
alcoholic beverages and from the sale of food by the establishment for the
preceding 12-month period. Such establishment shall make available to the city
or its agents, during reasonable hours, its books and records for inspection if
required by the city.
   BASEMENT.  That portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade
but so located that the vertical distance from grade to the floor below is
greater than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling. A basement shall not
be counted in computing the number of stories.
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN. An accessory use to a single-family dwelling unit in
which no more than seven rooms in the principal residential structure or in an
accessory building(s) on the property are set aside for guest clients, and
breakfast is available onsite to only such guest clients; length of stay of
guest clients ranges from one to 30 days; and the owner/operator resides on-
site.
   BEDROOM. A room marketed, designed, or otherwise likely to function
primarily for sleeping.
   BODY ART AND PIERCING STUDIO. A place where body modification is performed,
including: tattooing, where a design is made by inserting ink, dyes and
pigments, either indelible or temporary, into the dermis layer of the skin to
change the pigment; or piercing, the practice of puncturing or cutting a part
of the human body, creating an opening in which the jewelry may be worn, or
where an implant may be inserted. This definition does not include permanent
makeup or micro-blading as applied in a beauty shop.
   BUILDING. Any structure either temporary or permanent, having a roof or
other covering, and designed, built or intended for the shelter or enclosure or
partial enclosure of persons, animals, chattels  or movable property of any
kind or for an accessory use. Where independent units with separate entrances
are divided by absolute fire separations, each unit so separated shall be
deemed a building. This definition shall include structures wholly or partly
enclosed with an exterior wall.
   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. A building which:
      (1)   Is subordinate to and serves a principal structure or a principal
use;
      (2)   Is subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal
structure or use served;
      (3)   Is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use served
except as otherwise expressly authorized by provisions of this chapter; and
      (4)   Is customarily incidental to the principle structure or use. Any
portion of a principal structure devoted or intended to be devoted to an
accessory use is not an accessory structure.
   BUILDING LINE. A line on a lot, generally parallel to a lot line or street
right-of-way line, located at a sufficient distance therefrom to provide the
minimum yards required by this chapter. The building line delimits the area in
which buildings are permitted subject to all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
   BUILDING, MAIN/PRINCIPLE.  The building or buildings on a lot which are
occupied by the primary use.
   BUILDING, MIXED USE.  Any building used partly for residential use and
partly for community facility and/or commercial use.
   CAMPGROUND or RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK.  Any plot or tract of land used for
the temporary placement of camping trailers, travel trailers, motor homes,
recreational vehicles and designed for overnight camping. Said property shall
provide utilities and sanitary facilities as deemed necessary by the city for
the patrons.
   CAMPING or TRAVEL TRAILER. Vehicles that are currently registered as
recreational vehicles with the Vehicle Title and Registration Division of the
Texas Department of Transportation, having no foundation other than wheels,
jacks, blocks or skirting and is designed to be towed from place to place and
which by design is to be occupied as a dwelling on a temporary basis. This
definition shall include TRAILER COACH, MOTOR HOME, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE which
by definition are similar to CAMPING OR TRAVEL TRAILER but are designed to be
driven and contain their own power plant, drive train and steering device.
   CHURCH or RECTORY. A place of worship and religious training of recognized
religions including the on-site housing of ministers, rabbis, priests, nuns and
similar staff personnel.
   CLINIC, MEDICAL or DENTAL. Facilities for examining, consulting with and
treating patients including offices, laboratories and out-patient facilities
but not including hospital beds and rooms for acute or chronic care. This term
applies only to facilities used by more than two health care practitioners or
establishments.
   CLOTHING MANUFACTURING and LIGHT FABRICATION AND ASSEMBLY. Operations
involving cutting, sewing, forming and packing of garments and similar items
and including, but not limited to, the making of millinery and clothing
accessories, jewelry, trimming decorations, signs, electronic controls, and any
similar item not involving the generation of noise, odor, vibration, dust or
obnoxious or hazardous materials or machinery.
   CLUB, PRIVATE. Quarters for a private organization, the principle purpose of
which is the preparation and service of food and drink for members and their
guests only.
   COLLEGE or UNIVERSITY.  An academic institution of higher learning,
accredited or recognized by the State and offering programs of academic study.
   COMMUNITY CENTER, PRIVATE. A building or group of rooms designed and used as
an integral part of a residential project by the tenants of such a project for
a place of meeting, recreation or social activity and under the management and
unified control of the operators of the project. A private community center
shall not be operated as a place of public meetings, or as a business, nor
shall the operation of such facility create noise, odor, or similar conditions
perceptible beyond the bounding property line of the project site.
   COMMUNITY CENTER, PUBLIC.  A building and grounds owned and operated by a
governmental body for the social, recreational, health or welfare of the
community served.
   CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, RADIO, AND TELEVISION REPAIR. An establishment that is
primarily dedicated to the repair, the restoration, and the maintenance of
consumer electronics, radios, and televisions. A consumer electronics, radio,
and television repair establishment may also sell repaired or restored consumer
electronics, radio, and televisions, provided that no more than 10% of the
gross leasable floor area of the establishment may be dedicated to the sale of
such devices.
   COURT. An open space bounded on more than two sides by the walls of a
building.
   COVERAGE, LOT.  The percent of lot area which is covered by a roof, floor,
or other structure and is not open to the sky. Roof eaves to the extent of two
feet and ordinary projections from the building not exceeding 12 inches shall
not be counted in computing coverage.
   DANCE HALL or NIGHT CLUB. An establishment offering to the general public
facilities for dancing, dining and entertainment for a fee and subject to
regulations by the City of Mansfield.
   DAY CARE CENTER or NURSERY.  Any place, home or institution which cares for
five or more children under the age of 16 years old apart from their parents,
guardians, or custodians for regular periods of time for compensation;
provided, however, that the term CHILDCARE CENTER shall not apply to bonafide
schools, custody fixed by a court, children related by blood or marriage within
the third degree of the custodial person.
   DENSITY or GROSS DENSITY. A measure of residential land use intensity which
is expressed as the number of dwelling units per acre (du/ac) of gross site
area.
   DEVELOPMENT SCHEDULE.  A chronological estimate of the rate and order of
development.
   DOCTOR’S or PHYSICIAN’S OFFICE. A small office for examining and consulting
with patients including necessary accessory facilities and occupied by not more
than two doctors.
   DONATION BOX. Any drop-off box, bin, container, receptacle, trailer or
similar facility that accepts donated textiles, clothing, shoes, books, toys,
household items and/or other salvageable personal property items to be used by
the operator for distribution, resale or recycling.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached dwelling designed for and occupied by
not more than one family and having no roof, wall, or floor in common with any
other dwelling unit.
   DWELLING, TWO FAMILIES. A detached building having accommodation for and
occupied by not more than two families, each of which is attached side to side
each one sharing only one common wall with the other. In calculating minimum
lot area, a two-family dwelling shall be considered to be two dwelling units.
   DWELLING or DWELLING UNIT. A room or group of rooms which is arranged,
occupied, or intended to be occupied as living quarters and includes facilities
for food preparation and sleeping.
   DWELLING, ZERO LOT LINE.  A single-family, fully detached dwelling located
on an individual lot which is set on one of the interior side lot lines. This
makes the side yard usable and requires less land than a house centered on its
lot.
   EATING PLACES WITH DRIVE-IN SERVICES.  An establishment whose principle
business is the sale of food and/or beverages in a ready-to-consume state:
      (1)   For consumption within the establishment;
      (2)   For consumption within a motor vehicle parked on the premises where
the customer does not exit the vehicle; or
      (3)   Through direct window service allowing customers in motor vehicles
to purchase food and/or beverages for off-premises consumption.
   EATING PLACES WITHOUT DRIVE-IN SERVICES. An establishment whose principle
business is the sale of food and/or beverages to customers in a ready-to-
consume state, and whose principle method of operation includes one or both of
the following characteristics:
      (1)   Customers, normally provided with an individual menu, are served
their foods and beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter
at which food and beverages are consumed; and/or
      (2)   A service line operation where food and beverages are consumed
within the establishment.
   FAÇADE. Any exterior wall surface of a building that encloses the interior
of the building. At times, a FAÇADE may further be defined as a primary
residential FAÇADE, which is the ground floor, street facing FAÇADE,
specifically the wall surface containing the main entrance to the principal
use.
   FAMILY. Any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping
unit, in which not more than four individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage
or adoption.
   FEED STORE/MIXING PLANT. An establishment for the sale of grain, prepared
feed and forage for pets, livestock and fowl, part of other activities may
involve the grinding, mixing or commercial compounding of such items.
   FIELD or CONSTRUCTION OFFICE. A structure or shelter, subject to removal by
owner or Building Official, used in connection with a development or building
project for housing on-site administrative and supervisory functions and for
sheltering employees and equipment.
   FIX-IT SHOP and APPLIANCE REPAIR. A shop for the repair of household and
home equipment, such as electrical appliances, bicycles, lawn mowers, tools and
similar items.
   FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross floor area for each of a building's stories
measured from the interior limits of the walls of the structure. The floor area
of a building includes basement floor area and includes attic floor area only
if the attic area meets the Mansfield Building Code standards for habitable
floor area. It does not include cellars and unenclosed porches or any floor
space in an accessory building or in the principle building which is designed
for the parking of motor vehicles in order to meet the parking requirements of
this chapter.
   FLOOR AREA RATION (FAR). An intensity measure expressed as the ratio between
the number of square feet of total floor area in the main building(s) on a lot
and the total square footage of land in the lot; it is the number resulting
from dividing the main building floor area by the lot area.
   GARAGE APARTMENT. A dwelling unit designed or constructed as part of a
private garage.
   GARMENT PRESSING AND AGENTS FOR LAUNDRIES AND DRY CLEANING. An establishment
for custom cleaning and/or pressing of individual garments only and not a bulk
or commercial type cleaning plant.
   GAS SERVICE STATION.  An establishment providing sales of vehicle fuel and/
or such services as lubrication, oil and tire changes, and minor repairs. This
use does not include paint spraying or auto body repair or major engine or
motor repairs.
   GRADE.  The average elevation of the highest and lowest elevation measured
at the finished surface of the ground at any of the exterior corners of the
building or structure.
   GROSS SITE AREA. The total square footage or acreage of land in a lot or
tract excluding the area within a floodway and area dedicated as public street
right-of-way.
   GROUP FOSTER HOME.  A facility licensed by the State as a foster home that
provides room, board, ordinary care and supervision to no more than 12
individuals under 18 years of age who are related or not related to the owner.
This term shall include REGISTERED FAMILY HOME as defined in Ordinance No. 595.
   HEIGHT. The vertical distance of a building or structure measured from the
average established grade at the street line or from the average natural front
yard ground level, whichever is higher to: (1) the highest point of the roof
surface if a flat surface; (2) the top deck line of a mansard roof; (3) the
mean height level between eaves and ridge of a hip and gable roof; (4) the top
of a parapet wall. If the street grade has not been officially established, the
average front yard grade shall be used for a base level.
   HOME OCCUPATION. A business, profession, occupation, or trade conducted for
gain or support and located entirely within a residential building, or a
structural accessory thereto, which use is accessory, incidental, and secondary
to the use of the building for dwelling purposes and does not change the
essential residential character or appearance of such building or neighborhood
in which the building is located.
   HOSPITAL. A facility in which there are complete facilities for diagnosis,
treatment, surgery, laboratory, X-ray, nursing, and the prolonged care of bed
patients.
   HOTEL or MOTEL. A building or group of buildings designed to be temporarily
occupied by individuals.
   INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING. A commercial structure that is constructed in one
or more modules or constructed using one or more modular components built at a
location other than the permanent commercial site, and that is designed to be
used as a commercial building when the modules or modular components are
transported to the permanent commercial site and are erected or installed on a
permanent foundation system. The term includes the plumbing, heating, air-
conditioning, and electrical systems. The term does not include any commercial
structure that is in excess of three stories or 49 feet in height as measured
from the finished grade elevation at the building entrance to the peak of the
roof.
   INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING. A residential structure that is designed for the use
and occupancy of one or more families that is constructed in one or more
modules or constructed using one or more modular components built at a location
other than the permanent residential site, and that is designed to be used as a
permanent residential structure when the modules or modular components are
transported to the permanent residential site and are erected or installed on a
permanent foundation system. The term includes the plumbing, heating, air-
conditioning, and electrical systems. The term does not include any residential
structure that is in excess of three stories or 49 feet in height as measured
from the finished grade elevation at the building entrance to the peak of the
roof. The term shall not mean nor apply to: (1) housing constructed of
sectional or panelized systems not utilizing modular components; or (2) any
ready-built home which is constructed so that the entire living area is
contained in a single unit or section at a temporary location for the purpose
of selling it and moving it to another location.
   KENNEL. Any place in or at which three or more dogs more than eight weeks
old are kept, or any place in or at which one or more dogs are housed or
boarded for pay.
   KINDERGARTEN. A school for children of preschool age, the teaching of which
is purely preliminary to the teaching of the public school, and which
implements a planned curriculum of constructive endeavors, helpful games,
object lessons, songs and social exercises.
   LABORATORY, SCIENTIFIC or RESEARCH. Operations involving the compounding of
products such as perfumes, pharmaceutical and the experiment, testing,
development and assembly of instruments, construction materials and similar
items.
   LOADING SPACE. An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building,
or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
   LOCAL UTILITY SERVICE LINE. The facilities provided by a municipality or a
franchised utility company for the distribution of gas, water, drainage,
sewage, electric power, telephone or telecommunication.
   LOT. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory
buildings and including such open spaces as are required under this chapter and
having its principle frontage upon a public street or officially approved
place.
   LOT AREA. That area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and
rear lot lines of a building lot, including any portion of an easement which
may exist within such property lines, exclusive of rights-of-way for street or
alley purposes.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets, the
interior angle of such intersection not exceeding 135 degrees. A corner lot
shall be deemed to front on the street on which it has its smallest dimensions,
or as otherwise designated by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   LOT DEPTH.  The length of a line connecting the mid-point of the front and
rear lot lines.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A building lot, not a corner lot, which adjoins two
streets which are opposite each other and which are parallel or within 45
degrees of being parallel to each other. On a double frontage lot, both street
lines shall be deemed front lot lines, except as otherwise provided herein.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot
from the street or place; and in the case of a corner lot, a line separating
the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street, except in those cases
where the latest tract deed restrictions specifies another line as the front
lot line.
   LOT LINE, REAR. That lot line which is opposite to and most distant from the
front lot line of the lot; in the case of a triangular, pentagon or polygon
shaped lot, a line 20 feet in length, entirely within the lot, most parallel to
and at the maximum possible distance from the front lot line shall be
considered to be the rear lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line not a front lot line or rear lot line. Where a
lot has only three lot lines, those lot lines which do not front upon a street
shall be deemed side lot lines.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision plat which has been
recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Tarrant County or Johnson County
or Ellis County.
   LOT WIDTH. The length of a line, drawn perpendicular to the lot depth line
at its point of intersection with the front setback line, connecting the side
lot lines; however, in zoning districts requiring less than a 25 foot front
setback, lot width shall be measured as if said front setback were 25 feet.
   MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR SERVICES FOR BUILDINGS. An establishment and related
open storage yard for supplies and operational equipment for building
maintenance, but not constituting a junk, wrecking or salvage yard.
   MANUFACTURED HOME, HUD-CODE. A structure, constructed on or after June 15,
1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the
traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in
length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is
built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems.
   MANUFACTURED HOME RENTAL COMMUNITIES.  A plot or tract of land which is
separated into two or more spaces or lots which are rented or leased or offered
for rent or lease to persons for the installation of manufactured homes for use
and occupancy as residences; provided that the lease or rental agreement is for
a term of less than 60 months and contains no purchase option.
   MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A unified development of mobile home sites on
lots platted for such purposes, which lots may be sold to the owners of a
mobile home situated thereon, meeting all of requirements of applicable zoning
and subdivision ordinances and designed to accommodate mobile homes on a
permanent basis.
   MASONRY CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS. Masonry construction materials include
brick; natural or manufactured stone; structural clay tile; indented, hammered
or split-face concrete masonry unit or combination of these materials that are
laid up unit by unit and set in mortar and that are at least two inches thick.
   MASONRY-LIKE CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS. Masonry-like construction materials
include fiber reinforced cement exterior siding, stucco, Exterior Insulated
Finish Systems (E.I.F.S.), or similar exterior cladding; and concrete tilt
wall, pour-in-place concrete wall and pre-cast wall that are at least two
inches thick and that are profiled, sculptured, fluted, exposed-aggregated or
have other non-smooth architectural concrete finish.
   MEDICAL WASTE PRODUCT FACILITY. An establishment that receives, processes,
treats, transfers, collects or stores medical waste products.
   MEMBERSHIP SPORT OR RECREATIONAL CLUB.  A private recreational club with
restricted membership, usually of less area than a country club, which may
include a club house, a swimming pool, tennis courts, or similar recreational
facilities none of which are available to the general public.
   MEMORY CARE FACILITY. A facility meeting all applicable federal, state, and
local certificate, licensure, and regulatory requirements and that provides
long-term specialized residential care for people living with Alzheimer’s
disease and other forms of progressive-degenerative dementia. Resident staff
necessary for operation of the facility are allowed to live on-site.
   MINI-WAREHOUSE. A building or group of buildings in a controlled-access and
fenced compound that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized,
and controlled-access stalls or lockers for the dead storage of a customer's
goods or wares. No outside storage, sales, service, or repair activities other
than the rental of dead storage units are permitted on the premises.
   MOBILE HOME. A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976,
transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight
body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected
on-site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis
and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-
conditioning, and electrical systems.
   MANUFACTURED HOME LOT OR PAD. A plot of ground within a manufactured home
rental community or subdivision designed for the accommodation of one
manufactured home, with an area of not less than 4,500 square feet and meeting
all setbacks contained herein.
   MODEL HOME. A single-family dwelling in a developing subdivision located on
a legal lot of record that is limited to temporary use as a sales office for
the subdivision and to provide an example of the dwellings which have been
built or which are proposed to be built in the same subdivision.
   MOTOR/RAILROAD FREIGHT TERMINAL. A building or area in which freight brought
by motor truck or railroad car is assembled and is stored for interstate and/or
intrastate shipment by motor truck or railroad car. A motor freight terminal is
a truck terminal.
   MULTI-TENANT OFFICE OR RETAIL STRIP BUILDING. A building with two or more
office or retail tenants in a single structure on the same lot with each tenant
having its own separate entrance on the building's exterior.
   NONCONFORMING BUILDING, LAWFUL. A building, structure, or portion thereof
which does not conform to the regulations of this chapter and which lawfully
existed at the time the regulations with which it does not conform became
effective.
   NONCONFORMING USE, LAWFUL. A use of a building or land which does not
conform to the use district regulations of this chapter and which lawfully
existed at the time the regulations with which it does not conform became
effective. A lawful conforming use existing at the time of the adoption of this
chapter shall not become nonconforming as a result of a specific use permit
requirement.
   NURSERY. An enterprise which conducts the retail sale of plants grown on or
off the site, as well as accessory items directly related to their care and
maintenance but not power equipment such as gas or electric lawnmowers and farm
implements. The accessory items normally sold are clay pots, potting soil,
fertilizers, insecticides, baskets, rakes and shovels.
   NURSING or ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. A private home for the care of children
or the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders,
not containing equipment for surgical care or the medical treatment of disease
or injury.
   OCCUPANCY. As used herein pertains to and is the purpose for which a
building is used or intended to be used. A change of occupancy is not intended
to include a change of tenants or proprietors.
   OPEN SPACE. An area included in any side, rear or front yard or any
unoccupied space on a lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for
the ordinary projections of cornices, eaves and plant material.
   OPEN SPACE, COMMON. Parks, playgrounds, community centers, golf courses,
parkways, water areas or similar areas which are created as private open space
under a permanent agreement for maintenance and responsibility and is accepted
by the City Council and approved by the City Attorney.
   OPENINGS FOR LIGHT AND AIR. Any windows, window walls or glass panels
located in the building, but not including doors which are used only for
ingress or egress.
   PACKAGE STORE. A retail establishment licensed by the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Commission and dedicated primarily to the sale of beer, liquor, wine
and/or other alcoholic spirits in sealed containers for off-premise consumption
only. For the purposes of this definition, the term PACKAGE STORE shall also
include liquor store, and shall exclude convenience goods stores, corner
markets, and grocery stores in which beer, liquor, wine and/or alcoholic
spirits may be sold as a minor part of the inventory.
   PARKWAY. That public property situated between the curb or edge of a street
and the property line of the land adjacent.
   PHILANTHROPIC INSTITUTION. Any organization operating under a non-profit
charter, the activities of which are devoted exclusively to benevolent
purposes.
   PORCH. A structure attached along a front building wall providing access to
the use within the building while creating an outdoor room not dedicated to the
entryway. By function, in single family applications, the porch/outdoor room is
at least six feet deep and consists of a minimum of 60 square feet when
excluding the entryway. A porch is covered and open on a minimum of two sides.
The Director of Planning is authorized to administratively review and determine
a proposed porch that does not meet the standards of this definition for
compliance with intent.
   PUBLIC BUILDING, UTILITY SHOP or STORAGE YARD OF LOCAL, STATE OR FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT.  Facilities such as office buildings, maintenance yards or shops
required by branches of local, state or federal government for service to an
area, such as Highway Department Yard or City Service Center.
   PUBLICALLY OWNED NON-SCHOOL FACILITY. A structure, facility or land area
owned by a governmental entity including a public school district that is not
used for classroom instruction purposes but for administration, maintenance,
vehicle storage, entertainment or athletic competition not focused on
continuing instruction. Facilities of this type will be treated as public uses
of structures or land for zoning, alcoholic beverage regulation and other
regulatory purposes.
   RADIO, TELEVISION OR MICRO-WAVE TOWER. Structure supporting an antenna for
transmitting or receiving any portion of the radio spectrum, but excluding non-
commercial antenna installations for home use of radio or television.
   RAILROAD TRACK AND RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Not including railroad stations, sidings,
team tracks, loading facilities, docks, yards or maintenance areas.
   RECREATIONAL AREA. An area devoted to facilities and equipment for
recreational purposes, swimming pools, tennis courts, playgrounds, community
clubhouses, and other similar uses.
   RECYCLING COLLECTION CENTER. An open yard for the receiving, sorting,
storage or packing of paper, rags, glass, boxes, aluminum and similar
commodities.
   REPAIR GARAGE. A shop for the disassembly, rebuilding and repair of motor
vehicle engines, electric motors, vehicle transmissions or other major
components. Minor vehicle maintenance shall be classified as a service station.
   RETAIL STORES AND SHOPS OTHER THAN LISTED. Any establishment not listed in
the permitted use listing, offering consumer goods for sale except those uses
specifically excluded and listed in other districts.
   ROOMING/BOARDING HOUSE. A building other than a hotel or multi-family
dwelling where lodging is provided for compensation for three but not more than
12 persons, where meals may or may not be served, and where facilities for food
preparation are not provided in the individual rooms. Where meals are served,
they shall be served only to the residents of the boarding house.
   SCHOOL, BUSINESS or PROFESSIONAL. A business operating for profit and
offering instruction and training in a service or art, such as a secretarial
school, barber college, beauty school, commercial art school, but not including
a manual trade school.
   SCHOOL, PUBLIC or PRIVATE. For purposes of zoning, alcoholic beverage
regulation and other regulatory ordinances, a structure intended, designed and
constructed for the use of providing classroom instruction to students. It is
intended to include actual classroom facilities and attached administrative,
cafeteria and auditorium facilities. Gymnasiums are included within this
definition if they are attached to a facility designed and used for classroom
instruction of students.
   SCHOOL, VOCATIONAL or TRADE. A business operating for profit and offering
instruction and training in a trade such as welding, brick laying, machinery
operation or other similar manual trades.
   SHOPPING CENTER. A group of commercial establishments which is planned,
developed, and managed as a unit related in its location, size and type of
shops to the trade area that the unit serves.
   SOLAR PANEL SYSTEMS. A combination of equipment and/or controls,
accessories, interconnecting means and terminal elements for the collection,
storage and distribution of solar energy. Solar panel systems do not include
individually powered outdoor solar lights, such as garden lights, accent
lights, security lights or flood lights.
   STABLE, COMMERCIAL.  A building or land where horses are kept for breeding,
remuneration, hire, sale, boarding, riding or show.
   STABLE, PRIVATE.  Any building, incidental to an existing residential,
principle use, that shelters horses for the exclusive use of the occupants of
the premises.
   STABLE, RIDING CLUB. A paddock, stable and related riding and quartering
facilities for horses owned by a specific number of recorded members and
maintained for the exclusive use of such members and guest.
   STORAGE, OUTSIDE. The storage of any equipment, machinery, building
materials or commodities, including raw, semi-finished and finished materials,
the storage of which is not accessory to a residential use, and which is
visible from ground level; provided, however, that vehicular parking except
junked or damaged vehicles shall not be deemed to be outside storage.
   STREET FRONTAGE. The length of all property on one side of a street measured
along the line of the street, or in the case of a dead-end street, then the
length of all property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and
the end of the dead-end street.
   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent location on the ground or attached to something having permanent
location on the ground. This term shall include any man made screening
structure, sign or device.
   STUCCO. Exterior plaster as defined in the Uniform Building Code currently
adopted by the city and amendment thereof.
   TELEPHONE EXCHANGE, SWITCHING RELAY AND TRANSMITTING STATION. Not including
public business facilities, storage or repair facilities.
   TOBACCO PRODUCTS STORE. A retail establishment that is primarily dedicated
to the smoking of tobacco or other lawful substances and includes any
establishment that allows either the payment of consideration by a customer to
the establishment for on-site delivery of tobacco, tobacco accessories or
similar lawful substances and products to the customer; and the onsite smoking
of tobacco or other lawful substances. This definition shall be construed to
include establishments known variously as non-traditional smoking related
businesses, retail tobacco stores, tobacco products shops, head shops, hookah
cafes, tobacco clubs, tobacco bars, cigar stores, and similar establishments.
   TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling, on a separate lot which fronts on a
street, a place, a court or a private access easement, which is attached to two
or more similar dwellings by a vertical lot line, or party walls, which has its
own private entrance, and which in combination with said attached dwellings
constitutes an architectural whole.
   USE. The purpose or activity for which land or any building thereon is
designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
   USE, ACCESSORY. An accessory use is one which: (1) is subordinate to and
serves a principle structure or a principle use; (2) is subordinate in area,
extent, and purpose to the principle structure or use served; (3) is located on
the same lot as the principle structure or use served except as otherwise
expressly authorized by provisions of this chapter; and (4) is customarily
incidental to the principle structure or use.
   USE, MAIN/PRINCIPLE.  The specific primary purpose for which land is used.
   USE, TEMPORARY. A temporary use is one established for a fixed period of
time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of such time.
Such uses do not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent
structure.
   USED MERCHANDISE STORE. A retail store for used materials, goods, and
merchandise of less than 20 years of age, and those over 20 years of age which
do not derive a value from their age.
   VARIANCE. Permission to depart from the literal requirement of this chapter
granted pursuant to §
155.113.
   VEHICLE. Any passenger vehicle or other vehicle.
   VEHICLE, OTHER. Any bus, all-terrain vehicle, motor home, recreational
vehicle, camper, trailer, boat, or any vehicle of any kind that is not a
passenger vehicle.
   VEHICLE, PASSENGER. Any automobile, truck or motorcycle intended primarily
for transportation to and from work, school, shopping or similar domestic uses.
   VETERINARY CLINIC. An establishment for the care and medical veterinary
practice on or for domestic household animals, conducted completely within an
enclosed, soundproofed structure and not using any setback or open space for
the activities defined.
   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. An establishment for the care and medical treatment of
large animals and domestic household pets having treatment and boarding
facilities both in an enclosed building and outside pens or runs enclosed by a
permanent type of fencing.
   WRECKING or SALVAGE YARD. Premises upon which waste or scrap materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, packed, disassembled or handled, including but
not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, bottles
and used building materials. This term shall also include an automobile
wrecking and salvage yard.
   YARD. An open space, other than a court, between a building and the
adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except
as otherwise provided herein.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the front of the lot between side lot
lines and having a minimum horizontal depth measured from the front lot line as
specified for the district in which the lot is located.
   YARD, REAR. A yard, except for accessory buildings as herein permitted,
extending across the rear of the lot between side lot lines and having a
minimum horizontal depth measured from the rear lot line as specified for the
district in which the lot is located. On corner lots, the rear yard shall be
considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least
dimensions. On both corner and interior lots, the rear yard shall in all cases
be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard between a building and side lot line, extending from the
front yard or front lot line where no front yard is required to the rear yard
and having a minimum horizontal distance measured from the side lot lines as
specified for the district in which the lot is located.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86; Am. Ord. OR-2193-20, passed 10-26-20; Am. Ord. OR-
2217-21, passed 9-13-21; Am. Ord. OR-2255-22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. OR-2256-
22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. OR-2315-23, passed 8-14-23; Am. Ord. OR-2323-23,
passed 10-9-23; Am. Ord. OR-2376-24, passed 8-26-24; Am. Ord. OR-2387-24,
passed 10-14-24)
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 155.020 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.
   Mansfield, Texas is hereby divided into zoning districts of such number and
character as are necessary to achieve compatibility of uses within each
district, to implement the official Mansfield Land Use Plan and related
official plans and the Official Zoning Map of Mansfield, and to serve the other
purposes of this chapter which are detailed in §
155.002.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.021 ZONING DISTRICTS ENUMERATION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, all land and water areas in Mansfield are
hereby divided into zoning districts which shall be designated as follows:
      PR         Pre-Development District
      A         Agricultural District
      SF-5AC/24      Single-Family Residential District - five acre lots
minimum
      SF-12/22      Single-Family Residential District - 12,000 sq. ft. lots
minimum
      SF-9.6/20      Single-Family Residential District - 9,600 sq. ft. lots
minimum
      SF-8.4/18      Single-Family Residential District - 8,400 sq. ft. lots
minimum
      SF-8.4/16      Single-Family Residential District - 8,400 sq. ft. lots
minimum
      SF-7.5/18      Single-Family Residential District - 7,500 sq. ft. lots
minimum
      SF-7.5/16      Single-Family Residential District - 7,500 sq. ft. lots
minimum
      SF-7.5/12      Single-Family Residential District - 7,500 sq. ft. lots
minimum
      SF-6/12      Garden Home District - 6,000 sq. ft. lots minimum
      2F         Two Family Residential District - 3,750 sq. ft. per unit
minimum
      MF-1         Multi-family Residential District - 12 units per acre
maximum
      MF-2         Multi-family Residential District - 18 units per acre
maximum
      OP         Office Park District
      C-1         Neighborhood Business District
      C-2         Community Business District
      C-3         Commercial-Manufacturing District
      D            Downtown District
      I-1         Light Industrial District
      I-2         Heavy Industrial District
      FR         Freeway Overlay District
      MH         Manufactured Home District
      PD         Planned Development District
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86; Am. Ord. OR-2223-21, passed 10-11-21)
§ 155.022 ZONING MAP ADOPTED.
   The official Zoning Map of the City of Mansfield attached to Ord. 671 and
made a part hereof for all purposes, is hereby adopted and shall be filed with
the City Secretary of the City of Mansfield. The boundaries of the various
districts as enumerated in §
155.021 are hereby established as identified on said map. All notations,
references, legends, scales, and every detail shown on said map are
incorporated into and made a part of this chapter.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.023 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   The following rules shall be used to determine the precise location of any
zoning district boundary shown on the Official Zoning Map of Mansfield.
   (A)   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following the limits of
any municipal corporation shall be construed as following such limits.
   (B)   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following streets shall
be construed to follow the center lines of such streets.
   (C)   Boundary lines which follow or approximately follow platted lot lines
or other property lines as shown on the Mansfield Tax Maps shall be construed
as following such lines.
   (D)   In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the zoning
map shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map.
   (E)   Any property on the zoning map which does not have a zoning district
designation shall be classified as a PR, Pre-Development District.
   (F)   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following survey lines,
or county lines shall be construed as following such lines.
   (G)   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following railroad
lines shall be construed to lie midway between the main tracks of such railroad
lines.
   (H)   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following shorelines of
any lakes shall be construed to follow the mean high waterline of such lakes,
and in the event of change in the mean high waterline shall be construed as
moving with the actual mean high waterline.
   (I)   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following the center
lines of streams, rivers, or other continuously flowing water courses shall be
construed as following the channel center line of such water courses taken at
mean low water, and in the event of a natural change in the location of such
streams, river, or other water courses, the zone boundary shall be construed as
moving with the channel center line.
   (J)   Boundaries shown as separated from, and parallel or approximately
parallel to, any of the features listed in divisions (A) through (G) above
shall be construed to be parallel to such features and at such distances
therefrom as are shown on the map.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.024 DISTRICT BOUNDARY UNCERTAINTY.
   If after the application of the aforementioned rules, uncertainty still
exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts, as shown on the
zoning map, the conflict shall be resolved by utilizing the appeal power of the
Board of Adjustments as set forth in §§
155.113.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 155.030 GENERAL RESTRICTIONS.
   Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, no land or building shall be used,
and no building, structure or improvement shall be made, erected, constructed,
moved, altered, enlarged or repaired, for any purpose or in any manner except
in accordance with the requirement established in the district in which such
land, building, structure, or improvement is located, and in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.031 RESIDENTIAL USE RESTRICTIONS.
   Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one district permit
residential uses of a more restrictive district, such residential uses shall be
subject to the conditions as set forth in the regulations of the more
restrictive district unless otherwise specifically stated. For the purpose of
this chapter, the level of restrictions shall be in the order of districts
listed in §
155.021, with the "A", Agricultural District as the most restrictive to the "I-
2", Heavy Industrial District as the least restrictive.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.032 GENERAL PURPOSE AND DESCRIPTION PROVISIONS.
   Paragraphs included within the district regulations in this section contain
general descriptive information to provide the reader with a conceptual
understanding of the general legislative intent of the district indicated. The
provisions of such paragraphs are directory and not mandatory.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.033 PR, PRE-DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. To identify areas that will
ultimately be developed for residential, commercial or industrial purposes.
This zoning classification does not infer any specific indication of future
land uses other than its projection for some form of residential, commercial or
industrial development. The actual zoning classification for properties in
these areas will be converted to a residential, commercial or industrial zoning
district classification at the initiation of the development process by a
properly filed zoning change request to be evaluated in conformance with the
city's zoning ordinance. The zoning classification selected will be determined
based upon normal zoning change review criteria to include the city's then
current land use plan, thoroughfare plan, and the developer's projected uses.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the PR District shall be the same as
those permitted in the SF-12/22 District.
   (C)   Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in the PR
District shall be the same as those provided for the SF-12/22 District.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.034 A, AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. To establish and preserve
agricultural areas for those agricultural uses which are compatible with nearby
urban development.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Uses permitted in an A, Agricultural District are set
forth in § 155.054.
   (C)   Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in an A,
Agricultural District, are set forth in §
155.055.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.035 SF-5AC/24, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. To provide for the development of
single-family detached dwelling units on lots of not less than five acres.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the SF-5AC/24 District are set forth
in § 155.054.
   (C)   Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in the SF-
5AC/24 District are set forth in §
155.055.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.036 SF-12/22, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. To provide for the development of
single-family detached dwelling units on lots of not less than 12,000 square
feet.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the SF-12/22 District are set forth
in §
155.054.
   (C)   Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in the SF-12/
22 District are set forth in §
155.055.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.037 SF-9.6/20, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. To provide for the development of
single-family detached dwelling units on lots of not less than 9,600 square
feet.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the SF-9.6/20 District are set forth
in §
155.054.
   (C)   Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in the SF-
9.6/20 District are set forth in §
155.055.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.038 SF-8.4/18, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. To provide for the development of
single-family detached dwelling units on lots of not less than 8,400 square
feet.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the SF-8.4/18 District are set forth
in §
155.054.
   (C)   Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in the SF-
8.4/18 District are set forth in §
155.055.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.039 SF-8.4/16, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. To provide for the development of
single-family detached dwelling units with a minimum floor area of 1,600 square
feet per unit on lots of not less than 8,400 square feet.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the SF-8.4/16 District are set forth
in §
155.054.
   (C)   Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in the SF-
8.4/16 District are set forth in §
155.055.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.040 SF-7.5/18, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. To provide for the development of
single-family detached dwelling units with a minimum floor area of 1,800 square
feet per unit on lots of not less than 7,500 square feet.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the SF-7.5/18 District are set forth
in §
155.054.
   (C)   Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in the SF-
7.5/18 District are set forth in §
155.055.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.041 SF-7.5/16, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. To provide for the development of
single-family detached dwelling units with a minimum floor area of 1,600 square
feet per unit on lots of not less than 7,500 square feet.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the SF-7.5/16 District are set forth
in §
155.054.
   (C)   Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in the SF-
7.5/16 District are set forth in §
155.055.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.042 SF-7.5/12, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. To provide for the development of
single-family detached dwelling units with a minimum floor area of 1,200 square
feet per unit on lots of not less than 7,500 square feet.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the SF-7.5/12 District are set forth
in §
155.054.
   (C)   Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in the SF-
7.5/12 District are set forth in §
155.055.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.043 SF-6/12, GARDEN HOME DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. To provide for the development of
single-family detached and zero-lot-line dwelling units on lots of not less
than 6,000 square feet.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the SF-6/12 District are set forth
in §
155.054.
   (C)   Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in the SF-6/
12 District are set forth in §
155.055.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.044 2F, TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. To provide for the development of two
family dwelling units with each unit occupying its own lot of not less than
3,750 square feet.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the 2F District are set forth in §
155.054.
   (C)   Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in the 2F
District are set forth in §
155.055.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.045 MF-1, MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. To provide for the development of
multi-family dwelling units at a density of not more than 12 units per acre.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the MF-1 District are set forth in §
155.054.
   (C)   Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in the MF-
1 District, are set forth in §
155.055.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.046 MF-2, MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. To provide for the development of
multi-family dwelling units at a density of not more than 18 units per acre.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the MF-2 District are set forth in §
155.054.
   (C)   Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in the MF-
2 District, are set forth in §
155.055.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.047 OP, OFFICE PARK DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. To establish and preserve a district
for limited kinds of business and other uses which are compatible with nearby
residential uses.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Uses permitted in an OP, Office Park District are set
forth in §
155.054. The office, retail and service uses permitted in this district shall
be subject to the provisions of §
155.099 in addition to conforming with regulations of the OP District.
   (C)   Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in an OP,
Office Park District, are set forth in §
155.055.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.048 C-1, NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. To establish and preserve a business
district serving patrons who arrive on foot or arrive by car and park once to
carry out several errands, including travelers, tourists and vacationers as
well as residents of the city and surrounding area.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Uses permitted in a C-1, Neighborhood Business
District are set forth in §
155.054.
   (C)   Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in a C-1,
Neighborhood Business District are set forth in §
155.055 except that all commercial, retail and service uses permitted in this
district shall not exceed 4,000 square feet in gross floor area for any lot or
premise.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.049 C-2, COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. To establish and preserve general
commercial areas consisting of shopping facilities where customers reach
individual business establishments primarily by automobile, and to provide for
other kinds of uses in compatible circumstances.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Uses permitted in a C-2, Community Business District
are set forth in §
155.054.
   (C)   Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in a C-2,
Community Business District are set forth in §
155.055.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.050 C-3, COMMERCIAL-MANUFACTURING DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. To establish and preserve commercial-
manufacturing area consisting of sales and display operations which by their
nature are not compatible with many other general commercial uses, as well as
selected manufacturing uses which are either free of objectionable influences
in their operations and appearance or can eliminate or control objectionable
characteristics by landscaping, screening and other abatement devices.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Uses permitted in a C-3, Commercial-Manufacturing
District are set forth in §
155.054.
   (C)   Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in a C-3,
Commercial-Manufacturing District are set forth in §
155.055.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.051 D, DOWNTOWN DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. To enable and encourage increased
private investment in the historic downtown and in its immediate environs. It
is further the purpose of this district to build on the work protecting the
historic and cultural heritage of the historic downtown for the inheritance of
future generations.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Any uses permitted in the D District.
   (C)   Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in the D,
Downtown District are set forth in § 155.072.
(Am. Ord. OR-2223-21, passed 10-11-21)
§ 155.052 I-1, LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. To establish and preserve industrial
areas consisting of manufacturing, assembling and fabrication activities that
are predominantly light and non offensive in character, as well as commercial
uses which are most appropriately located as neighbors of industrial uses or
which are necessary to service the immediate needs of people in these areas.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Uses permitted in an I-1, Light Industrial District
are set forth in §
155.054. The permitted uses in this district shall be subject to special
conditions as set forth in §
155.099, in addition to conforming with regulations of the I-1 District.
   (C)   Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in a I-
1 Light Industrial District, are set forth in §
155.055.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.053 I-2, HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. To establish and preserve industrial
areas for heavy manufacturing uses which by their nature may not be compatible
with commercial or other manufacturing uses. Provision is also made for the
location in this district of uses which may have characteristics of a noxious
nature, along with the imposition of reasonable standards for the protection of
adjacent uses.
   (B)   Permitted uses.  Uses permitted in an I-2, Heavy Industrial District,
are set forth in §
155.054.
   (C)   Area and height regulations. Area and height regulations in an I-2,
Heavy Industrial District, are set forth in §
155.055.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.054 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Use of land and buildings. Buildings, structures, land or premises
shall be used only in accordance with the uses specifically permitted in the
zoning district classification for the site subject to compliance with parking
regulations, height and area requirements, "Special Conditions" and all other
requirements of the zoning ordinance.
   (B)   Permitted use table.
      (1)   The permitted uses in each specific zoning district are shown by
means of symbols in the permitted use tables on the following pages. The letter
"P" in the zoning district column opposite the listed permitted use means the
use is permitted as a use of right in that district subject to:
         (a)   Providing off-street parking in the amounts required by
reference to the "Parking Group Table" column; and
         (b)   Subject to compliance with all of the requirements specified in
the section or sections whose number appears in the "Special Conditions"
column.
      (2)   The letter "S" in the zoning district column opposite the permitted
use means the use is permitted in that zoning district only after:
         (a)   Providing off-street parking in the amounts required by
reference to the "Parking Group Table" column;
         (b)   Subject to compliance with all of the requirements specified in
the section or sections whose number appears in the "Special Conditions"
column; and
         (c)   Obtaining a specific use permit as set forth in §
155.080.
      (3)   The letter "I" in the zoning district column opposite the permitted
use means the use is not permitted as a use of right in that district and is
permitted only after:
         (a)   Providing off-street parking in the amounts required by
reference to the "Parking Group Table" column.
         (b)   Subject to compliance with all of the requirements specified in
the section or sections whose number appears in the "Special Conditions"
column; and
         (c)   Obtaining an industrial use permit as set forth in §
155.083.
      (4)   The referenced requirements of "Parking Group Table" and "Special
Conditions" listed in the above mentioned columns are provided in §
155.091 and §
155.099, respectively.
      (5)   No primary use shall be permitted in any district other than a use
shown in the following tables and no primary use shall be permitted in any
district unless the letter "P" or the letter "S" appears opposite the listed
permitted use.
   (C)   Uses not listed. Primary uses not listed in the permitted use table
may be permitted in any district where similar uses are permitted subject to
the determination of the Director of Planning. The function and location
requirements of the unlisted use must be consistent with the purpose and
description of the zoning district, compatible with the permitted uses in the
district, and be similar in traffic-generating capacity, noise, vibration,
dust, odor, glare and heat producing characteristics.
   (D)   Accessory use. A use which is customarily incidental to that of the
primary existing use, which is located on the same lot or premise as the
primary existing use, and which has the same zoning district classification,
shall be permitted as an accessory use without being separately listed as a
permitted use subject to the determination of the Director of Planning.
PERMITTED USE TABLE
                                                        Permitted   Nonresidential
Residential Districts                                   Primary     Districts
                                                        Uses
  SF-  SF- SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-            A.
A 5AC/ 12/ 9.6/ 8.4/ 8.4/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 6/  2F MF- MF- Accessory   OP C- C- C- I- I- PD Parking Group Table, §  Special Conditions, §
  24   22  20   18   16   18   16   12   12     1   2   Residential    1  2  3  1  2     155.091                  155.099
                                                        Uses
Residential Districts                                   Permitted      Nonresidential
                                                        Primary Uses   Districts
  SF-  SF- SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-    MF- MF- A. Accessory      C- C- C- I- I-    Parking Group Table, §  Special Conditions, §
A 5AC/ 12/ 9.6/ 8.4/ 8.4/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 6/  2F 1   2   Residential    OP 1  2  3  1  2  PD 155.091                  155.099
  24   22  20   18   16   18   16   12   12             Uses
                                                        1. Accessory
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   Building,                  P                          5
                                                        Structure or
                                                        Use
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P           2. Accessory               P                          35
                                                        Dwelling
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   3. Home                    P                          6
                                                        Occupation
                                                        4. Private
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   Recreation                 P                          7
                                                        Facility
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P               5. Private                 P                          12
                                                        Stable
                                                        6. Private
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   Utility Shop               P                          10
                                                        or Storage
                                                        7. Quarters
                                                        for On-Site
                                           Manager or           S  S  S  P                          32
                                                        Caretaker of
                                                        Mini-
                                                        Warehouses
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   8. Solar Panel P  P  P  P  P  P  P                          38
                                                        System
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   9. Swimming                P                          9
                                                        Pool
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   10. TV Dish    P  P  P  P  P  P  P                          11
                                                        Antenna
  SF-  SF- SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-    MF- MF- B.                C- C- C- I- I-    Parking Group Table, §  Special Conditions, §
A 5AC/ 12/ 9.6/ 8.4/ 8.4/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 6/  2F 1   2   Agricultural   OP 1  2  3  1  2  PD 155.091                  155.099
  24   22  20   18   16   18   16   12   12             Uses
                                                        1. Animal
S                                           Pound (Public        S  S  S                             
                                                        or Private)
P S    S   S    S    S    S    S    S               2. Farm, Ranch                                       20
                                                        or Orchard
S                                           3. Kennel            S  S  S                             
S                                           4. Livestock         S  S  S                             
                                                        Auction
S                                           5. Livestock           S  S                             
                                                        Feed Lot
                                                        6. Poultry
S                                           Raising or             S  S                             
                                                        Hatchery
  SF-  SF- SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-    MF- MF- C. Automobile/    C- C- C- I- I-    Parking Group Table, §  Special Conditions, §
A 5AC/ 12/ 9.6/ 8.4/ 8.4/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 6/  2F 1   2   Vehicle        OP 1  2  3  1  2  PD 155.091                  155.099
  24   22  20   18   16   18   16   12   12             Service Uses
                                           1. Auto              S      P  7f                        
                                                        Auction
                                                        2. Auto Glass,
                                           Upholstery or      S  S  P  P  P  7b                       18
                                                        Muffler Shop
                                                        3. Car Wash,
                                           Including          S  S      P  7g                       17
                                                        Self- Service
                                                        4. Auto
                                           Painting or          S  P  P  P  7b                       18
                                                        Body Repair
                                                        5. Auto Parts
                                           or Accessory     S  S  S  P  P  P  7c                        
                                                        Sales (Indoor)
                                                        6. Auto Parts
                                           or Accessory         S      P  7d                        
                                                        Sales
                                                        (Outdoor)
                                           7. Auto Rental     S  S      P                           
                                                        8.
                                                        Recreational
                                           Vehicle Sales,       S  P  P  P                           
                                                        Including RV
                                                        Trailers
                                           9. Auto Sales,     S  S      P  7e                        
                                                        In Building
                                                        10. Gasoline
                                           Service            S  S  P  P  P  7a                        
                                                        Station
                                           11. New Truck      S  S  P  P  P                           
                                                        Sales Lot
                                                        12. New and
                                           Used Car Sales     S  S  P  P  P  7f                       26
                                                        Lot
                                                        13. Truck or
                                           Heavy Vehicle        S  P  P  P  7b                       18
                                                        Repair
                                           14. Auto           S  S  P  P  P  7b                       18
                                                        Repair Garage
                                                        15. Temporary
                                           Storage of             P  P  P                           
                                                        Impounded
                                                        Vehicle
                                                        16. Tire
                                           Retreading or          P  P    7b                        
                                                        Capping
                                           17. Used Truck             P                           
                                                        Only Sales Lot
                                           18. Used Car         S      P  7f                        
                                                        Only Sales Lot
                                                        19. New
                                           Agricultural       S  S  P  P  P                           
                                                        or Utility
                                                        Trailer Sales
                                                        20. Trailer,
                                           Truck or             S  P  P  P                          29
                                                        Recreational
                                                        Vehicle Rental
                                                        21. Consumer
                                                        Electronics,
                                           Radio, and         P  P  P  P  P  4c                        
                                                        Television
                                                        Repair
  SF-  SF- SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-    MF- MF- D. Commercial     C- C- C- I- I-    Parking Group Table, §  Special Conditions, §
A 5AC/ 12/ 9.6/ 8.4/ 8.4/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 6/  2F 1   2   and Warehouse  OP 1  2  3  1  2  PD 155.091                  155.099
  24   22  20   18   16   18   16   12   12             Uses
                                                        1. Adult
                                           Entertainment          P  P    5b                       21, 30
                                                        Establishment
                                                        2. Bakery or
                                           Confectionary        S  P  P  P  8e                        
                                                        Wholesale
                                                        3. Bottle
                                           Works                S  P  P  P  8e                        
                                                        Wholesale
                                                        4. Building
                                           Material or        S  S  P  P  P  8a, 8d                   28
                                                        Lumber Yard
                                           5. Cabinet           S  P  P  P  8e                        
                                                        Making
                                           6. Woodworking       S  P  P  P  8e                        
                                                        Shop
                                                        7. Chemical
                                           Products, Bulk       S  S  P  P  8c                        
                                                        Storage
                                           8. Upholstery        S  P  P  P  8e                        
                                           9. Cleaning,         S  P  P  P  8e                        
                                                        Laundry Plant
                                   P  P   P   10. Donation   P  P  P  P  P  P                            40
                                                        Box
                                           11. Dyeing           S  P  P  P  8e                        
                                                        Plant
                                                        12. Cleaning
                                           Plant, Other           P  P  P  8e                        
                                                        Than Clothing
                                                        and Linen
                                                        13. Clothing
                                           Mfg. or Light        S  P  P  P  8e                        
                                                        Fabrication
                                                        and Assembly
                                                        14. Contractor
                                           Shop and             S  P  P  P  8d, 8e                    
                                                        Storage Yard
                                                        (Outside)
                                           15. Feed Store       S      P  8e                        
                                                        16. Heavy
                                           Machinery            S  P  P  P  8d, 8e                    
                                                        Sales, Service
                                                        or Storage
                                           17. Job              S  P  P  P  8e                        
                                                        Printing
                                           18. Newspaper        S  P  P  P  8e                        
                                                        Printing
                                                        19.
                                                        Maintenance or
                                           Repair               S  P  P  P  8e                        
                                                        Services For
                                                        Buildings
                                           20. Mini-            S  S  S  P                          27
                                                        Warehouses
                                           21. Nursery-           S  S  P  8e                        
                                                        Wholesale
                                                        22. Open
                                                        Storage or
                                           Sale of              S  S  S  P  8d                        
                                                        Commodities
                                                        Not Elsewhere
                                                        Listed
                                                        23. Paint Shop
                                                        or Paint
                                           Mixing,              S  P  P  P  8e                        
                                                        Wholesale or
                                                        Warehouse
                                                        24. Plumbing,
                                                        Electrical or
                                           Air                S  S  P  P  P  8e                        
                                                        Conditioning
                                                        Sales and
                                                        Service
                                                        25. Recycling
                                           Collection           S  S  S  P  8e                        
                                                        Center
                                                        26. Scientific
                                           or Research          S  P  P  P  8e                        
                                                        Laboratories
                                                        27. Storage or
                                           Sales              S  S  P  P  P  8c                       27
                                                        Warehouse
                                                        28. Trailer or
                                           Manufactured           P  P  P  8d                        
                                                        Housing Sales
                                                        or Rental
                                                        29. Wholesale
                                           Office or          S  S  P  P  P  8c                        
                                                        Sample Room
                                                        Only
                                                        E.
  SF-  SF- SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-    MF- MF- Educational,      C- C- C- I- I-    Parking Group Table, §  Special Conditions, §
A 5AC/ 12/ 9.6/ 8.4/ 8.4/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 6/  2F 1   2   Institutional  OP 1  2  3  1  2  PD 155.091                  155.099
  24   22  20   18   16   18   16   12   12             and Special
                                                        Uses
                                           1. Art Gallery P  P  P  P  P    P  2k                        
                                                        or Museum
                                                        2. Cemetery,
S S    S   S    S    S    S    S    S    S   S  S   S   Mausoleum or   S  S  S  S  S    P                           
                                                        Crematorium
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   3. Church or   P  P  P  P  P    P  2f                        
                                                        Rectory
                                                        4. College,
                                                        University,
                                           Business or    P  P  P  P      P  2c                        
                                                        Professional
                                                        School
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   5. Community   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  2a                        
                                                        Center, Public
S S    S   S    S    S    S    S    S    S   S  S   S   6. Convent or  P  P  P  P      P                           
                                                        Monastery
                                                        7. Day Nursery
S                                   S  S   S   or Child Care  P  P  P  P      P  2g                        
                                                        Center
                                                        8. Elementary
S S    S   S    S    S    S    S    S    S   S  S   S   or Secondary   P  P  P  P      P  2b                        
                                                        School,
                                                        Private
                                                        9. Elementary
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   or Secondary   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  2b                        
                                                        School, Public
                                                        10. Fairground
                                           or Exhibition      P  P  P  P  P  2d, 2e                    
                                                        Area
                                                        11. Fraternal
                                           Organization,  S  P  P  P      P  2l                        
                                                        Lodge or Civic
                                                        Club
                                                        12. Hospital/
                                                        Home/ Center
                                           for Substance      S  S      P  2i                        
                                                        Abuse or
                                                        Psychiatric
                                                        Patients
                                                        13. Hospital/
                                                        Home/ Center
                                           for General,       P  P      P  2h                        
                                                        Acute or
                                                        Chronic Care
                                                        14.
S                                   S  S   S   Kindergarten,  P  P  P  P      P  2g                        
                                                        Private
                                                        15. Labor
                                           Union or       S  P  P  P  P  P  P  2p                        
                                                        Similar Union
                                                        Organization
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   16. Library,   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  2k                        
                                                        Public
                                           17. Memory         P  P      P  2n                        
                                                        Care Facility
                                                        18. Mortuary
                                           or Funeral         P  P  P    P  2o                        
                                                        Chapel
                                                        19. Nursing or
                                           Assisted           P  P      P  2n                        
                                                        Living
                                                        Facility
                                                        20. Jail or
                                                        Prison,
                                           Privately              S  S                             
                                                        Owned or
                                                        Operated
                                                        21. Public
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   Park,          P  P  P  P  P  P  P                           
                                                        Playground
                                                        22. Vocational
                                           or Trade         P  P  P  P  P  P  2b                        
                                                        School
  SF-  SF- SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-    MF- MF- F. General        C- C- C- I- I-    Parking Group Table, §  Special Conditions, §
A 5AC/ 12/ 9.6/ 8.4/ 8.4/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 6/  2F 1   2   Retail Uses    OP 1  2  3  1  2  PD 155.091                  155.099
  24   22  20   18   16   18   16   12   12
                                                        1. Bakery or
                                           Confectionary  P  P  P  P      P  4b                       24
                                                        Store, Retail
                                           2. Book Store, P  P  P  P      P  4b                       24
                                                        Retail
                                                        3. Camera and
                                           Photography    P  P  P  P      P  4b                       24
                                                        Supply
                                                        4. Cleaning
                                           and Laundry,       S  S  P  P  P  4b                        
                                                        Retail
                                                        5. New
                                           Clothing or        P  P  P    P  4b                        
                                                        Department
                                                        Store
                                           6. Discount        S  S  P    P  4b                        
                                                        Store
                                           7. Drug Store  P  P  P  P      P  4b                       24
                                                        or Pharmacy
                                           8. Florist,    P  P  P  P      P  4b                       24
                                                        Retail
                                                        9. Food or
                                           Beverage Sales P  P  P  P  P    P  4b                       24
                                                        Store
                                                        10. Furniture,
                                                        Home
                                           Furnishings or     P  P  P    P  4c                        
                                                        Appliance
                                                        Store
                                                        11.
                                           Upholstery,      S  P  P      P  4c                        
                                                        Retail
                                           12. Gift Store P  P  P  P      P  4b                       24
                                                        13. Handicraft
                                           or Art Object    P  P  P  P    P  4b                        
                                                        Sales Store
                                           14. Hobby, Toy   P  P  P  P    P  4b                        
                                                        or Game Store
                                           15. Jewelry      P  P  P      P  4b                        
                                                        Store
                                                        16. Luggage or
                                           Leather Goods      P  P      P  4b                        
                                                        Store
                                                        17. Nursery or
                                           Garden Store,      P  P  P    P  4b                       28
                                                        Retail
                                           18. Package                                           
                                                        Store
                                           19. Pawn Shop          P  P    4b                        
                                           20. Pet Shop       P  P  P    P  4b                        
                                                        21. Retail and
                                                        Service
                                           Establishments S  S  S  S  S  S  P  4a, 4b                   22,24
                                                        Not Elsewhere
                                                        Listed
                                                        22. Sewing,
                                           Needlework and   P  P  P  P    P  4b                        
                                                        Goods Store
                                                        23. Stationary
                                           or Office      P  P  P  P      P  4b                       24
                                                        Supply Store
                                                        24. Sporting
                                           Goods or           P  P  P    P  4b                        
                                                        Bicycle Store
                                           25. Tobacco                P  4b                       39
                                                        Products Store
                                                        26. Used
                                           Merchandise        S  S      P  4b                        
                                                        Store
  SF-  SF- SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-            G. General
A 5AC/ 12/ 9.6/ 8.4/ 8.4/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 6/  2F MF- MF- Service and    OP C- C- C- I- I- PD Parking Group Table, §  Special Conditions, §
  24   22  20   18   16   18   16   12   12     1   2   Office Type       1  2  3  1  2     155.091                  155.099
                                                        Uses
                                           1. Advertising P  P  P  P      P  6d                        
                                                        Agencies
                                                        2. Advertising
                                                        Service with
                                           Outdoor              P  P    P  6d                        
                                                        Storage
                                                        Facilities
                                                        3. Drive-In
                                           Banking            P  P  P    P  6a                        
                                                        Facilities
                                                        4. Banking
                                                        Offices or
                                           Facilities     P  P  P  P      P  6a                        
                                                        Excluding
                                                        Drive-In
                                                        Services
                                           5. Beauty Shop S  P  P  P      P  4a                        
                                                        or Barber Shop
                                                        6. Body Art
                                           and Piercing               P  4a                       38
                                                        Studio
                                           7. Catering        P  P  P    P                           
                                                        Service
                                                        8. Coin-
                                                        Operated
                                           Laundries and/         P  P  P  4e                        
                                                        or Dry
                                                        Cleaning,
                                                        Self-Service
                                                        9. Computer
                                           and/or Data    P  P  P  P  P    P  6d                        
                                                        Processing
                                                        Services
                                                        10. Eating
                                           Places with        S  S  S  S  P  5b                       21, 36
                                                        Drive- Through
                                                        Service
                                                        11. Eating
                                           Places without   P  P  P  P    P  5a                       21
                                                        Drive- Through
                                                        Services
                                                        12. Fix-It
                                                        Shop or
                                           Household        S  S  S  P  P  P  4c                        
                                                        Appliance
                                                        Service and
                                                        Repair
                                           13. Food Carts     P  P                                33
                                                        14. Agents for
                                                        Garment
                                           Pressing,      S  P  P  P  P    P  4a                        
                                                        Laundries or
                                                        Dry Cleaning
                                           15. Key Shop   S  P  P  P      P  4a                        
                                                        16. Mailing,
                                                        Reproduction,
                                           Commercial     P  P  P  P  P    P  6d                        
                                                        Art, Photo or
                                                        Steno Service
                                                        17. Medical or
                                           Dental         P  P  P  P  P  P  P  6d                        
                                                        Laboratories
                                                        18. Office,
                                                        Physician,
                                           Dentist or     P  P  P  P  P    P  6c                        
                                                        Other Health
                                                        Practitioners
                                                        19. Office,
                                           Professional   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  6d                        
                                                        or
                                                        Administration
                                                        20. Personnel
                                           Supply         P  P  P  P  P  P  P  6d                        
                                                        Services
                                           21. Pet          P  P  P  P    P  4a                        
                                                        Grooming
                                           22. Private        P  P  P  P  P  5b                       21
                                                        Club or Lodge
                                                        23. Shoe
                                           Repair Shop or P  P  P  P      P  4a                        
                                                        Shoe Shine
                                                        Parlor
                                                        24. Studio for
                                           Photographer,  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  4a                        
                                                        Musician or
                                                        Artist
                                                        25. Tailor or
                                           Dressmaking    P  P  P  P      P  4a                        
                                                        Shop
                                                        26.
                                                        Veterinarian
                                           Hospital with        S  S  S  P  6d                        
                                                        Outside Animal
                                                        Run or Pens
                                                        27.
                                           Veterinarian       P  P  P    P  6d                        
                                                        Office Only
  SF-  SF- SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-    MF- MF- H. Government     C- C- C- I- I-    Parking Group Table, §  Special Conditions, §
A 5AC/ 12/ 9.6/ 8.4/ 8.4/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 6/  2F 1   2   Uses           OP 1  2  3  1  2  PD 155.091                  155.099
  24   22  20   18   16   18   16   12   12
                                                        1. Federal,
                                           State or       P  P  P  P  P  P  P                           
                                                        Municipal
                                                        Building
                                                        2. Fire
                                                        Station or
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   Similar Public P  P  P  P  P  P  P                           
                                                        Safety
                                                        Building
                                                        3. Public
                                           Utility Shop         P  P  P  P                           
                                                        or Storage
  SF-  SF- SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-            I. Hotels,
A 5AC/ 12/ 9.6/ 8.4/ 8.4/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 6/  2F MF- MF- Group Quarters OP C- C- C- I- I- PD Parking Group Table, §  Special Conditions, §
  24   22  20   18   16   18   16   12   12     1   2   and Other         1  2  3  1  2     155.091                  155.099
                                                        Lodging Places
                                           1. Bed and                 P                           
                                                        Breakfast Inn
S S    S   S    S    S    S    S    S    S   S  S   S   2. Group                   P  1a                        
                                                        Foster Homes
                                                        3. Age
                                     S   S   Restricted     S  S  S        P  2j                        
                                                        Senior Living
                                                        Facility
                                        S   4. Hotel or    S  S  P  P  P    P  1g                       4, 21
                                                        Motel
                                                        5. Houses on a
                                     P   P   Membership                 P  1g                        
                                                        Basis
                                     P   P   6. Private                 P  1i                        
                                                        Dormitory
                                                        7. Rooming and
                                                        Boarding
                                     P   P   House,                     P  1f                        
                                                        Organization
                                                        Hotel or
                                                        Lodging
                                           8. Vacation                P                           
                                                        Rental
  SF-  SF- SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-            J.
A 5AC/ 12/ 9.6/ 8.4/ 8.4/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 6/  2F MF- MF- Manufacturing  OP C- C- C- I- I- PD Parking Group Table, §  Special Conditions, §
  24   22  20   18   16   18   16   12   12     1   2   and Industrial    1  2  3  1  2     155.091                  155.099
                                                        Uses
                                                        1. Aircraft
                                           Hardware or            P  P  P  8f                        
                                                        Parts
                                                        Manufacturing
                                           2. Aircraft              I  P  8f                        
                                                        Manufacturing
                                                        3. Appliance
                                           (Small)                P  P  P  8f                        
                                                        Manufacturing
                                           4. Automobile            I  P  8f                        
                                                        Manufacturing
                                           5. Boiler                I  P  8f                        
                                                        Works
                                           6. Chemical            S  I  P  8f                        
                                                        Processing
                                                        7. Clay
                                           Products               S  I  P  8f                        
                                                        Manufacturing
                                                        8. Container
                                           Manufacturing          P  P  P  8f                        
                                                        (Wood, Paper
                                                        or Plastic)
                                                        9. Cotton or
                                           Cottonseed               I  P  8f                        
                                                        Processing or
                                                        Storage
                                                        10. Creamery/
                                                        Dairy Products
                                           Mfg. or              S  P  P  P  8f                        
                                                        Wholesale
                                                        Distribution
                                                        11. Electrical
                                           Component            S  P  P  P  8f                        
                                                        Manufacturing
                                                        12. Electrical
                                                        Equipment or
                                           Appliance                I  P  8f                        
                                                        Manufacturing
                                                        (Large)
                                           13.                    P  P  P  8f                        
                                                        Electroplating
                                           14. Flour Mill           I  P  8f                        
                                           15. Food               P  P  P  8f                        
                                                        Processing
                                                        16. Foundry,
                                           Forge Plant or           I  P  8f                        
                                                        Rolling Mill
                                                        17. Furniture,
                                           Cabinet                P  P  P  8f                        
                                                        Manufacturing
                                           18. Kitchen            P  P  P  8f                        
                                                        Equipment
                                                        19. Heavy
                                           Equipment                I  P  8f                        
                                                        Manufacturing
                                           20. Ice Cream        S  P  P  P  8f                        
                                                        Manufacturing
                                                        21. Ice
                                           Manufacturing        S  P  P  P  8f                        
                                                        or Storage
                                                        22. Machine
                                           Shop or              S  P  P  P  8f                        
                                                        Welding
                                                        23. Metal
                                           Fabrication          S  P  P  P  8f                        
                                                        Plant
                                                        24.
                                                        Manufactured
                                           Home,                  P  P  P  8f                        
                                                        Industrialized
                                                        Housing,
                                                        Building Mfg.
                                                        25. Oil Well
                                           Tools or               S  I  P  8f                        
                                                        Equipment
                                                        Manufacturing
                                           26. Paper                S    8f                        
                                                        Manufacturing
                                                        27. Paper
                                           Products             S  P  P  P  8f                        
                                                        Manufacturing
                                                        28. Petroleum
                                           or Chemical              I  P  8f                        
                                                        Manufacturing
                                           29. Planing            P  P  P  8f                        
                                                        Mill
                                           30. Rope             S  P  P  P  8f                        
                                                        Manufacturing
                                                        31. Salvage or
                                           Reclamation of       S  P  P  P  8f                        
                                                        Products
                                                        (Inside Only)
                                           32. Stone                I  P  8f                        
                                                        Monument Works
                                           33. Temporary  P  P  P  P  P  P                            23
                                                        Batch Plant
                                                        34. Textile or
                                           Garment              S  P  P  P  8f                        
                                                        Manufacturing
                                                        35. Travel
                                                        Trailer,
                                           Camper or              P  P  P  8f                        
                                                        Camper Top
                                                        Manufacturing
                                                        36. Industries
                                           Not Elsewhere          S  S  P  8f                       25
                                                        Listed
  SF-  SF- SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-    MF- MF- K. Natural        C- C- C- I- I-    Parking Group Table, §  Special Conditions, §
A 5AC/ 12/ 9.6/ 8.4/ 8.4/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 6/  2F 1   2   Resource and   OP 1  2  3  1  2  PD 155.091                  155.099
  24   22  20   18   16   18   16   12   12             Extractions
                                           1. Mining              S  S  P                           
                                                        Extraction
                                                        2. Oil or Gas
S S    S   S    S    S    S    S    S    S   S  S   S   Well Drilling  S  S  S  S  S  S  P                          34
                                                        or Production
S S    S   S    S    S    S    S    S    S   S  S   S   3. Line        S  S  S  S  S  S  P                          34
                                                        Compressor
                                                        4. Petroleum
                                                        Products
                                           Collection or          S  S  P  8b                        
                                                        Storage
                                                        (Wholesale)
                                                        5. Sand,
                                           Gravel or              S  S  P  8b                        
                                                        Earth Sales or
                                                        Storage
  SF-  SF- SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-    MF- MF- L. Public         C- C- C- I- I-    Parking Group Table, §  Special Conditions, §
A 5AC/ 12/ 9.6/ 8.4/ 8.4/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 6/  2F 1   2   Utilities      OP 1  2  3  1  2  PD 155.091                  155.099
  24   22  20   18   16   18   16   12   12
                                                        1. Cable TV
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   Transmission   P  P  P  P  P  P  P                           
                                                        Line
                                                        2. Electric
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   Transmission   P  P  P  P  P  P  P                           
                                                        Line
                                                        3. Electrical
                                           Generating         S  S  P  P                             
                                                        Plant
S S    S   S    S    S    S    S    S    S   S  S   S   4. Electrical  P  P  P  P  P  P  P                           
                                                        Substation
                                                        5. Gas
                                                        Transmission
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   Line or        P  P  P  P  P  P  P                           
                                                        Metering
                                                        Station
                                                        6. Local
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   Utility        P  P  P  P  P  P  P                           
                                                        Service Line
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   7. Pumping     P  P  P  P  P  P  P                           
                                                        Station
                                                        8. Radio, TV
S S    S   S    S    S    S    S    S    S   S  S   S   or Microwave   S  S  S  S  S  S  S                           
                                                        Tower
                                                        9. Railroad
S S    S   S    S    S    S    S    S    S   S  S   S   Switching      S  S  S  P  P  P  P                           
                                                        Yards
                                                        10. Sewage
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   Pumping        P  P  P  P  P  P  P                           
                                                        Station
                                                        11. Sewage
                                           Treatment              S  P  P                           
                                                        Facility
                                                        12. Telephone
                                                        Exchange,
S S    S   S    S    S    S    S    S    S   S  S   S   Switching      P  P  P  P  P  P  P                           
                                                        Relay or
                                                        Transmission
                                                        Station
                                                        13. Utility
                                           Business       P  P  P  P  P  P  P  6d                        
                                                        Office
                                                        14. Utility
                                           Service or         S  P  P  P  P                           
                                                        Storage Yard
                                                        or Buildings
                                                        15. Water
                                                        Standpipe or
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   Elevated Water P  P  P  P  P  P  P                           
                                                        Supply,
                                                        Reservoir or
                                                        Well
                                                        16. Water
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   Treatment      P  P  P  P  P  P  P                           
                                                        Plant
  SF-  SF- SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-            M. Recreation
A 5AC/ 12/ 9.6/ 8.4/ 8.4/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 6/  2F MF- MF- and            OP C- C- C- I- I- PD Parking Group Table, §  Special Conditions, §
  24   22  20   18   16   18   16   12   12     1   2   Entertainment     1  2  3  1  2     155.091                  155.099
                                                        Uses
                                                        1. Amusement,
                                           Commercial         P  P  P  I  P  3c                       21
                                                        (Indoor)
                                                        2. Amusement,
                                           Commercial         S  S      P  3d                       21
                                                        (Outdoor)
                                                        3. Bar, Dance
                                           Hall or Night      S  S      P  5b                       21
                                                        Club
                                           4. Bowling         P  P  P    P  3b                       21
                                                        Alley
                                                        5. Campground
                                           or                         P                           
                                                        Recreational
                                                        Vehicle Park
                                                        6. Coin-
                                           Operated           P  P      P  3c                        
                                                        Amusement
                                                        Devices
                                                        7. Commercial
                                                        Sport,
                                           Ballpark,          S  P  P    P  3e                        
                                                        Stadium or
                                                        Athletic Field
S S    S   S    S    S    S    S    S    S   S  S   S   8. Country     P  P  P  P      P  3g                        
                                                        Club
                                                        9. Driving
                                           Range or           P  P      P  3h                        
                                                        Miniature Golf
                                                        Course
                                           10. Go-Cart                P  3d                        
                                                        Track
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   11. Golf       P  P  P  P  P  P  P  3g                        
                                                        Course
                                                        12. Gun Club,
                                           Skeet or           S  S  S  S  P                           
                                                        Target Range
                                                        13. Membership
                                           Sport or           P  P  P    P                           
                                                        Recreation
                                                        Club
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   14. Parks      P  P  P  P  P  P  P                           
                                           15. Pool or                P  3c                       21
                                                        Billiard Hall
                                           16. Rodeo                  P  3d                       21
                                                        Ground
                                                        17. Roller or
                                           Ice Skating        P  P  P    P  3d                        
                                                        Rink
                                                        18. Stable,
                                           Commercial,                P                          14
                                                        Rental or
                                                        Boarding
                                           19. Stable,                P                          13
                                                        Riding Club
                                                        20. Swimming
                                           Pool,              P  P      P                          9
                                                        Commercial
                                           21. Theatre,               P                           
                                                        Drive-In
                                                        22. Theatre,
                                           Other Than         P  P  P    P  3a                        
                                                        Drive-In
  SF-  SF- SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-    MF- MF- N. Residential    C- C- C- I- I-    Parking Group Table, §  Special Conditions, §
A 5AC/ 12/ 9.6/ 8.4/ 8.4/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 6/  2F 1   2   Uses           OP 1  2  3  1  2  PD 155.091                  155.099
  24   22  20   18   16   18   16   12   12
                                                        1. Single
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P      Family                     P  1a                       31
                                                        Dwelling
                                P   P  P      2. Zero-lot-               P  1j                       1, 31
                                                        line Dwelling
                                   P  P   P   3. Two Family              P  1b                       31
                                                        Dwelling
                                     P   P   4. Townhouse               P  1c                       2
                                                        5. Multi-
                                     P   P   family                     P  1e                       2
                                                        Dwelling
                                     P   P   5. Apartments              P  1e                       2
As specified in §                                      6.
155.068                                                 Manufactured               P  1h                       3
                                                        Housing
As specified in §                                      7. Camping                 P                          3
155.068                                                 Trailer
  SF-  SF- SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-  SF-    MF- MF- O.                C- C- C- I- I-    Parking Group Table, §  Special Conditions, §
A 5AC/ 12/ 9.6/ 8.4/ 8.4/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 7.5/ 6/  2F 1   2   Transportation OP 1  2  3  1  2  PD 155.091                  155.099
  24   22  20   18   16   18   16   12   12             Uses
                                           1. Airport             S  S  P                          15
                                                        Landing Field
                                           2. Bus Station     S  S  P  P  P                           
                                                        or Terminal
                                           3. Heliport      S  S  S  S  S  P                          15
                                                        4. Hauling or
                                           Storage              S  P  P  P  8c                        
                                                        Company
                                                        5. Motor
                                           Freight              S  P  P  P  8c                        
                                                        Terminal
                                                        6. Parking Lot
                                           or Structure,  S  S  S  S  P    P                          16
                                                        Commercial
                                           7. Parking           S  P  P                             
                                                        Lot, Truck
                                                        8. Railroad
                                           Freight              S  P  P    8c                        
                                                        Terminal
                                                        9. Railroad
                                           Passenger          S  S  P  P  P                           
                                                        Station
                                                        10. Railroad
P P    P   P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P  P   P   Track or       P  P  P  P  P  P  P                           
                                                        Right-Of-Way
 
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86; Am. Ord. OR-2193-20, passed 10-26-20; Am. Ord. OR-
2217-21, passed 9-13-21; Am. Ord. OR-2256-22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. OR-2288-
23, passed 1-23-23; Am. Ord. OR-2315-23, passed 8-14-23; Am. Ord. OR-2346-24,
passed 2-12-24; Am. Ord. OR-2376-24, passed 8-26-24; Am. Ord. OR-2387-24,
passed 10-14-24)
§ 155.055 AREA, SETBACK AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No lot, parcel, premises or tract of land shall be created and no
building permit shall be issued for any request that does not meet the
appropriate minimum lot area, width, depth, yard and height regulations as set
forth in the tables in division (B) of this section.
   (B)   See tables on following page.
      (1)   Residential districts.
          Minimum  Minimum                                                   Minimum Exterior
          Lot Area Floor            Minimum Minimum Minimum Minimum Minimum  Side Yard (Feet)
Zoning    per      Area    Maximum  Lot     Lot     Front   Rear    Interior Backing  Backing  Max.   Min. Masonry
District6 Dwelling Per     Lot      Width   Depth   Yard    Yard    Side     up to an up to an Height Construction6
          Unit     Unit    Coverage (Feet)  (Feet)  (Feet)  (Feet)1 Yard     abutting abutting (Feet)
          (Sq.     (Sq.                                             (Feet)1  side     rear
          Ft.)     Ft.)                                                      yard     yard
          Minimum                                                                   Minimum Exterior
          Lot Area                         Minimum Minimum Minimum Minimum Minimum  Side Yard (Feet)
Zoning    per      Minimum Floor  Maximum  Lot     Lot     Front   Rear    Interior Backing  Backing  Max.   Min. Masonry
District6 Dwelling Area Per Unit  Lot      Width   Depth   Yard    Yard    Side     up to an up to an Height Construction6
          Unit     (Sq. Ft.)      Coverage (Feet)  (Feet)  (Feet)  (Feet)1 Yard     abutting abutting (Feet)
          (Sq.                                                             (Feet)1  side     rear
          Ft.)                                                                      yard     yard
A         2 acres  2,200          15%      150     200     40      15      25       25       25       35
SF-12/22  12,000   2,6008         45%      90      120     25      25      10       25       15       35
SF-9.6/20 9,600    2,4008         45%      80      110     25      15      10       25       15       35
SF-8.4/18 8,400    2,2008         45%      70      110     25      15      10       20       15       35
SF-7.5/18 7,500    1,800          45%      65      110     25      15      5 & 102, 20       15       35     See §
                                                                           7                                 155.056
2F        3,750    1,000          45%      65      110     25      15      5 & 102  20       15       35
MF-1      3,630    See §155.055  40%      100     120     25      253     203      25       25       354
                   (F)
MF-2      2,420    See §155.055  40%      100     120     25      253     203      25       25       354
                   (F)
SF-5AC/24 5 acres  2,400          15%      200     200     45      35      20       45       20       35
SF-8.4/16 8,400    1,600          45%      70      110     25      15      5/7.55   20       15       35
SF-7.5/16 7,500    1,600          45%      65      110     25      15      5 & 102, 20       15       35     See §
                                                                           7                                 155.056
SF-7.5/12 7,500    1,200          45%      65      110     25      15      5/7.55   20       15       35
SF-6/12   6,000    1,200          45%      60      100     25      15      0/105    20       15       35
 
Footnotes:
   1.   Refer to §
155.095(C) for minimum rear or side yard requirement on residential lots
abutting property in an OP, C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1 or I-2 zoning classification.
   2.   Requires two side yards to have a combined total of not less than 15'
with a 5' minimum on one side and a 10' minimum on the other side.
   3.   Notwithstanding the above, townhomes, apartments and multi-family
dwellings in MF- 1 and MF-2 Districts, when located adjacent to other
residential districts that do not permit multi-family dwellings, shall setback
from the property line along such other residential districts four (4) feet for
every one (1) foot of building height. See additional landscaping requirements
in §
155.092 that may affect the building setback.
   4.   Multi-family dwelling units in MF-1 and MF-2 Districts shall not be
higher than 35' or two stories, whichever is less.
   5.   For single-family detached dwellings located in SF-8.4/16, SF-7.5/12
and SF-6/12 Districts, the minimum interior side yard shall be five (5) feet
for one-story units and seven and a half (7.5) feet for units with more than
one-story. Zero-lot-line dwellings in SF-6/12 District shall comply with the
provisions in §
155.055(C).
   6.   The area and height regulations for the PR District shall be the same
as those provided for the SF-12/22 District.
   7.   Developments in the SF-7.5/18 District approved prior to September 14,
2015, and developments in the SF-7.5/16 District approved prior to November 13,
2000, may continue to use a minimum interior side yard of five (5) feet for
one-story dwelling units and seven and a half (7.5) feet for dwelling units
with more than one-story.
   8.   Developments approved prior to January 14, 2019, may continue to use a
minimum floor area as follows: SF-12/22 or PR may be 2,200 square feet; SF-9.6/
20 may be 2,000 square feet, and SF-8.4/18 may be 1,800 square feet.
      (2)   Non-residential districts.
                                                                 Lot               Minimum Building Setback (feet)
                                                                 Dimension Maximum (7) (10) (12)                                 Maximum
Zoning Districts (Numbers in brackets refer to exceptions in §  (i.e.     Floor   When     When abutting other     Masonry      Height
155.055(C))                                                      area,     Area    abutting property lines (1) (3)  Construction (Feet)
                                                                 width,    Ratio   street   In a non-   In a        Requirement  (2) (6)
                                                                 depth)            right-   residential residential
                                                                                   of-way   district    district
                                                                 Lot               Minimum Building Setback (feet)
                                                                 Dimension Maximum (7) (10) (12)                                  Maximum
Zoning Districts (Numbers in brackets refer to exceptions in §  (i.e.     Floor   When     When abutting other      Masonry      Height
155.055(C))                                                      area,     Area    abutting property lines (1) (3)   Construction (Feet)
                                                                 width,    Ratio   street   In a non-   In a         Requirement  (2) (6)
                                                                 depth)            right-   residential residential
                                                                                   of-way   district    district
OP                                                               None      0.6     25       None        Refer to §  Refer to §  35
                                                                                                        155.095(C)   155.056
C-1                                                              None      0.6     25       None        Refer to §  Refer to §  35
                                                                                                        155.095(C)   155.056
C-2                                                              None      2.0     25       None        Refer to §  Refer to §  50
                                                                                                        155.095(C)   155.056
C-3                                                              None      2.0     25       None        Refer to §  Refer to §  50
                                                                                                        155.095(C)   155.056
I-1                                                              None      2.0     30       None        40           Refer to §  None
                                                                                                                     155.056
I-2                                                              None      1.0     30       None        40           Refer to §  None
                                                                                                                     155.056
 
   (C)   Exceptions to area and height regulations.
      (1)   In an industrial district, no structural setback shall be required
from a railroad right-of-way not less than 50 feet in width.
      (2)   A non-residential building or structure owned and/or operated by a
government entity shall be exempt from the district maximum height regulations.
      (3)   A building or structure may exceed the district maximum height
regulations with a specific use permit provided that the following minimum
setback requirements are met:
         (a)   Single-family or two-family dwellings may be increased in height
not more than ten feet when two side yards of not less than 20 feet each are
provided.
         (b)   In zoning classifications other than the C-2 and C-3 Districts,
hospitals may be erected to a height not exceeding 45 feet when the front, side
and rear yards are each increased an additional foot for each foot such
buildings exceed 35 feet.
         (c)   In C-2 and C-3 Districts, hospitals may be erected to a height
that is deemed appropriate by the City Council provided that the front, side
and rear yards are each increased an additional foot for each foot such
buildings exceed 50 feet in height, unless the additional setback requirement
is modified or waived by the City Council during the approval of the specific
use permit.
      (4)   Interior side yards shall not be required for abutting commercial
and industrial properties in the same zoning district if both properties are
developed as a unit under a common development plan provided that the
construction meets the requirements of the Mansfield Building Code and Fire
Code.
      (5)   Nonconforming lots of record existing at the time of the adoption
of this chapter and lots or parcels created as a result of condemnation or
involuntary sale by owner to a government entity with power of eminent domain,
shall be exempt, unless indicated, from the minimum lot area, depth and width
requirements provided they are developed in accordance with all minimum yard
requirements. Multi-family uses shall not be exempt from the minimum lot area
requirements.
      (6)   When individual attached townhouses or condominiums are to be sold
separately, there shall be no minimum lot area, lot width and lot depth
requirements; provided that the total land area of the project, including the
land on which the units are located and the land held in common ownership by
the unit owners, is equal to the total minimum land area required per dwelling
unit in the district in which the project is located.
      (7)   The height regulations of this chapter shall not apply to belfries,
chimneys, church spires, conveyors, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire
towers, storage towers, monuments, ornamental towers or spires, cranes,
construction equipment, smoke stacks, stage towers and scenery lofts, tanks,
ham radio and television antennas, and microwave relay, radio and television
transmission towers provided that in a PR, residential or commercial district
restricted to 35 feet in height, one additional foot shall be added to the
width and depth of the front, side and rear yards for each foot that such
structures exceed 35 feet in height.
      (8)   Buildings or structures for existing developments in industrial
districts shall be exempt from the minimum yard requirements where the
expansion, enlargement or separate addition thereof is limited to land already
owned by those businesses or committed to them under long term leases (or
extensions thereof) at the time of the enactment of this chapter unless it
abuts a residential zoning district.
      (9)   The zero-lot line concept which involves locating a residential
dwelling with a doorless and windowless wall actually on one interior side lot
line and with one side yard at a minimum width of ten feet shall be permitted
in the SF-6/12 District when the appropriate building lines and necessary
structural restrictions for the zero-lot-line concept, as set forth in §
155.099, are shown on a recorded plat which has been approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission.
      (10)   Where a building line has been established by a recorded plat or a
city ordinance and such line requires a greater or lesser front, side or rear
yard setback than is prescribed by this chapter for the district in which the
building line is located, the required front, side or rear yard shall comply
with the building line so established by such plat or ordinance.
      (11)   Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street
to another, a required front yard shall be provided on both streets unless a
building line for accessory buildings has been established along one frontage
on the plat or by city ordinance, in which event only one required front yard
need be observed.
      (12)   Every part of a required yard shall be open and unobstructed
except for accessory buildings or use as permitted herein, and the ordinary
projection of window sills, belt courses, fences, cornices, and roof eaves not
exceeding 24 inches into the required yard. No accessory building or use shall
be allowed in the required front or side yard except as provided in §
155.099(B).
   (D)   Minimum setback for trash containers and refuse or recycling storage
areas. Trash containers and storage areas for refuse or materials awaiting
disposal or recycling shall setback a minimum of 50 feet from any public
street.
   (E)   Minimum floor area and building separation in MF-1 and MF-2 Districts.
      (1)   In any district in which apartments and multi-family dwellings are
permitted, the following standards shall be followed in establishing the
minimum floor area, minimum width of a place or court and minimum separation
between buildings, to be measured between building walls:
   Dwelling Type            Minimum Floor Area
   a. Townhouse            1,200 sq. ft. per unit
   b. Apartment and other multi-family   600 sq. ft. per efficiency
    dwelling               750 sq. ft. per 1 bedroom unit
                     900 sq. ft. per 2 bedroom unit
                     1,000 sq. ft. per 3 bedroom unit
         The minimum average floor area per apartment or multi-family
residential project shall be 800 square feet; said minimum average floor area
shall apply to the total number of units to be constructed under the same
building permit.
   When Buildings are Facing         Minimum Separation
   a. Front to front             40 feet
   b. Front to rear            40 feet
   c. Rear to rear             20 feet
   d. Side to side             10 feet
   e. Side to front            20 feet
   f. Side to rear             10 feet
      (2)   In applying the above described standards, the front of a building
shall be deemed to be any building face, whether in one or more planes, having
doors, entrances or openings for primary access to the building or any unit
therein. The rear of the building shall be the face of the building that is
most nearly parallel and opposite to the building front and has no doors,
entrances or openings for any access to the building or units therein. A
building is considered to have a double frontage if both frontage has doors,
entrances or openings for access to the building or units therein. The sides of
a building shall be building faces that are not considered as the front or rear
of the building.
   (F)   Area, setback and height regulations for accessory buildings. Refer to
§
155.099(B)(5).
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86; Am. Ord. OR-2223-21, passed 10-11-21)
§ 155.056 COMMUNITY DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Exterior construction materials for development in the OP, C-1 through
C-3 Zoning Districts and the I-1 and I-2 Freeway Overlay Zoning Districts.
      (1)   In the OP, C-1 through C-3 Zoning Districts and the I-1 and I-
2 Freeway Overlay zoning districts, the exterior surfaces of all structures,
including screening walls, wing walls, columns and supports, shall consist of
at least 70% masonry construction materials. This requirement shall apply to
new structures, expansion of existing structures, and any repair or alteration
that involves more than 50% of the exterior surfaces of an existing structure.
This requirement shall not apply to roofs, awnings, canopies, doors, windows,
glass walls and frame assemblies thereof. The remaining 30% of the exterior
surfaces may be constructed of masonry-like construction materials or any
construction materials not expressly prohibited by this section.
      (2)   Masonry construction materials and masonry-like construction
materials are as defined in §
155.012.
      (3)   The exterior wall surfaces of all new structures shall be
constructed of at least two materials that compliment each other and are
consistent in style.
      (4)   The following construction materials shall be prohibited on the
exterior wall surfaces of all structures:
         (a)   Vinyl or aluminum siding;
         (b)   Plastic or fiberglass panels;
         (c)   Unfired or underfired clay, brick or other masonry product;
         (d)   Corrugated, ribbed or standing-seamed metal panels;
         (e)   Galvanized or aluminum coated metal cladding;
         (f)   Smooth, unfinished or untextured concrete masonry units or
concrete walls; or
         (g)   Reflective glass.
      (5)   Any damage to the exterior surfaces of a structure shall be
repaired within 120 days from the date the damage occurs.
      (6)   Existing structures that were lawful before the effective date of
this chapter but which do not conform to the regulations of this chapter after
its passage, shall be lawful nonconforming buildings or structures.
      (7)   Deviation from the above requirement may be accomplished only
through Planned Development zoning.
      (8)   Facilities or development on property owned and used by the City of
Mansfield and the Mansfield Independent School District are exempt from the
masonry materials requirements of this section.
      (9)   When all other conditions are met, industrialized buildings for
private schools and churches are permitted without masonry construction
materials as long as the total floor area of the industrialized buildings does
not exceed 35% of the total floor area of the primary structure.
   (B)   Exterior construction materials for development in the MF-1 and MF-
2 Zoning Districts.
      (1)   In the MF-1 and MF-2 Zoning Districts, the exterior surface of all
structures, including screening walls, wing walls, gables, and columns and
supports, shall be constructed of at least 80% masonry construction materials.
This requirement shall not apply to roofs, awnings, canopies, doors, windows,
glass walls and frame assemblies thereof. The remaining 20% of the exterior
surfaces may be constructed of masonry-like construction materials or any
construction material not expressly prohibited by this section.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the above, chimneys and fireplaces on external wall
surfaces shall be constructed of a minimum of 100% masonry construction. This
requirement shall not apply to chimneys for fireplaces that are not on or part
of the external wall.
      (3)   The following construction materials shall be prohibited:
         (a)   Plastic or fiberglass panels;
         (b)   Unfired or underfired clay, brick or other masonry product;
         (c)   Corrugated, ribbed or standing-seamed metal panels;
         (d)   Galvanized or aluminum coated metal cladding;
         (e)   Smooth, unfinished or untextured concrete masonry units or
concrete walls; or
         (f)   Reflective glass.
      (4)   Existing structures that were lawful before May 10, 2004, but which
do not conform to the regulations of this chapter after its passage, shall be
lawful non-conforming buildings or structures.
      (5)   Deviation from the above requirement may be accomplished only
through Planned Development zoning.
      (6)   Facilities or development on property owned and used by the City of
Mansfield and the Mansfield Independent School District are exempt from the
masonry materials requirement of this section.
      (7)   When all other conditions are met, industrialized buildings for
private schools and churches are permitted without masonry construction
materials as long as the total floor area of the industrialized buildings does
not exceed 35% of the total floor area of the primary structure.
   (C)   Exterior construction materials for development in the SF, PR, or 2F
Zoning Districts.
      (1)   In the SF, PR or 2F Zoning Districts, the exterior wall surfaces of
all dwelling units and all non-residential development such as churches,
schools or public facilities shall be constructed of at least 80% masonry
construction materials, including gables. This requirement shall not apply to
roofs, awnings, canopies, doors, windows, glass walls and frame assemblies
thereof. The remaining 20% of the exterior surfaces may be constructed of
masonry-like construction materials or any construction materials not expressly
prohibited by this section.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the above, chimneys and fireplaces on external wall
surfaces shall be constructed of a minimum of 100% masonry construction
materials. This requirement shall not apply to chimneys for fireplaces that are
not on or part of the external wall.
      (3)   The following construction materials shall be prohibited:
         (a)   Plastic or fiberglass panels;
         (b)   Unfired or underfired clay, brick or other masonry product;
         (c)   Corrugated, ribbed or standing-seamed metal panels;
         (d)   Galvanized or aluminum coated metal cladding;
         (e)   Smooth, unfinished or untextured concrete masonry units or
concrete walls; or
         (f)   Reflective glass.
      (4)   Deviation from the above requirement may be accomplished through
Planned Development zoning or through an appeal to the Board of Adjustment for
a special exception as set forth in § 155.082.
      (5)   Notwithstanding the above, facilities or development on property
owned and used by the City of Mansfield and the Mansfield Independent School
District are exempt from the masonry materials requirements of this section.
      (6)   When all other conditions are met, industrialized buildings for
private schools and churches are permitted without masonry construction
materials as long as the total floor area of the industrialized buildings does
not exceed 35% of the total floor area of the primary structure.
      (7)   The following properties in SF, PR or 2F zoning are automatically
exempted from said masonry construction requirement:
         (a)   Properties that are part of a preliminary or final plat approved
before February 12, 2001; and
         (b)   Existing dwelling units that are in legal conformance before the
adoption date of the requirement described above; such dwelling units shall not
be considered non-conforming uses due to non-compliance with the masonry
construction requirement.
   (D)   Architectural attributes for residential development in the PR, SF and
2F Districts.
      (1)   Developments in a valid preliminary plat submitted for approval on
or before November 12, 2012 shall be exempt from the requirements in this
division.
      (2)   The front entry to a house shall be well-defined and kept
proportional to the house. The front entry must be designed so as not to
distract from the rest of the house.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7501.png]
Front entry not proportional. Distracts      Front entry is well defined and
proportional
from the rest of the house. Not         to the house. Acceptable.
Acceptable.
      (3)   Only specialty windows such as box windows or circular windows may
be flush mounted to the exterior face of the building, all other windows are to
be inset to create relief on the elevations.
      (4)   Facades shall avoid large expanses of uninterrupted, single
exterior materials and must be broken up by changes in plane, window placement,
window trim, or color changes.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7506.png]
Large expanse with only one window and      Large expanse with articulated
features,
no material changes, projections or         windows and material changes.
Acceptable.
articulation. Not Acceptable.
      (5)   Gutters, if provided, shall be copper, galvanized steel, aluminum
or painted if exposed to the street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7508.png]
Shutters are not proportionally sized         Shutters are sized proportionally
to
to windows. Not Acceptable.            windows. Acceptable.
      (6)   All asphalt roof shingles shall be laminated architectural shingles
with a three dimensional appearance and warranted for at least 30 years.
      (7)   A minimum roof pitch of 8:12 (inches of rise per inches of run)
from side to side shall apply to the predominant roof, except a tile or slate
roof may have a minimum roof pitch of 5:12 (inches of rise per inches of run)
from side to side. A variety of roof pitches may be incorporated into the roof
design provided that the predominant roof meets the minimum roof pitch
requirement.
      (8)   In order to encourage variety, the exterior facades of houses on a
continuous block shall vary within every ten houses. When a house is
constructed, the same combination of brick, stone, masonry-like materials and
paint shall not be used on other houses within five lots on either side of that
house. The rear facade of a house on a lot that backs up to a street with four
or more lanes as shown in the thoroughfare plan shall vary in design and
construction materials from the rear facade of other houses within three lots
on either side of that house that also back up to the same street.
      (9)   Design between garage and house shall use same or complementary
colors and materials.
      (10)   Other quality products are encouraged, including but not limited
to: tile, slate or metal roofs suited to the architecture of the house;
decorative columns and railings; wood garage doors; insulated garage doors
varied patterns, style and type of materials; and architectural details such as
tile work, wood trim, and moldings; or accent materials integrated into the
facade.
      (11)   All exposed wood accents or wooden garage doors shall be stained,
sealed or painted for protection and regularly maintained.
      (12)   In order to encourage variety, for developments with 100 lots or
more, there shall be at least six housing products provided for every 100
houses in a development. To be classified as a housing product, a housing
product shall have at least three of the following characteristics which
clearly and obviously distinguish it from other housing products:
         (a)   Different room layout and size of house;
         (b)   Exterior materials;
         (c)   Roof lines;
         (d)   Garage placement; and
         (e)   Placement of the foot print on the lot and/or building face.
      (13)   In order to expedite individual permit approval, a builder is
required to submit plans or drawings showing floor plans, elevations or other
design elements of each housing product and have them pre-approved for
compliance with the above requirement.
      (14)   In order to encourage variety, for developments with 30 lots or
more, driveway orientations shall vary throughout the development. A minimum of
20% of all lots shall contain a J-Swing or side entry orientation. Additional
lot widths shall be provided to accommodate this configuration.
      (15)   For developments with 100 lots or more, a maximum of 10% of the
residential lots may be reduced to the size allowed in the next lower zoning
district from the current zoning of the development as shown in the table
below:
 
Base zoning district: 10% of the lots may be:
SF-12/22 or PR        SF-9.6/20
SF-9.6/20             SF-8.4/18
SF-8.4/18             SF-7.5/18
 
         The reduced size lots must comply with the minimum lot area, minimum
lot depth, minimum lot width, and minimum setbacks of the lower zoning district
that they are designated. The minimum floor area of houses on reduced sized
lots shall be the same as the minimum floor area required for the base zoning
district.
         The location of the reduced size lots must be shown on the preliminary
plat of a qualified development to be dispersed throughout the development such
that they are not concentrated in any particular phase, block or area of the
development. In a development with three or more blocks, there shall be no more
than of the total allowable reduced size lots within each block. To ensure that
the reduced size lots are dispersed according to the provisions of this
division, the Director of Planning must approve the design and location of the
lots before the preliminary plat of the development is presented to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for approval.
      (16)   Front porches that are fully covered and have a minimum depth of
seven feet may encroach a maximum distance of ten feet into the minimum front
yard setback in any SF or 2F district.
      (17)   The minimum front yard setback for 25% of the lots in a
development may be decreased to 20 feet provided that no front entry garage
shall be located within 25 feet of the front property line.
      (18)   To enhance the quality of life of residents and aesthetics, all
developments with interior streets shall have an enhanced entryway. At the time
of preliminary plat, a developer shall submit an enhanced entryway plan that
will include at least five of the following features:
         (a)   Boulevard section with median;
         (b)   Enhanced pavers or stained concrete;
         (c)   Decorative street lighting at the enhanced entryway which
conforms to the city's standards with Oncor Electric Services or other utility
providers;
         (d)   Enhanced architectural features;
         (e)   Enhanced fencing and landscaping features; and
         (f)   Use slip roads adjacent to arterials to front some homes on open
space, where applicable.
         To ensure that the entryway meets the intent of this division, the
Director of Planning must approve the design of the proposed enhanced entryway
before the preliminary plat of the development is presented to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for approval.
      (19)   Every development is encouraged to incorporate designs with the
following concepts:
         (a)   Single loaded streets adjacent to public parks and/or open
space;
         (b)   Curvilinear streets in developments over 50 acres;
         (c)   Lots fronting on block ends in gridded rectangular layouts;
         (d)   Shorten block lengths to approximately 900 feet to distribute
traffic and shorten pedestrian trips;
         (e)   Allow connectivity to adjacent neighborhoods and open space;
         (f)   Allow pedestrian proximity to neighborhood services/commercial
development;
         (g)   Incorporate drainage features into open space; and
         (h)   Limit lot frontage on higher volume collectors.
      (20)   To enhance the quality of life of residents, for developments with
250 lots or more, one recreation facility shall be provided for every 250 lots.
To be classified as a recreation facility, a recreation facility shall have at
least one of the following amenities:
         (a)   Swimming pool;
         (b)   Pond equipped with an aerator;
         (c)   Walking or bike trails;
         (d)   Playground;
         (e)   Open game fields;
         (f)   Common green areas or open space;
         (g)   Lighted courts for activities such as volleyball, basketball,
tennis, shuffleboard, racquet ball, croquet; or
         (h)   Other amenities approved by the Director of Planning that meet
the intent of this division.
         To ensure that the recreation facility meets the intent of this
division, the Director of Planning must approve the design and location of the
proposed recreation facility before the preliminary plat of the development is
presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval.
      (21)   Every neighborhood with common open space, private park land,
landscaping, common walls and fencing shall have a mandatory Home Owners
Association (HOA) to maintain those improvements.
      (22)   Connections to the Master Trail System shall be provided in
accordance with the Parks and Recreation Master Plan, where possible.
      (23)   All lawns and landscaping shall be irrigated in accordance with §
155.092.
      (24)   The Director of Planning is authorized to interpret and apply the
forgoing provisions to ensure conformance with the purposes intended by the
City Council. The decision of the Director of Planning shall be final unless an
appeal of the decision is made to the City Council. Such appeal shall be
submitted within ten days after the decision has been rendered by the Director
of Planning by filing a Notice of Appeal in the office of the Director of
Planning, setting forth in clear and concise fashion the basis for the appeal.
The City Council shall consider the appeal at a regular meeting and may affirm,
modify, or reverse the decision of the Director of Planning.
      (25)   Deviation from the above requirements may be accomplished only
through Planned Development zoning.
   (E)   Architectural attributes for non-residential development in the OP, C-
1 through C-3 Districts and all non-residential districts within the Freeway
Overlay District.
      (1)   Architectural attributes are intended to address the visual impact
of long uninterrupted walls or rooflines by providing a minimum amount of
variations according to the size of the structure.
      (2)   Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary
accepted meanings within the context with which they are used.
      (3)   All non-residential buildings shall be architecturally finished on
all four sides with the same materials, detailing (e.g. tiles, awnings,
moldings, cornices, etc.) and features (e.g. windows, openings, columns,
towers, arches, etc.).
      (4)   All non-residential buildings with facades greater than 100 feet in
length shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses that are at least
four feet deep. Projections/recesses must be at least four feet in length. No
uninterrupted length of facade may exceed 50 feet in length.
      (5)   All non-residential buildings with flat roof planes greater than
100 feet in length shall incorporate variations in the height of the roof plane
that differ by at least two feet in height. Variations to flat roof planes may
include pilasters and projected or raised entry features. No uninterrupted
length of any flat roof plane may exceed 50 feet in length.
      (6)   All non-residential building facades shall include a repeating
pattern of elements such as material module change, colors or textures. At
least one of these elements shall repeat horizontally.
      (7)   All non-residential buildings shall be designed to include no less
than four of the architectural elements from the list below. Buildings over
20,000 square feet must include a minimum of six of the architectural elements
listed below.
         (a)   Canopies, awnings, arcades, covered walkways or porticoes;
         (b)   Recesses/projections, columns, pilasters projecting from the
plane;
         (c)   Varied roof heights for pitched, peaked, sloped or flat roof
styles;
         (d)   Articulated cornice line;
         (e)   Arches;
         (f)   Display windows, faux windows or decorative windows;
         (g)   Architectural details (such as tile work and molding) or accent
materials integrated into the building facade;
         (h)   Integrated planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaping
and sitting areas or outdoor patios;
         (i)   Offsets, reveals or projecting ribs used to express
architectural or structural bays; or
         (j)   Other architectural features approved by the Director of
Planning.
      (8)   Existing structures that were lawful before September 14, 2004, but
which do not conform to the regulations of this chapter after its passage,
shall be lawful non-conforming buildings or structures.
      (9)   All new structures or expansion of existing structures shall comply
with the requirements in this section. Any repair or alteration that involves
more than 50% of the exterior surfaces of an existing structure shall comply
with the requirements in this section.
      (10)   Deviation from the above requirements may be accomplished only
through Planned Development zoning.
   (F)   Underground utilities.
      (1)   Definitions.
         (a)   Transmission line. Electrical lines operated at voltages of
60,000 volts or higher that bring power from a generating plant to an
electrical sub-station.
         (b)   Feeder line. An electrical line that emanates from an electrical
sub-station or hub to distribute power throughout an area.
         (c)   Lateral line. An electrical line that emanates from a feeder
line, typically through a sectionalizing device like a fuse or a disconnect, to
distribute power to smaller areas of electric consumers; such line can be
either single or three phase.
         (d)   Secondary service line. An electrical line which, through a
transformer, connects a lateral line to a customer's electrical service
entrance.
      (2)   After November 24, 2003, for all developments in the OP, C-1, C-
2 and C-3 zoning districts, for developments on property within the Freeway
Overlay District, and for churches, schools and public facilities in PR or
residential zoning districts, all utility lines shall be placed underground
except for transmission lines and feeder lines. All electrical, gas, cable
television and telephone support equipment shall be installed on the ground or
placed underground. This requirement shall not apply to the following:
         (a)   Utility lines or support equipment installed before November 25,
2003; or
         (b)   Any support equipment belonging to the city, the Mansfield
Independent School District or any state agency for the regulation of traffic,
street lighting, or any other public safety purpose.
      (3)   The cost of installing these utilities underground shall be the
responsibility of the property owner or developer who is seeking utility
service for their property. The utility company providing the utility service
shall advise the customer of the nearest connection point and the perspective
customer shall be responsible for the cost of bringing the utility service to
the point of connection on the utility system designated by the utility
company. A property owner or developer requesting utility service shall not be
entitled to pro rata reimbursement from subsequent customers who might tie on
to a lateral line or secondary service line.
      (4)   The provisions of this section shall not be construed to require
the City of Mansfield or the utility company to bear the additional cost of
placing utilities underground.
      (5)   The provisions of this section are not intended to alter the intent
of the electrical franchise agreement.
      (6)   Nothing contained within this subsection shall be construed to
require that any existing overhead facility be placed underground or to
prohibit the upgrading, reconstruction or reconductoring of any existing
overhead facilities with overhead facilities.
      (7)   Any property owner, developer or utility company who believes that
the imposition of this underground utility construction requirement causes a
unique and unreasonable hardship shall have the right to apply for a waiver to
the requirement on a case by case basis. The applicant shall submit a written
request to the City Council via the City Secretary's office. The request must
provide the following information:
         (a)   A description of the property, land use and/or utility
improvements for which a waiver to the requirement is sought.
         (b)   An explanation as to why the application of the underground
utility regulation is unreasonable as applied to the applicant's property or
situation.
         (c)   A description of any negative impacts created by the requirement
to place the utilities underground.
         (d)   The City Secretary's office shall place the request for a waiver
on the agenda of the City Council for consideration at a public meeting. The
applicant shall receive written notice of the date of the proposed hearing on
the waiver request. The city staff shall not be required to provide written
notice of the waiver request to any other individual or entity. On the date
that the item is set for hearing, the City Council shall conduct a public
hearing on the waiver request giving any individual who desires to present
information or evidence to the City Council on the appropriateness or
inappropriateness of the wavier, the opportunity to appear before the City
Council and present such information. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
City Council by majority vote, may approve a waiver of the underground utility
construction requirement on all or part of the proposed utility improvements or
may deny the request for a waiver.
   (G)   Security gates and shutters. Solid metal security gates and solid
roll-down shutters shall not be permitted in the OP, C-1, C-2, C-3, D, FR, PD,
and S Districts. Interior link or grill security devices may be permitted if
they can be completely enclosed or hidden from view when not in use and shall
be subject to review and approval by the Director of Planning.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86; Am. Ord. OR-2223-21, passed 10-11-21; Am. Ord. OR-
2387-24, passed 10-14-24)
§ 155.057 NEIGHBORHOOD DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose. The primary purpose of this section is to enable and to
encourage the intentional coordination, placement, orientation, and design of
buildings to produce a neighborhood fabric with well-defined street edges with
continuous building walls, articulated building facades, architectural features
that create visual interest, and an attractive pedestrian environment. It is
further the purpose of this section to enable and to encourage compact, mixed-
use, and pedestrian-oriented development so that the ordinary activities of
daily living may occur within walking distance of most dwellings, creating
sustainable and complete neighborhoods.
   (B)   Applicability. The provisions set forth in this section modify the
conventional rules and regulations for the development or the redevelopment of
private lots within the OP, C-1, C-2, and C-3 Zoning Districts, and advocate
for the development and the modification of buildings and for other elements of
the built environment within the private lot and produce mixed-use and walkable
spaces. The provisions of this section are available to owners and developers
of private lots within the OP, C-1, C-2, and C-3 Zoning Districts as a matter
of right; and owners and developers may opt to utilize the provisions that are
contained herein or to utilize the existing underlying zoning. Except where it
may be in conflict, existing planned developments (i.e., PD, Planned
Development Districts) may voluntarily comply with the provisions contained
herein, subject to review and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the approval of the City Council. Any requests for existing
planned developments to voluntarily comply with the provisions contained herein
heard by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council shall be heard
as per the rules set forth for consideration of other business agenda items,
and shall not require a public hearing.
      (1)   The provisions of this section are activated by "shall" or "are"
when required, and "may" when optional.
      (2)   The provisions of this section shall take precedence if the
property owner or the developer opts to utilize the provisions of this section,
when in conflict with other sections of this chapter.
      (3)   The provisions of this section shall not take precedence if
property owners or developers opt to utilize the existing underlying zoning.
      (4)   The existing provisions of this chapter and this code of ordinances
shall continue to be applicable to all issues not covered by this section for
the existing underlying zoning (e.g., OP, C-1, C-2, and C-3), except where
those provisions are in conflict with the provisions contained herein.
      (5)   The provisions of this section, when in conflict with illustrations
or diagrams, shall take precedence.
   (C)   Existing conditions.
      (1)   Where buildings exist on adjacent lots, the Director of Planning
may require that a proposed building or buildings match the setbacks of
adjacent buildings rather than the provisions of this section.
         (a)   Buildings on any lot proposed for construction or modification
within 150 feet of any parcel of land within the PR, A, SF, and 2F Zoning
Districts shall be restricted to a maximum building height of two stories; the
maximum height restriction shall not apply to any building more than 150 feet
of a parcel of land within the PR, A, SF, and 2F Zoning Districts. Single-
family detached residences and row houses (i.e., single-family attached) of
three stories or less shall be exempted from this provision.
      (2)   The adaptive reuse of a building shall not be required to comply
with the minimum building height established in division (K) below.
      (3)   The restoration or the modification of a building does not require
the provision of parking in addition to the existing, if there are less than
six new spaces that are required.
   (D)   Deviation. An owner or a developer may deviate from the following
standards in this section, only, and are subject to compliance with the other
provisions of this section. Deviations shall be granted only by the City
Council and all requests heard by the City Council shall be heard as per the
rules set forth for consideration of other business agenda items. A public
hearing is not required.
      (1)   The maximum travel lane width of a thoroughfare.
      (2)   The maximum building area.
      (3)   The minimum building height.
      (4)   The maximum building height.
      (5)   The requirement that all buildings proposed for commercial use or
mixed-use and having a minimum of 5,000 square feet of floor area, be designed
for tenant flexibility.
      (6)   The requirement that all development and redevelopment proposals on
properties greater than two acres in size allocate at least 50% of the total
building area proposed for construction to commercial use.
   (E)   Variance. An owner or a developer may request a variance in accordance
with the standards and procedures set forth in §
155.113.
   (F)   Design for tenant flexibility. Principal buildings proposed for
commercial use or mixed-use, and having a minimum of 5,000 square feet of floor
area, shall be designed for tenant flexibility. The design of the first story
and second story commercial spaces shall anticipate restaurant requirements.
Accommodations for restaurant venting and sewage utilities such as grease traps
and interceptors shall be purposefully designed into the building. Such designs
shall anticipate potential commercial power and gas load needs for existing and
future tenants. In addition, buildings shall provide maximum clear space
between interior columns for first story retail and activity spaces. Designs
for tenant flexibility shall be included in construction documents that are
required for building plan review.
   (G)   Instructions for site plan submittals. This division (G) sets forth
the standards applicable to the development and to the modification of
buildings and other elements of the built environment within private lots. All
site plans required by this division (G) are subject to administrative review
and approval by the Director of Planning. All site plans submitted for review
and approval shall demonstrate compliance with:
      (1)   Thoroughfare standards, if applicable.
      (2)   Lot standards.
      (3)   Building orientation.
      (4)   Building setbacks.
      (5)   Building height.
      (6)   Building frontages.
      (7)   Building area.
      (8)   Building use.
      (9)   Parking standards.
      (10)   Landscaping.
      (11)   Signage standards.
      (12)   Architecture.
      (13)   Civic space.
      (14)   Additional regulations, if applicable.
   (H)   Thoroughfare standards. Modification of an existing thoroughfare and
the assemblies of new thoroughfares shall meet the following standards, unless
otherwise mandated by standards established by the Texas Department of
Transportation (TxDOT), the Department of Public Works, or the Department of
Engineering Services:
      (1)   General.
         (a)   For the purpose of this section, all those thoroughfares shown
as "arterial" in the Master Thoroughfare Plan are classified and designated as
A-Thoroughfares.
         (b)   For the purpose of this section, all those thoroughfares shown
as "collector" or "local" in the Master Thoroughfare Plan are classified and
designated as B-Thoroughfares.
         (c)   All thoroughfares shall be paved in asphalt (public use only),
cobble, concrete, stone, or other similar material subject to review and
approval by the Director of Engineering Services.
            1.   Parking lanes on public thoroughfares shall be paved in a
material that differs from the thoroughfare pavement material, subject to
review and approval by the Director of Planning.
         (d)   All thoroughfares shall have a maximum travel lane width of 11
feet.
         (e)   All thoroughfares shall require sidewalks.
      (2)   Specific to A-Thoroughfares.
         (a)   All sidewalks shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width.
         (b)   All sidewalks shall provide tree wells that are five feet by ten
feet in dimension, unless otherwise reviewed and approved by the Director of
Planning, and:
            1.   Trees shall be planted at 30 feet on center, average.
            2.   Trees shall be appropriately planted and spaced in order to
accommodate public lighting.
      (3)   Specific to B-Thoroughfares.
         (a)   All sidewalks shall be separated from travel lanes by a planter
a minimum of six feet in width and with trees.
            1.   Trees shall be planted at 30 feet on center, average.
         (b)   All sidewalks shall be a minimum of six feet in width.
      (4)   Specific to rear alleys.
         (a)   All garages for the allowable residential uses shall be accessed
by rear alleys with a minimum pavement width of 14 feet and an access easement
a minimum of 20 feet in width.
         (b)   All rear alleys for the other allowable uses may be accessed by
rear alleys with a minimum pavement width of 20 feet and an access easement a
minimum of 24 feet.
      (5)   Public lighting.
         (a)   Public lighting along all A-Thoroughfares shall be designed as
columns with a maximum height of 16 feet (i.e., as measured from the base of
the standard to the top of the luminaire); and public lighting along all B-
Thoroughfares shall be designed as post or pipe, with a height of 13 feet
(i.e., as measured from the base of the standard to the top of the luminaire),
subject to review and approval by the Director of Planning (See Figure Nos.
11,
12 and
13).
            1.   Public lighting shall be spaced at intervals no more than 30
feet apart along all A-Thoroughfares.
            2.   Public lighting shall be spaced at intervals no more than 60
feet apart along all B-Thoroughfares.
         (b)   Unless otherwise mandated by standards that are established by
TxDOT, cobra head fixtures are prohibited.
      (6)   Utilities. All utilities shall be placed underground and within the
public right-of-way, including roadway lanes and sidewalks.
      (7)   Outdoor display of merchandise and outdoor seating and serving.
First story commercial uses may utilize the building frontage, the adjacent
sidewalk, or a combination of both for outdoor display of merchandise, for
outdoor seating, for outdoor serving, and for other business-related activities
provided that a minimum six-foot contiguous path for pedestrians be maintained.
         (a)   Outdoor display of merchandise shall not be left outdoors past
business hours.
         (b)   Outdoor seating and outdoor serving areas shall be separated
from all thoroughfares, sidewalks, and pedestrian paths using wrought-iron
railings, metal fencing, planters, landscaping, or any combination thereof.
   (I)   Lot standards.
      (1)   There are no minimum lot widths.
      (2)   There is no minimum lot size.
      (3)   Lot coverage shall not exceed 80%.
      (4)   All platted lots shall front on a thoroughfare or a civic space
(i.e., the front lot line).
   (J)   Building orientation.
      (1)   All principal buildings shall be oriented to be parallel to the
front lot line or a tangent to a curved front lot line.
      (2)   All principal buildings shall have their principal pedestrian
entrance along a thoroughfare or a civic space with the exception of entrances
off of a courtyard, that are visible from public rights-of-way.
      (3)   All principal buildings with residential uses at grade shall be
raised above the level of the sidewalk by a minimum of two feet, as measured
from the average sidewalk elevation.
   (K)   Building setbacks. All buildings shall be set back from the boundaries
according to the following:
      (1)   Front building setbacks for principal buildings.
         (a)   Zero feet minimum.
         (b)   Twenty feet maximum.
      (2)   Additional front building setback considerations. Corner lots shall
designate the front lot line (i.e., front building setback) along the
thoroughfare having the greater pedestrian importance.
      (3)   Side building setbacks for principal buildings. Zero feet minimum
or five feet minimum.
      (4)   Rear building setback for principal buildings. Zero feet minimum.
      (5)   Outbuilding setbacks.
         (a)   The side setback for all outbuildings shall be five feet
minimum.
         (b)   The rear setback for outbuilding shall be a minimum of 15 feet
measured from the centerline of the rear alley. In the absence of a rear alley,
the rear setback shall be five feet minimum from the rear lot line.
      (6)   Building setback considerations for utilities. Maximum building
setbacks may be increased up to 50% by-right for all owners and developers as
consideration for utilities.
         (a)   Utility easements along the front, the rear, or the side lot
lines may require additional front, rear, and side setbacks, and may cause
buildings to exceed maximum building setbacks.
         (b)   Utility services may require easements at the front, the rear,
or the side lot lines for meters, pedestals, and other equipment requirements.
         (c)   Utility services provided from the rear may require additional
rear alley setbacks.
   (L)   Building height. Building height is measured as follows:
      (1)   General.
         (a)   Stories are measured from finished floor to finished ceiling.
         (b)   First stories shall not exceed 18 feet in height.
         (c)   Second stories and above shall not exceed 14 feet in height.
         (d)   First story residential uses shall have a minimum story height
of ten feet.
         (e)   All other first story uses shall have a minimum story height of
11 feet.
         (f)   Building height measurement shall not include the following:
            1.   Attics;
            2.   Belfries;
            3.   Chimneys;
            4.   Clock towers;
            5.   Elevator bulkheads;
            6.   Stair housings;
            7.   Vents; and
            8.   Other uninhabited accessory elements.
      (2)   Principal buildings.
         (a)   The minimum building height shall be two stories.
         (b)   The maximum building height shall be four stories.
      (3)   Outbuildings. The maximum building height shall be two stories.
      (4)   Row houses. The minimum building height shall be three stories.
   (M)   Building frontages.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   The front building setback shall contain the building frontage;
and corner lots at the intersections of two A-Thoroughfares shall contain one
building frontage in the front building setback and one in the side building
setback.
         (b)   Loading docks and service areas are not permitted in building
frontages.
         (c)   Balconies and bay windows may encroach into front building
setbacks up to 100% of its depth.
         (d)   Fences and walls may be located along front lot lines at stoop
building frontages. Fences and walls at front lot lines shall be limited to a
maximum height of four feet.
         (e)   A dooryard building frontage or a stoop building frontage shall
be required for all row houses.
         (f)   A shopfront building frontage shall be required at a minimum for
all first story commercial uses.
            1.   Bed and breakfasts are exempt from this requirement.
         (g)   Cottage court central courtyards shall maintain a minimum of 30
feet in width between all structures and encroachments along the depth of the
court.
      (2)   Dooryards.
         (a)   Dooryards may encroach into the front building setback up to
100% of its depth.
         (b)   Dooryards shall be no less than ten feet deep.
         (c)   Dooryards may be raised from average sidewalk grade.
         (d)   Dooryards shall be enclosed on three sides by a fence
constructed of metal or wood or a wall made of brick or stone and four feet in
height. Openings in the fence or wall shall be no larger than is necessary to
allow pedestrian access.
      (3)   Stoops.
         (a)   Stoops may encroach into the front building setback up to 100%
of its depth.
         (b)   Stoops shall be no less than five feet deep, excluding the
exterior stairs.
         (c)   Stoops shall be no less than five feet wide, including the
landing at the dwelling entrance.
         (d)   Stoops may be recessed into the volume of the building where the
front setback is less than five feet.
      (4)   Shopfronts.
         (a)   Shopfronts shall be glazed in glass for no less than 70% of the
first story building facade area that is between two and 12 feet above average
sidewalk elevation.
         (b)   Shopfronts that are freestanding and not combined with other
building frontages may include awnings.
         (c)   Awnings may encroach into the public rights-of-way to within two
feet of the curb.
            1.   All awnings shall extend at least six feet from the building
facade and into the front building setback.
            2.   All awnings shall have a minimum of eight feet of clearance
above finished grade.
      (5)   Galleries.
         (a)   Galleries may encroach into the public rights-of-way to within
two feet of the curb.
         (b)   Galleries shall provide a minimum vertical clearance of ten feet
and project horizontally from the facade a minimum of ten feet.
         (c)   Public planting and/or public lighting may be omitted where
galleries encroach into the public rights-of-way.
         (d)   A gallery may be combined with a shopfront building frontage,
and include all components of a shopfront.
         (e)   A gallery may be supported by posts of metal or wrought iron.
   (N)   Building area.
      (1)   The total floor area of a dwelling unit shall comply with all
applicable regulations and restrictions as found in §
155.055(E), except as provided below:
         (a)   The minimum floor area of all detached single-family dwelling
units shall be 1,800 square feet.
      (2)   The total floor area of a single building or a single tenant space
shall not exceed 10,000 square feet, except as provided below.
      (3)   The total floor area of a grocery store shall not exceed 45,000
square feet.
   (O)   Building use.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   Buildings and their lots are limited to uses provided below.
         (b)   Buildings and their lots may have more than one use.
         (c)   Permitted commercial uses other than lodging and office shall be
limited to the first story except as provided below.
            1.   Food service establishments are permitted on the upper
stories.
         (d)   The applicable regulations and restrictions for those allowable
uses as found in §
155.099 shall apply.
      (2)   Allowable uses.
         (a)   Art gallery.
         (b)   Bank.
         (c)   Reserved.
         (d)   Barber.
         (e)   Cottage court.
         (f)   Day spa.
         (g)   Dry cleaner.
         (h)   Live-work.
         (i)   Mail center.
         (j)   Manor house.
         (k)   Meeting hall.
         (l)   Mixed-use building.
         (m)   Mobile food vendor park.
         (n)   Office building.
         (o)   Open-air farmers market.
         (p)   Photography studio.
         (q)   Post office.
         (r)   Retail building, provided that the building area made available
for the sale of merchandise and food service is further limited to:
            1.   An arts and crafts store;
            2.   A bakery;
            3.   A book store;
            4.   A cafe;
            5.   A coffee house;
            6.   A corner market;
            7.   A cosmetics store;
            8.   A dairy goods store;
            9.   An eyewear shop;
            10.   A fashion store;
            11.   A food hall;
            12.   A gift store;
            13.   A grocery;
            14.   A hardware store;
            15.   A home decor store;
            16.   A home electronics store (including repair);
            17.   An ice cream parlor;
            18.   An office supplies store;
            19.   A pet store;
            20.   A pet supplies store;
            21.   A pharmacy; and
            22.   A restaurant.
         (s)   Row house.
         (t)   Salon.
         (u)   Single-family residential, detached.
         (v)   Veterinary clinic (no outdoor kennels).
      (3)   Additional allowable uses. The following accessory buildings and
accessory uses are additionally allowed:
         (a)   Accessory dwelling unit (provided that the accessory dwelling
unit is located toward the rear of the same lot as a row house dwelling, and
that the accessory dwelling unit is constructed in accordance with the
applicable regulations and restrictions contained in §
155.099).
         (b)   Flat (provided that flat dwellings are only allowed on the upper
stories of a mixed-use building).
         (c)   Greenhouse.
         (d)   Home occupation.
         (e)   Liner building.
         (f)   Outbuilding.
         (g)   Swimming pool and pool house.
         (h)   Temporary batch plant (provided that temporary batch plants are
located and are operated in accordance with the applicable regulations and
restrictions contained in §
155.099).
      (4)   Specific use permits. Consideration for all specific use permits
shall be in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in §
155.080. The following uses require review and approval of a specific use
permit:
         (a)   Bed and breakfast (up to six rooms).
         (b)   Child-care center.
         (c)   Drive-through facility. Drive-through facilities shall not be
located between any building facade and a thoroughfare or a civic space.
      (5)   Additional use restrictions.
         (a)   Accessory dwelling unit. The total number of accessory dwelling
units allowed on each lot is restricted to one.
         (b)   Bed and breakfast.
            1.   The number of bedrooms made available for each lot for lodging
is further limited by the parking requirement of one assigned parking spaces
for each bedroom, up to six, in addition to the parking requirement for the
dwelling.
            2.   The lodging must be owner-occupied.
            3.   The maximum length of stay shall not exceed 14 days.
         (c)   Live-work.
            1.   The building area available for commercial use is limited to
the first story.
            2.   The business owner shall reside at the property.
            3.   The parking requirements shall be determined by use.
         (d)   Residential. Permitted principal and accessory residential uses
are not allowed within 660 feet of any intersection of two A-Thoroughfares or
any intersection of A-Thoroughfares and B-Thoroughfares, except that flats on
upper stories of buildings are allowed within 660 feet of thoroughfare
intersections.
         (e)   Retail building. The building area made available for retail use
is limited to the first story. A food service establishment is allowed on the
upper stories.
      (6)   Prohibited uses. Those uses not listed as permitted uses in this
(O) and those uses not listed as requiring approval of a specific use permit in
this division (O) are not allowed, except as provided below. Any use not listed
as permitted uses in this division (O) may only be granted by the City Council,
with a review and a recommendation provided by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. All requests for any use not listed as permitted uses in this
division (O) heard by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council
shall be heard in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth for
specific use permits in §
155.080. The following uses are additionally not allowed and shall not be
granted as permitted uses:
         (a)   Adult-themed establishment.
         (b)   Automotive repair and/or automotive service establishment.
         (c)   Car wash.
         (d)   Gas station.
         (e)   Medical clinic (including urgent care).
   (P)   Parking standards. Unless otherwise noted below, all provisions of §
155.091 shall apply to those properties developed and redeveloped in accordance
with this section.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   Parking provided shall include the actual parking spaces that
are provided within the private lot and along the parking lane corresponding to
the private lot.
         (b)   Parking provided may include a private parking lot within 800
feet of the private lot.
         (c)   The following shall be exempted from parking requirements:
            1.   All liner buildings less than 30 feet in depth and no more
than two stories in height; and
            2.   All retail tenant spaces that are under 1,500 square feet of
total building area.
      (2)   Maximum parking. Minimum parking is not required; maximum parking
shall be as provided below. Maximum parking shall include the actual parking
spaces provided within the private lot and along the parking lane (i.e., on-
street parking) corresponding to the private lot.
         (a)   Residential: 2.0 assigned parking spaces per dwelling unit.
         (b)   Lodging: 1.0 assigned parking spaces per bedroom.
         (c)   Office: 4.0 assigned parking spaces per 1,000 square feet.
         (d)   Retail: 10.0 assigned parking spaces per 1,000 square feet.
         (e)   All other uses: 4.0 assigned parking spaces per 1,000 square
feet.
      (3)   Parking access.
         (a)   Parking shall be accessed by rear alleys where available.
         (b)   Garages shall be accessed by driveways from the rear alley.
         (c)   Vehicular entrances to parking lots shall be no wider than 24
feet at the front lot line.
      (4)   Parking location.
         (a)   Carports and garages shall be located at the rear of the lot.
            1.   Garages may be attached to or detached from dwellings.
         (b)   Parking lots shall be oriented to the rear or the side of the
lot.
      (5)   Physical requirements.
         (a)   Parking lots shall be visually screened from thoroughfares and
civic spaces by a liner building or hedges between three and four feet in
height and with openings no larger than necessary to allow for automobile and
pedestrian access.
         (b)   Parking lots are not allowed between any building facade and a
thoroughfare or a civic space.
         (c)   Parking lots shall be paved in asphalt, brick, cobble, concrete,
or stone.
         (d)   A minimum of one bicycle rack shall be provided within the
private lot for every 20 vehicular parking spaces.
      (6)   Parking study. Owners and developers of any project may elect to
commission a parking study, providing evidence of parking requirements that are
above or below the standards of this section.
   (Q)   Landscaping. Unless otherwise noted below, all provisions of §
155.092 shall apply to those properties developed and redeveloped in accordance
with this section:
      (1)   General.
         (a)   All landscape in the building frontage and the private lot shall
consist of non-invasive species.
         (b)   All residential building frontages shall have one pedestrian
path no wider than five feet that provides access to the principal pedestrian
entrance.
            1.   Pedestrian paths may be paved in pervious materials.
         (c)   Stormwater ponds and stormwater facilities are not allowed in
the building frontage.
      (2)   Dooryards.
         (a)   Trees and shrubs are required in the building frontage, if the
frontage is paved.
         (b)   Trees and/or shrubs are required in the building frontage, if
the frontage is landscaped.
      (3)   Shopfronts and galleries. Trees and shrubs are not required in the
building frontage.
   (R)   Signage standards. Unless otherwise noted below, all provisions of §
155.090 shall apply to those properties developed and redeveloped in accordance
with this section.
      (1)   Additional permitted signs. The following additional signs are
permitted for first story commercial uses:
         (a)   Awnings may include signage in the form of text along the flap,
no taller than six inches and text or graphics on the top, printed or applied
to the awning material.
         (b)   One A-frame sign may be placed in front of each first story
business not to exceed six square feet.
            1.   A-frame signs are not allowed to be placed within three feet
of a thoroughfare curb.
      (2)   Prohibited signs. The following signs are not allowed:
         (a)   Any sign placed within the public rights-of-way, except for an
A-frame sign.
   (S)   Architecture.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   The maximum length of a building facade for a single building or
a single tenant space shall not exceed 100 feet.
         (b)   The exterior finish material on all building facades or a
project shall be consistent around the project.
         (c)   The exterior finish material on all building facades or a
project shall not exceed three, excluding balconies, bay windows, and any other
building facade decorations.
      (2)   Building walls.
         (a)   The heavier of the wall materials shall only be below the
lighter (e.g., stone below brick; brick below stucco; and stucco below
cementitious fiber board or wood and metal). The transition in wall material
shall run horizontally across the entire length of the building facade, except
as provided below:
            1.   Building facade attachments may differ in material from the
building volume, with the attachment being a lighter material with the
exception of chimneys, which shall be a heavier material.
         (b)   All exposed exterior wood shall be painted or stained.
      (3)   Roofs.
         (a)   Principal roofs, where sloped, shall be a symmetrical gable or a
symmetrical hip angled no less than 6:12, and shall be clad in asphalt shingle,
slate, or terra cotta tile.
            1.   Synthetic materials are also allowed provided they have the
appearance of the materials noted above.
         (b)   Principal roofs, where low-slope (i.e., flat), shall be
surrounded by a horizontal parapet wall no less than 42 inches high where the
roof deck meets the parapet wall.
         (c)   Ancillary roofs may be sheds angled no less than 3:12.
      (4)   Openings.
         (a)   Openings for doors and windows shall be rectangular and with a
rectangular orientation and proportion, except for shopfront display windows
and transom windows.
         (b)   Openings for doors and windows shall be recessed a minimum of
three inches in building facades with exterior finish material of brick, stone,
and stucco along thoroughfares and civic spaces; flush-mounted windows are not
allowed along thoroughfares and civic spaces.
         (c)   Openings for doors and windows shall be evenly spaced along
building facades along thoroughfares and civic spaces in order to create a
harmonious architectural composition.
            1.   All row house building facades at the front lot line shall
provide openings for doors and windows for no less than 15% and for no more
than 35% of the total building wall area.
         (d)   Openings for doors and windows above the first story fronting a
thoroughfare or a civic space shall generally align with those on the first
story below.
         (e)   Openings for doors and windows above the first story fronting a
thoroughfare or a civic space shall not exceed 50% of the total building facade
area, with each such building facade being calculated independently.
         (f)   Doors and windows that operate as sliders shall be prohibited
along building facades fronting a thoroughfare, a civic space, or a cross-block
passage. Doors and windows that operate as sliders at shopfronts for grocery
stores only, may be approved by the Director of Planning for grocery stores.
         (g)   Door and window header heights shall be consistent along the
building facade at the front lot line.
         (h)   Bay windows shall extend to the floor inside and to the ground
outside, or be supported by visible brackets.
         (i)   All shutters shall be operable, and useable along the building
facades fronting a thoroughfare or a civic space.
            1.   If non-operable, then the shutters shall be of proportion that
is identical to an operable shutter for the window.
      (5)   Attachments.
         (a)   Stoops, including their exterior stairs and their landings,
shall be of brick, cast stone, or stone and shall match the materials and the
colors of the adjacent building facade.
         (b)   Balconies that encroach beyond a building facade at the front
line, shall be structurally supported by brackets that are of an appropriate
scale and size.
         (c)   Flues may be black painted or galvanized.
         (d)   Chimneys, where visible, shall be brick, cast stone, or stone.
         (e)   Chimneys shall extend to finished grade and have a projecting
cap on top.
      (6)   Fences and walls.
         (a)   Fences and walls for front lot lines:
            1.   Fences shall be made of metal or wood; and fences may have
brick or stone bases and columns.
            2.   Walls shall be made of brick or stone.
         (b)   Fences and walls in accordance with all the provisions existing
in §
155.094 may be provided along the rear lot line and the side lot lines.
         (c)   Gates on front lot line fences and walls shall be made of metal
or wood.
      (7)   Specific to shopfronts. Shopfronts shall be designed with the
following elements:
         (a)   Shopfronts shall be distinguished from the upper stories with an
identifiable break or a distinguishing expression line. This may include
cornices, encroachments, and changes in glazing or exterior finish mterials.
         (b)   Shopfronts may be built of brick, concrete siding, stone, wood
or custom metal work or steel frame.
         (c)   Shopfronts shall have entry doors a minimum of eight feet in
height.
         (d)   Shopfronts shall have a minimum 18-inch-high masonry kick plate
or masonry bulkhead (e.g., brick, cast stone, stone, and stucco) along all
thoroughfares and civic spaces.
         (e)   Shopfront kick plates or bulkheads shall not exceed 36 inches
above the adjacent sidewalk.
         (f)   All kick plates and bulkheads shall be designed as an integral
component of the overall shopfront.
         (g)   Shopfronts shall have display windows that are a minimum of 70%
glass of the total building facade area as measured between two and 12 feet
above average sidewalk elevation, which may include the glass area of the entry
door or doors.
         (h)   Shopfronts shall have transom windows, that are between the
shopfront display windows and the signage band, meeting the following
standards:
            1.   Transom windows shall be at least two feet in height;
            2.   Ttransom windows shall have dividing muntins; and
            3.   Ttransom windows shall be free of signage.
         (i)   Shopfronts shall not have any windows with tint greater than
10%, or colored, mirrored, or reflective glass.
         (j)   Where appropriate, sliding or folding doors or roll-up windows
that allow the activity of the business to open adjacent to, and onto the
sidewalk, may be installed for restaurants and other food services and may
replace shopfront display windows and bulkheads or kick plates.
      (8)   Specific to row houses. Row houses shall be designed and
constructed as follows:
         (a)   All row houses shall have special detailing in order to enhance
the distinctiveness of each unit. This may include changes in color, material,
height, stoops, and railings.
      (9)   Specific to outbuildings. Outbuildings shall be designed and
constructed as follows:
         (a)   All outbuildings shall match the wall and roof style, the
colors, and the materials of the principal building.
   (T)   Screening standards.
      (1)   Roof top mechanical equipment shall be fully screened from all
sides by either an opaque screen enclosure or, by building parapets, both of
which shall be a minimum of 12 inches greater in height than the roof top
equipment.
      (2)   Ground mounted equipment shall not be installed within 200 feet of
any thoroughfare intersections. Where practicable, ground mounted equipment
should be oriented to the rear or the side of lots. Ground mounted equipment
located along a building frontage area shall be screened by either a screening
structure or by landscaping, either of which shall be equal to or greater than
the height of the equipment.
         (a)   All landscaping shall be at least three feet in height at the
time of planting.
      (3)   Outdoor refuse/recycling collection receptacles shall not be
located along any building frontage and shall be located towards the rear or
the side of the lot. Outdoor refuse/recycling collection receptacles shall be
located off a rear alley where available. All outdoor refuse/recycling
receptacles shall be visually screened on three sides by opaque walls made of
brick, cast stone, or stone, and at least six feet in height. Access doors into
the outdoor refuse/recycling receptacle shall be constructed of opaque metal
that matches the height of the wall. All walls and access doors shall screen
the outdoor receptacle from view on all sides. Lids are required on all outdoor
receptacles that are not in a roofed enclosure.
      (4)   Loading docks and service areas shall be visually screened, shall
not be located along building frontages, and shall be located towards the rear
of the lot.
         (a)   All developments and redevelopments with multiple buildings
requiring loading docks and service areas shall be designed in a manner so that
loading docks and service areas are located adjacent to each other in order to
minimize visual impacts and noise impacts wherever possible.
   (U)   Civic space.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   All proposals for development and redevelopment shall assign at
least 5% of the total lot area to civic space. Any part of a proposal for
development or redevelopment located within 660 feet of an existing civic
space, passive space, or other type of required open space shall be exempted
from required civic space as set forth herein.
         (b)   All proposals for development and redevelopment shall select a
civic space type as provided below:
            1.   A cross-block passage;
            2.   A courtyard;
            3.   A park; or
            4.   A plaza.
         (c)   Where any civic space abuts existing or planned pedestrian or
bicycle trails, pedestrian and bicycle trails shall be continued through the
civic space.
         (d)   At least 50% of the trees provided shall be canopy shade trees.
         (e)   All civic space shall include the minimum number of program
elements, in addition to the requirement of canopy shade trees and outdoor
seating, as specified in below:
            1.   A community garden;
            2.   A dog park;
            3.   A formal garden;
            4.   A meeting hall;
            5.   An open-air farmers market;
            6.   An outdoor dining area;
            7.   An outdoor food service area;
            8.   An outdoor performance space for concerts;
            9.   A playground; or
            10.   A water feature.
      (2)   Specific to cross-block passages.
         (a)   A cross-block passage shall be at least 12 feet in width.
         (b)   A cross-block passage shall provide opportunistic landscaping
and planting and outdoor seating and gathering places.
      (3)   Specific to courtyards. A courtyard shall be at least 0.25 acres in
size.
      (4)   Specific to parks.
         (a)   A park shall be at least 0.5 acres in size.
         (b)   A park shall front a thoroughfare on at least one side.
      (5)   Specific to plazas.
         (a)   A plaza shall be at least 0.625 acres in size.
         (b)   A plaza shall front a thoroughfare on at least one side.
   (V)   Additional regulations. For development and redevelopment proposals on
properties that are greater than two acres in size, additional regulations
shall be applied as follows:
      (1)   Thoroughfares.
         (a)   All thoroughfares shall terminate at other thoroughfares, and in
intersections, forming a network.
            1.   Cul-de-sacs are not allowed.
         (b)   All new B-Thoroughfares shall provide a maximum pavement width
of 28 feet.
         (c)   All thoroughfare networks shall define blocks, to be measured as
the sum of all front lot lines, not exceeding 2000 feet.
      (2)   Blocks. Cross-block passages shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide,
and they may be hardscaped or softscaped, and shall be well lit for security
and comfort purposes.
      (3)   Civic space. All proposals for development and redevelopment on
multiple lots shall provide civic space within 800 feet of every principal
building.
      (4)   Required commercial. All proposals for development and
redevelopment on multiple lots shall allocate at least 50% of the total floor
area of a project to commercial use or commercial uses.
   (W)   Definitions. This division provides definitions for the terms in this
section that are technical in nature, or that otherwise may not reflect a
common usage of the term. If a term is not defined in this section, then the
Director of Planning shall determine the correct definition.
      A-FRAME SIGN. A portable sign not secured or attached to the ground or
surface upon which it is located, typically constructed in such a manner as to
form an "A" or tent-like shape, and primarily or exclusively intended to
advertise to pedestrian traffic.
      A-THOROUGHFARES. Cumulatively, those thoroughfares that by virtue of
their pre-existing pedestrian-supportive qualities, or their future importance
to pedestrian connectivity, are held to the highest standards prescribed by
this section. (See B-THOROUGHFARES.)
      ATTIC. The interior part of a building contained within a pitched roof
structure.
      AWNING. A fixed or a movable shading structure that is cantilevered or
otherwise entirely supported from a building, that is used to protect outdoor
spaces from the sun, the rain, and other natural conditions. AWNINGS are
typically used to cover outdoor seating for restaurants and cafes.
      B-THOROUGHFARES. Cumulatively, those thoroughfares that by virtue of
their use, their location, and their absence of pre-existing pedestrian-
supportive qualities, may meet a standard lower than that of A-Thoroughfares.
(See A-THOROUGHFARES.)
      BED AND BREAKFAST. An owner-occupied lodging establishment type, offering
one to six bedrooms, permitted to serve breakfast in the mornings to guests.
      BLADE SIGN. A type of sign made from rigid material mounted perpendicular
to a building facade with one side either attached or supported by a device
extending from a building facade.
      BLOCK. The aggregate of all private lots, civic spaces, cross-block
passages, and rear alleys, as circumscribed by thoroughfares.
      BUILDING FACADE. The exterior wall of a building.
      BUILDING FRONTAGE. The area that is located between a building facade and
the right-of-way, and inclusive of its built and its planted components.
      BUILDING SETBACK. The area of a lot measured from any lot line to a
building facade and is maintained clear of permanent structures with the
exception of encroachments.
      BY-RIGHT. Characterizing either a proposal or a component of a proposal
that complies with the standards of this section and is permitted and processed
administratively without public hearing.
      CIVIC SPACE. An outdoor area that is permanently dedicated for public
use.
      COMMERCIAL. The term collectively defining lodging, office, and retail
use.
      COMMUNITY GARDEN. A community garden is a single parcel of land gardened
collectively by a group of people. COMMUNITY GARDENS may have individual or
shared plots on either private land or public land while producing fruit,
vegetables, and/or plants that are grown for their attractive appearance.
      CORNER MARKET. A retail building purpose-built to primarily sell food,
either fresh or preserved. A CORNER MARKET shall occupy no less than 2,000
square feet of total floor area, and shall occupy no more than 5,000 square
feet of total floor area. At least 50% of the total floor area of a corner
market shall be exclusively dedicated to the sale of fresh produce and other
similar goods and items for preparation and for consumption at another
location. A CORNER MARKET may or may not be disposed in proximity to a food
service establishment or a mail center.
      COTTAGE COURT. An assemblage of detached single-family dwellings that are
arranged on a single lot or on adjacent lots, designed together for aesthetic
purposes and enclosing a civic space or other outdoor gathering place for the
cottage court. The minimum floor area for each detached single-family dwelling
shall be 1,800 square feet. (Synonym: BUNGALOW COURT.)
      COURTYARD. A type of civic space that is designed and equipped for
recreation with both natural surfaces and shaded areas and is used for both
passive and active activities.
      CROSS-BLOCK PASSAGE. A publicly accessible way providing access through a
block that is restricted to pedestrian use and limited vehicular access. (See
Figure No. 7.)
      DOORYARD BUILDING FRONTAGE. A type of building frontage with a shallow
setback and a front garden or a patio, usually with a low wall or a hedge at
the front lot line. (See
Figure No. 1.)
      DRIVEWAY. A vehicular lane within a lot, often leading to a garage.
      ENCROACHMENT. Any structural element permitted to encroach into a
building setback.
      FLAT. A dwelling sharing a building and a lot with other units and uses.
      FRONT BUILDING SETBACK. Is the distance from the front lot line to the
point where a building may be constructed. This area must be maintained clear
of permanent structures with the exception of encroachments.
      FRONT LOT LINE. A lot line bordering a thoroughfare or a civic space.
      GALLERY BUILDING FRONTAGE. A type of building frontage conventional for
retail uses wherein the building facade is aligned close to the front lot line,
with an attached cantilevered shed or a lightweight colonnade overlapping the
sidewalk. (See
Figure No. 4.)
      GARAGE. A single story structure intended for housing a motor vehicle.
      LINER BUILDING. A building that is specifically designed to mask a
parking lot from the right-of-way.
      LIVE-WORK. A mixed use building consisting of a commercial component and
a residential component. The commercial component is restricted to the first
story. It is intended to be occupied by a business operator who lives in the
same building that contains the commercial activity.
      LOADING DOCK. An area in which goods and/or products are moved on and off
a vehicle, including the stall or berth, apron, and maneuvering room.
      LOT COVERAGE. The percentage of a lot that is covered by buildings and
other roofed structures.
      LOT LINE. The boundary that legally and that geometrically demarcates a
lot.
      MANOR HOUSE. A residential building that is designed similarly to a large
house or a villa, but contains up to six multi-family dwelling disposed above
and beside each other, and sharing a common entry. The total floor area for a
multi-family dwelling shall occupy no more than 1,200 square feet. (See
Figure No. 8.)
      MEETING HALL. A building available for gatherings, including conferences,
and is associated with an important civic space.
      MIXED-USE BUILDING. A building that is specifically designed for multiple
uses on the same lot.
      MOBILE FOOD VENDOR PARK. A site for permanent location of four or more
mobile food vehicles. Such sites shall include required infrastructure and
public seating for all vehicles serving in the park.
      OPEN-AIR FARMERS MARKET. An occasional or a periodic market that is held
in an open area or in a structure where groups of individual sellers offer for
sale to the public items such as fresh produce; fresh flowers; seasonal fruits;
arts and crafts; and food and beverages, but excluding second-hand goods, that
are dispensed from booths located on-site.
      OUTBUILDING. An accessory building, that is usually located toward the
rear of the same lot as a principal building and that is no greater than 800
square feet in area.
      PARK. A type of civic space which may be a natural preserve, and that may
also be maintained as public property.
      PLANTER. A landscaped element of the public rights-of-way that
accommodates street trees, whether continuous or individual.
      PLAZA. A type of civic space that is designed for civic purposes and
commercial activities and generally paved and spatially defined by building
frontages.
      PRINCIPAL BUILDING. The main building on a lot.
      PRINCIPAL PEDESTRIAN ENTRANCE. The main point of access for pedestrians
into a principal building.
      REAR ALLEY. An access easement, that is designated to be a secondary
means of vehicular access to the rear or to the side of properties; a rear
alley may connect to a vehicular driveway located to the rear of lots providing
access to outbuildings, service areas, parking, and may contain utility
easements.
      RETAIL BUILDING. A building that is available for the sale of merchandise
and food service.
      ROW HOUSE. A single-family dwelling that shares a party wall with another
of the same type and occupies the entire length of the front lot line.
      SERVICE AREA. The portion of a property or building dedicated to service
in the form of shipping and receiving, trash and recycling collection and
storage, housing of mechanical equipment and outdoor storage areas.
      SHOPFRONT BUILDING FRONTAGE. A type of first story building frontage that
is most conventional for office uses and retail uses with substantial glazing
(and an awning may or may not be provided) wherein the building facade is
aligned close to the front lot line, with the building entrance at sidewalk
grade. (See
Figure No. 3.)
      STOOP BUILDING FRONTAGE. A type of building frontage in which the
building facade is aligned close to the front lot line, with the first story
elevated from the sidewalk for privacy, with an exterior stair and landing at
the entrance. (See
Figure No. 2.)
      STORY. A habitable level within a building, excluding an attic.
      VETERINARY CLINIC. A clinic which is either maintained by or for the use
of a licensed veterinarian in the diagnosis, the treatment, or the prevention
of animal diseases.
 
FIGURE NO. 1
An example of a dooryard building frontage
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9393.png]
 
FIGURE NO. 2
An example of a stoop building frontage
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9395.png]
 
FIGURE NO. 3
An example of a shopfront building frontage
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9397.png]
 
FIGURE NO. 4
An example of a gallery building frontage
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9399.png]
 
FIGURE NO. 5
An example of an outdoor and serving area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9401.png]
 
FIGURE NO. 6
An example of a roll-up door and outdoor seating and outdoor serving
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9403.png]
 
FIGURE NO. 7
An example of a cross-block passage
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9405.png]
 
FIGURE NO. 8
An example of a manor house
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9407.png]
 
FIGURE NO. 9
An example of building scale and architectural detailing
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9409.png]
 
FIGURE NO. 10
An example of building scale and architectural detailing and streetscape design
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9411.png]
 
FIGURE NO. 11
Example of public lighting for thoroughfare
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9413.png]
 
FIGURE NO. 12
Example of public lighting for A-Thoroughfares
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9415.png]
 
FIGURE NO. 13
Example of public lighting for B-Thoroughfares
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9417.png]
(Ord. OR-2340-24, passed 1-8-24)
SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 155.065 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   The special purpose subchapter is designed as an inclusive subchapter that
establishes sets of standards for uses or areas that deserve specific,
independent considerations. None of the districts contained in this subchapter
are cumulative.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.066 PD, PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to accommodate unified design of
residential, commercial, office, professional services, retail and
institutional uses and facilities or combinations thereof in accordance with an
approved comprehensive development plan. This district is designed to permit
flexibility and encourage a more creative, efficient and aesthetically
desirable design and placement of buildings, open spaces, circulation patterns
and parking facilities in order to best utilize special site features of
topography, size or shape.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Uses permitted in a PD, Planned Development District,
are set forth in §
155.054.
   (C)   Development standards and regulations.
      (1)   Height regulations. The maximum height requirement for permissible
uses in this district shall be established on the approved development plan
with due regard to site and general area characteristics including land use,
zoning, topography and setbacks, etc.
      (2)   Density regulations. The density requirement for development shall
be established on the approved development plan taking into account the goals
and objectives, planning principles, and guidelines in the adopted Master Land
Use Plan.
      (3)   Open space regulations. Provisions for public, private and common
open space shall be evaluated with due regard to density, site coverage, and
physical characteristics of the site. Common open space must be usable for
recreational activities including but not limited to playgrounds, trails, or
other passive or active play areas. No open space shall be proposed that is
less than 20 feet in width to accommodate a minimum section of trail surface,
landscape buffer area and space for maintenance. Ownership and maintenance of
these areas must be addressed with the plan proposal.
      (4)   Off-street parking regulations. The off-street parking requirements
shall be established on the approved development plan and generally in
accordance with § 155.091, hereof. The location, number of spaces and size of
parking areas shall be evaluated with due regard to vegetation, topography, and
other physical characteristics of the site.
      (5)   Setback regulations. The setback requirements shall be established
on the approved development plan.
      (6)   Masonry construction standards. The masonry construction standards
shall be established on the approved development plan.
      (7)   Landscaping and screening regulations. The landscaping and
screening requirements shall be established on the approved development plan
but shall not be less than the minimum requirements for development prescribed
in §
155.092 unless a reduction, change or modification of the landscaping and
screening requirements is approved by the City Council as part of the
development plan.
      (8)   Tree preservation and mitigation. Preservation of trees shall be
evaluated with due regard to aesthetics and other physical characteristics
(e.g. topography, view corridors, utilities, access) of the site. This
evaluation should be made prior to the design and layout of proposed
improvements such that the environment suggests design. The requirements for
tree preservation and mitigation shall be established through the policies and
procedures prescribed in the Natural Resources Management Ordinance in
cooperation with the Landscape Administrator. The city deems it necessary that
a developer consult with the Landscape Administrator as early in the site
search, acquisition and planning process as possible so as to minimize negative
impacts on the development.
   (D)   Approval procedures.
      (1)   A concept plan shall be required as a pre-requisite to any
application for PD, Planned Development zoning.
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council will each hold
a public hearing to review the proposed concept plan. The review of the concept
plan does not grant any change in zoning. It merely allows the applicant to
seek a conceptual review before spending the necessary resources to prepare a
development plan.
      (3)   After the concept plan review and a favorable indication from
Planning and Zoning and Council, the applicant may submit a formal application
for zoning change to a Planned Development District and for approval of a
development plan. Such application shall be submitted in accordance with the
provisions of §
155.115. The procedures for hearing said zoning change application and for
approval of the development plan shall be the same as for an application for
any other zoning change.
      (4)   The applicant has the option to by-pass the concept plan review
process if prepared to submit a development plan without any prior indication
from the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council regarding the
development concept.
      (5)   Prior to considering an application for a zoning change to a
Planned Development District and development plan, the City Council shall
request a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (6)   After receiving the Planning and Zoning Commission's
recommendation, the City Council shall hold a public hearing to consider the
application.
      (7)   After the public hearing, City Council may approve the original
application and development plan or modify the development plan as deemed
appropriate by the City Council.
      (8)   The approved development plan and the associated development
standards and regulations to be observed on the Planned Development District
shall be specified and incorporated as part of the ordinance establishing the
district. Every Planned Development District approved under the provisions of
this chapter shall be considered an amendment to the zoning ordinance and
zoning map.
   (E)   Concept plan application.  An application for review and consideration
of a concept plan shall consist of the following:
      (1)   A complete signed application as provided by the Planning
Department or on the city's website at www.mansfield-tx.gov.
      (2)   The appropriate fee in accordance with the current fee schedule
adopted by City Council.
      (3)   On a separate 8½" X 11" exhibit, provide a metes and bounds
description of the property included in the concept plan boundaries, including
the total acreage, signed and sealed by a registered surveyor.
      (4)   On a separate 8½" X 11" exhibit, list the proposed specific land
uses in detail and the approximate acreage data for each use. If land uses are
general, refer to the nearest, least intensive zoning district that would
accommodate the proposed use and any excluded uses. Example: All uses permitted
in the "C-3, Commercial District, excluding outside storage or sales".
      (5)   An electronic copy of the plan in accordance with current
established policy.
      (6)   All large format drawings shall be folded to an approximate size of
8½" X 11" with the title block showing.
      (7)   Copies of the plan shall be submitted to the city in the manner
specified by the most current submittal policies. The plan must be drawn to an
acceptable size and scale and must indicate all significant features of the
proposed development to include:
         (a)   A vicinity map locating the property in relationship to existing
major thoroughfares.
         (b)   Title block, preferably in lower right-hand corner, including
the following: "Concept Plan, name of development, survey and abstract number
or recorded plat information, city, county, state, date of preparation, acreage
and number of lots".
         (c)   Acceptable scale: 1" = 20', 1" = 40', 1" = 100' or as approved.
         (d)   Type size is legible at full scale and when reduced.
         (e)   North arrow, graphic and written scale in close proximity.
         (f)   Name, address, phone and fax of owner/developer and the firm
preparing the plan.
         (g)   A map showing the boundaries of the different land uses and the
boundary dimensions.
         (h)   Adjacent or surrounding land uses, zoning, streets and other
pertinent existing or proposed off-site improvements, sufficient to demonstrate
the relationship and compatibility of the site to the surrounding properties,
uses and facilities.
         (i)   The location, height, setbacks and minimum floor areas for all
buildings and if non-residential, the floor area ratio.
         (j)   The number, location, and typical dimensions of the lots, the
setbacks, the number of dwelling units, and number of units per acre (density).
         (k)   The location, type, and size of all fences, berms, or screening
features.
         (l)   When deemed necessary, the Planning and Zoning Commission or
City Council may ask for more information during the review of a concept plan.
   (F)   Development plan application.  An application for zoning change to PD,
Planned Development shall consist of the following:
      (1)   A complete signed application as provided by the Planning
Department or on the city's website at www.mansfield-tx.gov. The appropriate
fee in accordance with the current fee schedule adopted by City Council.
      (2)   On a separate 8½" X 11" exhibit, provide a metes and bounds
description of the property included in the zoning change request, including
the total acreage, signed and sealed by a registered surveyor.
      (3)   On a separate 24" X 26" or 22" X 34" sheet, drawn at the same scale
as the plan, show the approximate topography of the plan area, all water
courses that will remain in a natural state, 100-year floodway and a 100-year
floodplain per FEMA and other hydraulic and hydrologic studies as necessary.
Provide two copies.
      (4)   On a separate 24" X 36" or 22" X 34" sheet, drawn at the same scale
as the plan, show proposed and existing water and sanitary sewer locations.
Also include the locations and sizes of private water and sanitary sewer lines.
Provide two copies.
      (5)   On a separate 8½" X 11" exhibit, list the specific land uses in
detail and the acreage data for each use. If land uses are general, refer to
the nearest, least intensive zoning district that would accommodate the
proposed use and excluded uses. Example: All uses permitted in the "C-3,
Commercial District, excluding outside storage or sales".
      (6)   A separate exhibit and documents indicating the traffic volumes,
turning movements, evaluation of ingress and egress existing and proposed, when
required by the City Engineer.
      (7)   An electronic copy of the plan in accordance with current
established policy.
      (8)   All large format drawings shall be folded to an approximate size of
8½" X 11" with the title block showing.
      (9)   Copies of the plan shall be submitted to the city in the manner
specified by the most current submittal policies. The plan must be drawn to an
acceptable size and scale and must indicate all significant features of the
proposed development to include:
         (a)   A vicinity map locating the property in relationship to existing
major thoroughfares.
         (b)   Title block, preferably in lower right-hand corner, including
the following: "Development Plan, name of development, survey and abstract
number or recorded plat information, city, county, state, date of preparation,
acreage and number of lots".
         (c)   Acceptable scale: 1" = 20', 1" = 40', 1" = 100' or as approved.
         (d)   Type size is legible at full scale and when reduced.
         (e)   North arrow, graphic and written scale in close proximity.
         (f)   Name, address, phone and fax of owner/developer and the firm
preparing the plan.
         (g)   A map showing the boundaries of the different land uses and the
boundary dimensions.
         (h)   Adjacent or surrounding land uses, zoning, streets, drainage
facilities and other existing or proposed off-site improvements, sufficient to
demonstrate the relationship and compatibility of the site to the surrounding
properties, uses and facilities.
         (i)   The location and size of all streets, alleys, parking lots and
parking spaces, loading areas or other areas to be used for vehicular traffic
and the proposed access and connection to existing or proposed streets adjacent
to the plan area. Include a chart indicating the number of required parking
spaces by use, the method of calculation and the number of proposed parking
spaces.
         (j)   The types of surfacing, such as paving (e.g. concrete, brick,
turf, etc.) to be used at the various locations.
         (k)   The location and size of all fire lanes with all curb radii
adjacent to the fire lane labeled. The nearest fire hydrant dimensioned to the
property corner and all proposed fire hydrants.
         (l)   The location, height, setbacks and minimum floor areas for all
buildings, and if non-residential, the floor area ratio. Include the following
building details for non single-family developments:
            1.   Entrance and exits to the building.
            2.   Architectural renderings or elevations of proposed structures
with all exterior materials for roofs, awnings, walls etc. labeled.
            3.   Calculations of the masonry content on each facade and in
total for each building. (Example: Area of front facade = h x l, percent
masonry = 80%)
            4.   Distance between buildings and distance from building to
property lines.
         (m)   The number, location, and dimensions of the lots; and the
setbacks, number of dwelling units, and number of units per acre (density). A
graphic showing a typical lot layout, with size and setbacks.
         (n)   The location of all on-site facilities for liquid waste or
method of temporary storage pending disposal, including existing or proposed
septic fields.
         (o)   The location, size and type of each outside facility for waste
or trash disposal. If no facility is shown, provide a note indicating method of
disposal and removal.
         (p)   A tree survey locating all protected trees by type, size and
species in a printed and electronic format, as required by the Landscape
Administrator, and mitigation plan, if required by the city's Natural Resources
Management Ordinance. (Refer to the Tree Preservation Application as found on
the city's website.)
         (q)   A landscape plan showing all landscape setbacks and buffers;
parking lot landscaping; and any additional landscaping proposed. A chart
indicating the size, length and width of the landscape areas, with the required
number of plants and the proposed number of plants should be included on the
plan. The landscape plan may be presented on a separate exhibit on the same
sheet size and at the same scale as the site plan.
         (r)   The approximate location and size of greenbelt, open, common, or
recreation areas, the proposed use of such areas, and whether they are to be
used for public or private use. If private, indicate the proposed ownership.
         (s)   The approximate location and size of required Parkland
Dedication areas, as required by the city's Parkland Dedication Ordinance for
residential development.
         (t)   The location, type, and size of all fences, berms, or screening
features.
         (u)   A plan, including elevations, showing location, size, height,
orientation and design of all signs regulated by the city's sign ordinance.
         (v)   The location, size and type of all pedestrian areas, bike paths
and sidewalks.
         (w)   The location, size, type and purpose of any outside storage or
outside display and method of screening. Indicate the percentage of outside
storage as compared to the building square footage.
         (x)   Phases of development should be shown and labeled. Provide a
development schedule indicating the start and finish date of each phase, broken
down by use and acreage.
         (y)   When deemed necessary, the Planning and Zoning Commission or
City Council may ask for more information during the review of a Planned
Development. Likewise, they may waive some of the information if the
application is a simple request to deviate from the existing zoning category on
the property.
         (z)   If applicable, show the following mandatory Owners Association
notes:
            1.   A mandatory Owners Association will be responsible for the
maintenance of the "insert list of private amenities and common areas here".
(Example: screening fences, common areas, parks, amenity centers, landscaping)
            2.   The Owners Association and associated documents shall be filed
in accordance with the City of Mansfield policies. These documents must be
reviewed by the City Attorney prior to filing the final plat. The documents
shall be filed with the final plat at Tarrant County when deemed necessary by
the Attorney. The documents shall be submitted in a timely manner to allow for
a minimum of 60 days review. Failure to submit the documents or incomplete
documents may result in delay of construction, acceptance of the subdivision or
delay in approval of a building permit. The city does not accept the
responsibility for any delays in construction, approval or acceptance of the
subdivision caused by the failure to submit the association documents or the
inaccuracy of the documents.
      (10)   A statement that clearly indicates that the proposed development
will be in complete accordance with the provisions of the approved Planned
Development District and that all Development Plans recorded hereunder shall be
binding upon the applicant thereof, his successors and assigns, and shall limit
and control all building permits.
   (G)   Amendments. The Director of Planning and Development may approve minor
variations or revisions from the original Planned Development which do not
increase density, change traffic patterns, or result in any increase in
external impact on adjacent properties or neighborhoods. The Director of
Planning may refer any variation or revision that warrants special
consideration to the City Council for its review. If, in the City Council's
determination, the variation or revision does not constitute a significant
change, no public hearing shall be called and the variation or revision shall
be deemed approved. The City Council in its sole discretion may direct any
variation or revision to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its review and
recommendation and, in such event, said variation or revision shall follow the
procedures set out in §
155.115 herein regarding amendments to the zoning ordinance.
   (H)   Platting required prior to development.
      (1)   Prior to issuance of any building permits, the development plan
shall reflect all stipulations as approved by the City Council and the property
shall be final platted in accordance with the subdivision ordinance and
platting policies of the city.
      (2)   When a development plan has been approved, final plats may be
submitted in phases as shown on the approved plan. In no case, however, shall
the density of all approved final plats exceed the maximum approved project
density.
   (I)   Maintenance of common open space. When common open space, common
recreational areas or private utilities and private streets are approved as a
part of a development plan, the applicant for the approval of the applicable
Planned Development District shall also submit a scheme, subject to the
approval of the City Attorney and City Council, for assuring continued
retention and perpetual maintenance of said items for as long as the
development exists. The associated documents must be reviewed by the City
Attorney prior to filing the final plat. The documents shall be filed with the
final plat at Tarrant County when deemed necessary by the Attorney. The
documents shall be submitted in a timely manner to allow for a minimum of 60
days review. Failure to submit the documents or incomplete documents may result
in delay of construction, acceptance of the subdivision or delay in approval of
a building permit. The city does not accept the responsibility for any delays
in construction, approval or acceptance of the subdivision caused by the
failure to submit the Association documents or the inaccuracy of the documents.
   (J)   Enforcement of development schedule. If the developer or property
owner fails to adhere to the development schedule shown in the approved
development plan, the city has the option to initiate an amendment of the
Planned Development District or development plan as deemed necessary by the
City Council. The procedures for amending the Planned Development District or
development plan shall be the same as for a new zoning change application.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86; Am. Ord. OR-2189-20, passed 10-26-20)
§ 155.067 FR, FREEWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. This district shall function as an
overlay zoning district the regulations of which are superimposed and shall
supersede the regulations of an approved standard zoning district; such
standard zoning districts identified as the PR, A, SF-5AC/24, SF-12/22, SF-9.6/
20, SF-8.4/18, SF-8.4/16, SF-7.5/18, SF-7.5/16, SF-7.5/12, SF-6/12, 2F, MF-1,
MF-2, OP, C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1, I-2, MH and PD District. Where provisions of the
"FR", Freeway Overlay Districts shall be applicable to any property which is
adjacent to and within 300 feet of the right-of-way lines of a highway abutting
a FR District in the City of Mansfield, the "FR" District is created as an
overlay district whereby it is recognized that certain specific standards
relative to land use, set backs, signage, and the like are appropriate and
necessary that such standards shall be superimposed and shall supersede the
regulation of an approved standard zoning district. Where such district
regulations are in conflict with the provisions of these sections, all
regulations of the approved standard zoning districts shall be in effect except
as identified in this section.
   (B)   Use regulations. A building or premise in this district shall be used
only for the following purposes:
      (1)   Any use identified in the MF-1, MF-2, OP, C-1, C-2, C-3 or I-
1 districts subject to the conditions identified in division (C) herein
prohibiting certain land uses or requiring restricted use approval for certain
identified land uses so long as said uses are permitted within the approved
standard zoning district. No cumulative use permitted in a standard zoning
district with a "FR" prefix shall be permitted unless provided for herein.
   (C)   Uses identified in this division are expressly prohibited as the
primary use of land on any lot or tract in the FR, Overlay District. Such uses
are also prohibited secondary uses except as identified in this section as
permitted secondary usage:
      (1)   Any use identified in the MH, C-4 or I-2 district unless otherwise
permitted.
      (2)   Plant nursery.
      (3)   Mobile homes, trailers, temporary buildings, tents, except as
temporary office for construction or business relocation and only in compliance
with § 155.081(B).
      (4)   Open warehousing except as specifically provided herein.
      (5)   Any outside storage of vehicles for repair, storage, sale or use
except as a secondary use to a permitted use provided herein.
      (6)   Travel trailer park.
      (7)   Rental stores with outside storage or display.
      (8)   Landscape materials, sales, rental or supply with outside storage.
      (9)   Any outside storage of materials or products for finishing
fabrication or disposal.
      (10)   Pool or billiard hall.
      (11)   Amusement center.
      (12)   Amusement park except as a planned development, or specific use.
      (13)   Outdoor amusements including but not limited to commercial
swimming pool, drive-in theater, driving range miniature golf course, riding
stable or club.
      (14)   Buildings or enclosed structures whereby vehicles may enter into
and pass completely through to the other side, except for the following
purposes:
         (a)   Mechanical service or modification;
         (b)   Inspection; and
         (c)   Electronic product or component installation.
      (15)   Second hand goods.
      (16)   Pawn shop.
      (17)   Kennel.
      (18)   Carwash with exception that a single bay fully automatic car wash
be permitted as a secondary use to retail gasoline sales.
      (19)   New or used motor vehicle part sales with outside storage.
      (20)   Used motor vehicles sales except as a secondary use to new motor
vehicles sales.
      (21)   Tire recapping or retreading.
      (22)   Salvage or reclamation.
      (23)   Temporary storage of impounded vehicles or vehicles awaiting
dismantling or repair.
      (24)   Trailer rental, sales or storage.
      (25)   Truck or motorcycle rental, storage or secondary sales except as a
secondary use to new truck or motorcycle sales.
      (26)   Heavy equipment rentals, sales or storage, new or used.
      (27)   Any use involving nude employees.
      (28)   Book stores, theaters, or movie houses except those within a strip
commercial shopping center, shopping mall or as part of a planned development
as provided herein.
      (29)   Petroleum products, wholesale storage.
      (30)   Planning mill.
      (31)   Railroad yard, shop; truck terminal, stops.
      (32)   Night club, bar or private club except as a secondary use to a
hotel, motel, restaurant and provided that the sale of food constitutes a
minimum of 60% of total sales.
      (33)   Any use incorporating the housing outdoors or indoors of any
livestock or animals except as a secondary use to an amusement park or Planned
Development for amusement purposes (specific use permit required).
      (34)   Drive-thru or to go food services except as a secondary use to a
walk-in restaurant.
   (D)   Restricted land uses. Any building or premises in this overlay
district may be used for the purpose identified in this division only when the
use has been specifically approved by specific use permit in compliance with
the provisions of §
155.080.
      (1)   Single-family dwelling, zero-lot-line dwelling, and two-family
dwelling.
      (2)   Amusement park (except as may be incorporated as part of a planned
development).
      (3)   Dance hall or night club.
      (4)   Recycling collection center.
      (5)   Building materials and lumber sales with outside storage.
      (6)   Any secondary use incorporating housing of animals indoors.
      (7)   Auto repair, auto paint and body shop and auto service
establishments that meet the requirements of §
155.099 and the following conditions; provided that a car wash shall continue
to be prohibited as shown in §
155.067(C) and that an auto service department of a new car dealership shall be
exempt from the specific use permit requirement depicted in §
155.067(D) above.
         (a)   Architectural elements shall be required to enhance all building
facades. Such architectural elements may include cornices, moldings, pilasters,
wall recesses or projections, arches, special entryways, awnings, canopies,
porticoes, pitched roof and/or combinations of such elements. In addition,
architectural details such as a variety of patterns, colors and textures of
building materials shall also be required. Building elevation drawings shall be
included as a part of the application for the specific use permit. Elevation
drawings shall be in color and depict the proposed architectural elements and
details.
         (b)   No service bay shall face an abutting public street or highway
if it is not completely behind a screening enclosure.
         (c)   No service bay shall be located less than 100 feet from the
highway right-of-way if it is not completely behind a screening enclosure.
         (d)   Service bays that are not totally screened by an existing
intervening building shall be screened from view from any highway that abuts
the property where the service bays are located. Screening shall be achieved by
a solid masonry wall, earthen berm or a combination of screening wall and
earthen berm that is ten feet high minimum, located perpendicular to the
exterior facade of the first service bay nearest to the highway to extend out a
distance of 20 feet beyond the service bay.
            1.   The screening wall shall be constructed of the same material
used predominately on the building facade that faces the highway.
            2.   If an earthen berm is used, it shall be designed and
constructed to prevent any drainage and erosion problems. The maximum slope for
an earthen berm shall be 3:1 (i.e. three feet width for every foot in height).
         (e)   In addition to the street landscape setback required in §
155.092 and the screening described in this section, additional landscaping, in
the amount of 10% of the total area of the property, shall be provided to
enhance the appearance from any public street or highway that abuts the
property and minimize the view of the service bays.
         (f)   To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed landscaping and
screening, the following documents shall be submitted as part of the
application for the specific use permit:
            1.   A landscape plan prepared by a registered landscape architect;
            2.   A line of sight drawing prepared by a qualified design
professional; and
            3.   A perspective rendering or axonometric drawing prepared by a
qualified design professional.
         (g)   Whenever service bay doors face a side property line, a 20 foot
wide landscape buffer shall be provided along the entire side property line.
When there are service bay doors on more than one side of the building, this
requirement shall apply to all side property lines across from service bay
doors. The 20 foot landscape buffer shall be planted at the rate of one
approved screening tree for each 200 square feet or portion thereof. At the
time of planting, each screening tree shall be a minimum of ten to 11 feet in
height, six to seven feet spread, and a minimum of three and one-half inch
caliper measured 18 inches above ground. Screening trees shall be chosen from
the list in division (1) below. As an alternative to screening trees, a
developer may choose from the canopy trees listed in §
155.092, as long as the minimum height and caliper requirements above are met.
If canopy trees are utilized, they shall be planted at the rate of one tree for
each 300 square feet or portion thereof, and shrubs shall be planted between
trees to provide adequate screening. The screening shrubs shall be planted no
further apart than four feet on center in two continuous, alternating rows so
that screening should be effective within two growing seasons. Screening shrubs
shall be a minimum of seven gallon or larger with a minimum height of three-
and-a-half feet at the time of planting and shall be chosen from the list in
division (2) below.
            1.   Screening trees. Approved screening trees may not be limbed up
and the foliage must be full-to-the-ground. Approved screening trees include
Eastern Red Cedar, Leyland Cypress, Elderica Pine, Cherry Laurel, and Nelly R.
Stevens Holly. The Landscape Administrator may approve other screening trees.
            2.   Screening shrubs. Approved screening shrubs may not be limbed
up and the foliage must be full-to-the-ground. Approved screening shrubs
include Waxmyrtle, Dwarf Waxmyrtle, Burford Holly, Dwarf Burford Holly,
Nandina, Texas Sage, Pampas Grass, Chinese Holly, and other selections of holly
which will reach at least five feet in height. The Landscape Administrator may
approve other screening shrubs.
         (h)   Service bay doors shall be painted with a neutral or earth tone
color. The developer may propose an alternate color that the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council may determine to be appropriate for the
building design and not detract from the aesthetic quality of the development
and surrounding properties. The intent of this provision is to avoid drawing
attention to the service bay doors. Glass or transparent overhead doors shall
not be permitted.
         (i)   Vehicles awaiting repair or pickup may be stored overnight only
in enclosed spaces. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an auto paint and body shop
may store vehicles awaiting repair provided the vehicles are completely behind
a screening enclosure.
         (j)   There shall be no outside storage or display of materials,
including goods or products (i.e. tires, batteries, auto parts, etc.) awaiting
sale, installation, disposal, finishing or fabrication.
         (k)   A screening enclosure referenced or required in this section
shall be at least six feet in height and constructed of the same material used
predominately on the building facade.
         (l)   The screening and/or landscaping requirements described above
may be modified by the City Council if they find that the structure is
architecturally designed to effectively screen the service bay doors from view
from abutting properties and abutting public street or highway.
         (m)   The site plan, elevations, landscape plan, line of sight drawing
and perspective rendering/axonometric drawings that are submitted to
demonstrate architectural elements, effectiveness of screening, and
architectural details shall be binding on the development and subsequent
expansions.
         (n)   Buildings constructed for any use permitted under this
subsection are limited to one story and maximum height of 35 feet.
   (E)   Set back regulations.
      (1)   On federal or state numbered highways or access roads the minimum
set back adjacent to such highways or access road shall be 25 feet measured
from the right-of-way line.
      (2)   On all arterial streets as designed in the thoroughfare plan
adopted by the City Council, minimum set back adjacent to such streets shall be
the same as the approved standard zoning district except that in no case shall
such set back be less than 20 feet from the property line.
      (3)   All other set backs including interior lot line, setbacks and set
backs on minor or collector streets, shall be in compliance with the approved
standard zoning district.
      (4)   On any lot in this district used for non-residential purposes which
adjoins any non "FR" prefix residential district, the minimum setback adjacent
to such residential district shall be 15 feet and shall meet the screening
requirements of §
155.092.
   (F)   Masonry construction. All development in the Freeway Overlay district
shall conform to the regulations of §
155.056.
   (G)   Parking regulations. For each permissible use in this district, off
street parking shall be provided in accordance with all regulations governing
the approved standard zoning district and the regulations of §
155.091.
   (H)   Sign regulations. All signs in the Freeway Overlay District shall
conform to the regulations in § 155.090 and shall pertain only to the principle
use or service rendered or product sold on the premises on which the sign is
located, and contain only information pertaining to either the name of the
occupant, the kind of business or the brand name of the principle commodity
being sold, but not including information on subsidiary products or services,
nor information on anything or person.
   (I)   Special conditions of the "FR" District.
      (1)   No fencing shall be permitted in any required set back abutting a
public street except as required herein or as part of a secondary landscaping
theme. The provisions of §
155.092 shall apply in this district.
      (2)   No outside display of goods, wears or merchandise shall be
permitted except where the primary land use is the show room display and sale
of new automobiles, trucks, motorcycles or boats by an authorized dealer.
Repair work, storage facilities, rentals or used merchandise sales on the same
premises shall be allowed only as incidental to an approved primary use.
      (3)   When allowed by the standard zoning district, outside storage shall
be completely enclosed by a screening device as specified in §
155.092. No outside storage shall be permitted in any required setback.
      (4)   No loading dock shall be erected fronting any state or federally
numbered highway. Any loading dock fronting any public street shall be set back
from such street, right-of-way line a sufficient distance so that all loading
operations, truck parking and storage, and maneuvering of vehicles into or out
of loading dock spaces shall take place outside of public right-of-way.
      (5)   Refuse facilities. Any refuse facility or container shall be
screened from view of public streets and highways by screening device as
specified in §
155.092. In no case may refuse facilities, dumpsters, or other refuse
containers be located in the front or side yard of any business or structure.
      (6)   Utilities. All utilities shall be placed underground except for
electrical utilities under the following conditions:
         (a)   Any transmission line crossing a highway abutting a FR District
at an angle of less than 40 degrees from perpendicular with said highway may be
placed overhead. For the purpose of this section, a transmission line shall be
that line which is responsible for bringing electricity from a generating plant
to a distribution substation.
         (b)   Any distribution feeder lines crossing a highway abutting a FR
District at an angle of less than 40 degrees from perpendicular with said
highways may be placed overhead. For the purpose of this section, a
distribution feeder line shall be that line which is responsible for bringing
electricity from a distribution substation to interconnect with a distribution
line.
         (c)   Any distribution line not within 300 feet of the centerline of a
highway abutting a FR District may be placed above ground. For the purpose of
this section, a distribution line shall be that line responsible for bringing
electricity from a distribution feeder line to the business or structure.
         (d)   No electrical transformer shall be installed on any pole
carrying electrical lines. All transformer equipment shall be ground-mounted.
         (e)   Nothing herein shall be construed as requiring the City of
Mansfield or the utility company to bear the increased cost of underground
utility placement required by this chapter (as compared to the cost of overhead
placement).
         (f)   Any electrical utility lines placed prior to the effective date
of this chapter that are contrary to same are nonconforming.
         (g)   Nothing contained herein is intended to alter the intent of the
electrical franchise agreement ordinance in effect on the effective date of
this chapter.
         (h)   All lines existing at the time of adoption of this chapter are
herein exempted from provisions of this chapter.
      (7)   Approval of a "FR" designation on any given zoning district shall
be deemed approval of a less or more intensive district whichever case applies
than approval of such zoning district without a FR designation.
      (8)   Specific use permits shall be permitted in this district when in
compliance with §
155.054 and §
155.091 so long as such specific use permit is provided within the suffix
district applicable to the property within the FR Overlay District, is
consistent with the spirit and intent of the FR Overlay District, and is not a
prohibited use within the FR Overlay District.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86; Am. Ord. OR-2223-21, passed 10-11-21)
§ 155.068 MH, MANUFACTURED HOME DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. To establish and preserve a special and unique form of
housing for which accommodations should be provided. To provide appropriate
standards as to density, spacing and use, a separate district is hereby created
and designated for the specific purpose of providing, at appropriate locations,
area for the development of manufactured home rental communities or
subdivisions for more or less permanent occupancy.
   (B)   Permitted use. No building or premises in a "MH", Manufactured Home
Zoning District shall be used and no buildings shall be hereafter erected,
reconstructed, altered, enlarged, used, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be
issued, except for the following uses:
      (1)   HUD - code manufactured homes, either:
         (a)   As a part of a manufactured home rental community as herein
specified; or
         (b)   As a part of a manufactured home subdivision which is designed
in accordance with the subdivision ordinance and is shown on a final
subdivision plat approved by the City of Mansfield and filed of record which is
specifically for and restricted to manufactured home development.
      (2)   Accessory buildings and structures incidental to the above use and
for the exclusive use of residents including, but not limited to, community
centers, swimming pools, and offices.
      (3)   Installation owned and operated by the City of Mansfield, Tarrant
County, State of Texas, or public utility companies, which installations are
necessary for the public safety, governmental services, or the furnishing of
utility services to or through a "MH" District.
   (C)   Manufactured home rental community license required. It shall be
unlawful for any person(s) to maintain or operate within the City of Mansfield
any manufactured home rental community unless such person(s) shall first comply
with the following and obtain a license therefor.
      (1)   Pre-existing rental communities. Not withstanding the provisions of
this chapter, a license shall be issued within 30 days to any manufactured home
rental community which was in operation prior to the adoption of this chapter
for operations only to the extent that they were carried on such date of
adoption. All pre-existing rental communities obtaining licenses as set out
herein shall be considered legal non-conforming uses. At any time that the
ownership of a legally non-conforming manufactured home rental community
operating under this chapter is transferred, the manufactured home rental
community shall be required to conform with all sections except divisions (J)
and (M) of this section before a license to the new owners will be issued.
Ownership transfer is defined as a majority stock transfer or a transfer of
title to the real property except for a bonafide gift, devise or descent. Any
manufactured home rental community annexed after the adoption of this chapter
shall likewise comply as hereinabove described in this section.
      (2)   Application. Application for a manufactured home rental community
license shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and shall contain the
following:
         (a)   The name and address of the applicant and owner if not the same.
         (b)   The location survey and legal description of the manufactured
home rental community by metes and bounds.
         (c)   A complete plan of the rental community with lot numbers.
         (d)   Design and engineering drawings, properly sealed, plans of all
buildings, lots and other improvements constructed including water, sewer, gas,
electricity and telephone. All water and sewer installations shall be in
accordance with city standards.
         (e)   Such further information as may be requested by the city to
enable the city to determine if the manufactured home rental community will
comply with the legal requirements.
         (f)   The application and all accompanying plans shall be filed in
triplicate. The City Building Official, City Engineer, City Fire Marshal and
City Planning and Zoning Commission shall investigate the application and
inspect the plans. If the manufactured home rental community is in compliance
with all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances or
statutes, the Planning and Zoning Commission may approve the application. The
Building Official at the direction of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
issue the license.
      (3)   License renewal. The license application form for a manufactured
home rental community shall be obtained from the Building Official at a fee of
$50. Such license shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is
issued. The cost of any license secured having less than a year to run before
the expiration period, as herein provided, shall be pro-rated at a rate of $2
per month. Such or any license shall not be issued for less than a minimum of
$25. Application for renewal of licenses shall be within 30 days prior to
expiration, and a renewal fee paid for a full 12 month period thereafter.
   (D)   Office building within a manufactured home rental community. Each
manufactured home rental community shall be provided with a structure to be
known and marked as the office, in which shall be kept copies of all records
pertaining to the management and supervision of the rental community, as well
as all rules and regulations of the rental community and such records, rules
and regulations to be available for inspection.
   (E)   Register of occupants within a manufactured home rental community. It
shall be the duty of the licensee to keep a register containing a record of all
occupants located within the rental community. The register shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   Name and address of each occupant and/or owner.
      (2)   Make, model, serial number, year and size of homes.
      (3)   The make, model and year of all recreational vehicles, camping or
travel trailers, coaches, and motor homes used as dwelling, temporary or
permanent.
      (4)   The date of arrival and of departure of each of the above.
      (5)   The manager of the rental community shall keep the register
available in the office for inspection at all times by law enforcement
officers, public health officials and other officials whose duties necessitate
acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register records
shall be kept up-to-date and shall not be destroyed for a period of two years
following the date of registration.
   (F)   Rules and regulations for a manufactured home rental community. It
shall be the duty of the owner of each manufactured home rental community, his
agent, representative or manager to prescribe rules and regulations for the
management of the rental community, to make adequate provision for the
enforcement of such rules, and to subscribe to any and all subsequent rules and
regulations which may be adopted for the management of such rental community.
Copies of such rules and regulations shall be furnished to each occupant upon
registration and a copy to the city. In addition thereto, it shall be the duty
of the owner, his agent, representative or manager to comply.
   (G)   It shall be the responsibility of the manufactured home rental
community owner or his agent to maintain said rental community in a safe, clean
and sanitary condition and:
      (1)   Provide that each structure be installed in accordance with State
of Texas regulations and skirted within 30 days after being placed on lot or
pad.
      (2)   Provide that the City Building Official be notified upon approval
of the installations by State Inspectors.
      (3)   Provide for regular inspection of water and sanitary conveniences.
      (4)   Provide for the collection and removal of garbage, other waste
materials and refuse.
      (5)   Provide for the removal of any unsightly, wrecked, abandoned or
junked vehicles, machinery or equipment.
   (H)   License; revocation and reissuance.
      (1)   The City Council may revoke any license to maintain and operate a
manufactured home rental community when the licensee has been found guilty by
court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provisions of this chapter.
After such conviction, the license may be reissued if the circumstances leading
to conviction has been remedied and the rental community is being maintained
and operated in full compliance with the law and this chapter, the fee for
which shall be set by the City Council.
      (2)   The City Council may revoke any manufactured home rental community
license upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission in case any
of the provisions hereof are violated. However, before the license may be
revoked, the City Council must give ten days' notice, delivered in person or by
registered mail to the holder of the license, and after ten days, a hearing
thereon. After the license has been revoked, the license may be reissued if the
reasons for the revocation have been duly corrected.
   (I)   License posting. The license certificate issued under the provisions
of this chapter shall be conspicuously posted in the office of the manufactured
home rental community at all times.
   (J)   Area and height regulations. All new manufactured home rental
communities or subdivisions and all new additions to existing manufactured home
rental communities or subdivisions shall conform to the following:
      (1)   The maximum height of any building or structure in a MH District
shall be 35 feet.
      (2)   The minimum site area which may be developed or used for
manufactured home purposes shall be 40 spaces.
      (3)   The minimum lot or site area per manufactured home unit shall be
4,500 square feet.
      (4)   The minimum lot width per manufactured home unit shall be 50 feet.
      (5)   The minimum lot depth per manufactured home unit shall be 90 feet.
   (K)   Setback regulations. Minimum setbacks shall be as follows:
      (1)   The minimum setback for residential use shall be 25 feet from
dedicated street right-of-way, or 15 feet from any private drive designated or
used for access, circulation, or service within the manufactured home rental
community. The minimum street setback for non-residential use shall be 25 feet.
      (2)   The minimum side setback shall be ten feet, provided in any event,
there shall be a minimum space of 20 feet between manufactured homes.
      (3)   The minimum rear setback shall be ten feet provided in any event,
there shall be a minimum space of 20 feet between manufactured homes.
      (4)   No structure of any type shall be permitted within ten feet of a
boundary of a MH District.
   (L)   Accessory or additional building regulations. It shall be unlawful for
any person operating a manufactured home rental community or occupying a
manufactured home to construct or permit to be constructed in such rental
community or in connection with such manufactured home any additional
structure, building or shelter in connection with or attached to a manufactured
home except, however, awnings of wood or metal may be attached to such
manufactured home as well as portable, prefabricated structures for the express
purposes of increasing manufactured home storage or living area, which meet the
following requirements:
      (1)   To secure a building permit from the Building Official.
      (2)   Strength of materials and structure to meet minimum of the City
Building Code.
      (3)   Such room shall be completely dismantled and/or removed from the
site at the time the manufactured home to which it is an accessory is moved.
      (4)   Finished in appearance to be as near the same as possible to the
manufactured home to which it is an accessory.
      (5)   The length must not exceed the length of the manufactured home to
which it is an accessory.
      (6)   The width shall not exceed the width of the manufactured home.
      (7)   Any structure building or shelter added to or placed on a
manufactured home site shall meet all of the setback requirements contained in
this chapter.
      (8)   Only one such room for dwelling purposes per manufactured home
shall be permitted.
   (M)   Any manufactured home rental community or subdivision constructed
after the adoption of this chapter or any extension of addition to an existing
manufactured home rental community or subdivision in the City of Mansfield
shall be done in compliance with the following requirements:
      (1)   Will have MH zoning before consideration.
      (2)   Must comply with all applicable sections of this chapter.
      (3)   If extension or expansion of existing rental community, must have a
valid license.
      (4)   A preliminary plan or plat of the rental community shall be
submitted following the same guidelines as outlined for preliminary plat in the
subdivision ordinance.
      (5)   Upon approval of said preliminary rental community plan or plat by
the Planning and Zoning Commission, a final rental community plan or plat may
be submitted following the same guidelines as outlined for final plat in the
subdivision ordinance with following variances.
         (a)   The number, location and size of all manufactured home spaces.
         (b)   City water and sewer shall have collective or master meters.
         (c)   Centrally-located refuse containers having a capacity of three
cubic yards or larger shall be provided, one for each 30 lots. Such containers
shall be designed so as to prevent spillage, container deterioration, and to
facilitate cleaning around them. Refuse and garbage shall be removed from the
park at least twice each week. These containers shall be screened and set apart
by at least 25 feet from any dedicated right-of-way or manufactured home.
         (d)   The topography of the entire park site and the surrounding
terrain shall dictate the type of streets and storm drainage. Recommendations
will be made at preliminary rental community planning or platting by the City
Engineer and if approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission the type of
systems will be shown on the final plan or plat of the rental community and
construction plans.
         (e)   Where curbed streets or drives are not required a minimum of 36
feet of driving surface for all collector streets and a minimum of 26 feet for
all minor streets shall be constructed with all weather shoulder on each side
upon requirement of the Commission after recommendation of the City Engineer.
         (f)   Private streets within a manufactured home rental community
shall be constructed of concrete and comply with all applicable Fire Code and
city engineering standards.
         (g)   A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for
each manufactured home. Each parking space shall be a minimum of nine feet by
18 feet. These spaces may be within the required setback.
         (h)   Parking for guests will be allowed on one side of streets or
drives only. One side of the street or drive shall be properly posted for "No
Parking". The remaining 20 to 30 feet (depending on collector or minor
designation) shall be striped and marked "Fire Lane".
         (i)   Fire hydrants must follow both of two rules:
            1.   No structure shall be further away, in a direct line, than 500
feet from a fire hydrant.
            2.   Hydrant spacing along a water main shall not exceed 500 feet.
         (j)   There shall be provided within the manufactured home rental
community open space at a ratio of 500 square feet for each of the first 20
spaces, and 250 square feet per unit for all additional manufactured home
spaces provided.
         (k)   There shall be constructed and maintain a permanent screening
device, not less than six feet in height on all sides of a manufactured home
rental community or subdivision that abuts an existing zoned single-family
tract that is platted for single-family or existing single-family use and for
those portions of the park which directly abut on a dedicated public street.
         (l)   Each manufactured home shall have an address number permanent in
nature and shall be clearly visible from streets or drives.
         (m)   Bottled gas for cooking and/or heating purposes shall not be
used at individual manufactured home lots unless the containers are properly
connected by copper or other suitable metallic tubing. Bottled gas cylinders
shall be securely fastened in place. No cylinder containing bottled gas shall
be located in a manufactured home, under or within ten feet of any manufactured
home and 25 feet of any street or drive. State and local regulations applicable
to the handling of bottled gas and fuel oil must be followed.
         (n)   All manufactured homes shall be connected to sewer, water and
electrical systems by persons licensed in the performance of each job. The
connections shall be inspected and approved by the City Building Official.
         (o)   All structures erected in or placed on a manufactured home
rental community or subdivision shall meet all of the applicable building
codes.
         (p)   A minimum of six inch water and sewer lines shall be installed
within a manufactured home rental community or subdivision. The City Engineer
can require larger water and sewer lines if the rental community area and
density computations indicate that oversizing is necessary. Manholes shall be
spaced every 500 feet along sewer lines.
         (q)   All utility installations shall be in accordance with current
City of Mansfield standards.
         (r)   Street lights within the manufactured home rental community or
subdivision shall be provided along all internal streets at 300 feet intervals.
Each fixture shall have a minimum 200 watt lamp of high pressure sodium.
   (N)   Parking or placing manufactured homes, camping, travel trailer,
trailer coach or recreational vehicle shall be allowed only as follows:
      (1)   Camping or travel trailers will be allowed for temporary occupancy
in manufactured home rental communities, but any lots on which travel trailers
are placed must conform to manufactured home lot requirements.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place or locate any
camping or travel trailer in any place in the city except within an approved
campground or recreational vehicle park as defined in § 155.012 or in a
manufactured rental community as provided in this subdivision.
      (3)   No camping or travel trailer may be placed in a manufactured home
rental community for over seven days out of any period of 30 consecutive days.
The owner of the manufactured home rental community shall keep a record book
showing the day and time of arrival of each camping or travel trailer, the
license number, the owner or resident of the trailer, a description of the
trailer, and upon departure, show the date and time of leaving. Entries shall
be made in this book promptly upon arrival of such trailer, and these books
shall be open to inspection by officers of the city at any time. Special
camping or travel trailer parking areas with central dumps for sewage, etc.,
without the necessity of conforming with all manufactured home lot requirements
for each trailer may be provided in manufactured home rental communities but
only with approval of the City Council for the specifications of each area.
Special camping or travel trailer parking areas shall be subject to the
requirements for records and length of stay.
      (4)   A camping or travel trailer may be placed in an assigned spot or
pad site in an approved campground for up to 12 months. At the end of that 12
month period, the camping and travel trailer must be relocated to another
assigned spot or pad site before continuing its stay in the same campground.
The same relocation requirement shall apply at the end of each 12 month period
during an extended stay.
      (5)   The owner or operator of a campground shall not have any ownership
or proprietary interest in any of the camping and travel trailers within his
campground.
      (6)   It is specifically provided that camping or travel trailers may be
located, for storage purposes only, on the premises of the owner of the camping
or travel trailer or city approved storage area within a manufactured home
rental community.
      (7)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place or locate a HUD-
Code manufactured home in any place in the city except in a licensed
manufactured home rental community or manufactured home subdivision as provided
in this section, or in a non-residential district for purpose of sale provided
in §
155.054, or in a PR or Single-family Residential District provided that the
following conditions are met:
         (a)   A specific use permit has first been obtained for the placement
or location of the HUD-Code manufactured home.
         (b)   The HUD-Code manufactured home is permitted only as a
replacement of a pre-existing single-family house on the same property which
has been destroyed to the extent that the cost of reconstruction or repair
exceeds 50% of the replacement cost of the structure.
         (c)   The application for said specific use permit for the replacement
of a destroyed single-family house by a HUD-Code manufactured home must be made
within six months of the loss of the single-family house; documentation on the
destruction date of the single-family house shall be furnished by the applicant
in order to complete the application.
         (d)   The applicant for said specific use permit shall be limited to
only the original property owner suffering from the destruction of a previously
destroyed single-family home on the property to which the specific use permit
would apply.
         (e)   Said specific use permit shall become null and void in case the
HUD-code manufactured home, which is used as replacement, is occupied by
someone other than the applicant within a year from the issuance of the
specific use permit.
      (8)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place or locate a
mobile home, as defined in §
155.012, in any place in the city.
      (9)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, permanently fix or
use a railway coach or car, street car, bus or other similar construction
vehicle or device originally intended for use as a conveyance, as a dwelling in
the city; provided, however that nothing herein shall be construed so as to
apply to a railroad work car, caboose or converted freight car used as a
temporary house or shelter when confined to rails and located on the
established right-of-way of any such railroad doing business as a common
carrier.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.069 H, HISTORIC LANDMARK OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description. The City Council hereby finds and
declares as a matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement,
preservation and use of historic landmarks is a public necessity and is
required in the interest of the culture, prosperity, education, and general
welfare of the people. The purposes of this district are:
      (1)   To protect, enhance and perpetuate historic landmarks which
represent or reflect distinctive and important elements of the city's and
state's architectural, archaeological, cultural, social, economic, ethnic and
political history and to develop appropriate settings for such places.
      (2)   To safeguard the city's historic and cultural heritage, as embodied
and reflected in such historic landmarks by appropriate regulations.
      (3)   To stabilize and improve property values in such locations.
      (4)   To foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the
past.
      (5)   To protect and enhance the city's attractions to tourists and
visitors and provide incidental support and stimulus to business and industry.
      (6)   To strengthen the economy of the city.
      (7)   To promote the use of historic landmarks for the culture,
prosperity, education, and general welfare of the people of the city and
visitors to the city.
   (B)   Historic landmark definitions.
      (1)   Historic Landmark Overlay District. Any area which: (1) contains
buildings, structures or sites which: (a) have a special character or have a
special historical or cultural interest or value; (b) represents one or more
periods or styles of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of
the city; and (c) cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a
district of the city; and (2) has been designated as an historic district
pursuant to the provision of this chapter. The area of an Historic Landmark
Overlay District may include one or more properties.
      (2)   Rehabilitation. Is the process of returning a property to a state
of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient
contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the property
which are significant to its historic, architectural, and cultural values.
      (3)   Restoration. Is the act or process of accurately recovering the
form and details of a property and its setting as it appeared at a particular
period of time by means of the removal of later work or by the replacement of
missing earlier work.
      (4)   Preservation. Is the act or process of applying measures to sustain
the existing form, integrity, and material of a building or structure, and the
existing form and vegetative cover of the site. It may include initial
stabilization work where necessary, as well as ongoing maintenance of the
historic building materials.
      (5)   Reconstruction. Is the act or process of reproducing by new
construction the exact form and detail of a historic building, structure, or
object, or a part thereof, as it appeared at a specific period of time.
      (6)   Landmark. A building or site of immeasurable value in preserving
the cultural heritage, or an outstanding example of design or a site closely
related to an important personage, act or event in history. Such designation
marks the site for preservation and restoration to its historical character and
is intended to discourage modifications, which detract from its historical
significance.
      (7)   Contributing elements.  A building or site which in its historical
character contributes to the district's purpose. Such designation is intended
to encourage restoration and preservation, but also allow and encourage
adaptive reuses and encourage continued economic and social vitality of the
district. Any new construction proposed within the district shall be considered
a contributing element.
      (8)   Non-essential elements.  A building or site which, though within
the physical boundaries of the district, does not contribute to the cultural
and historic value thereof. Such designation is meant to provide greater
latitude for utilization of the site or structure, but all modifications shall
conform to the guidelines.
   (C)   Landmark designation power. The City Council may designate buildings,
structures, sites, districts, areas and lands in the city as historic landmarks
and define, amend and delineate the boundaries thereof. This chapter is created
as an overlay district to the existing zoning that exists on the property. The
suffix "H" shall indicate the zoning designation of those buildings,
structures, sites, districts, areas and land which the City Council designates
as historic landmarks. Such designation shall be in addition to any other use
designation, established in the comprehensive zoning ordinance. The official
zoning ordinance map shall reflect the designation of historic landmarks by the
letter "H" as a suffix to any other use designation established in the
comprehensive zoning ordinance.
   (D)   Landmark designation criteria. In making such designations as set
forth in division (C) above, the City Council shall consider, but shall not be
limited to, one or more of the following criteria:
      (1)   Character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage
or cultural characteristics of the City of Mansfield, State of Texas, or the
United States.
      (2)   Recognition as a Recorded Texas Historic Landmark, a National
Historic Landmark, or entered into the National Register of Historic Places.
      (3)   Appear to be eligible for the National Register and also may be
eligible for designation as a Recorded Texas Historic Landmark as indicated in
the 1983 Tarrant County Historic Resource Survey; included as an authoritative
reference for this purpose.
      (4)   Embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural
type or specimen.
      (5)   Identification as the work of an architect or master builder whose
individual work has influenced the development of the city.
      (6)   Embodiment of elements of architectural design, detail, materials
or craftsmanship, which represent a significant architectural innovation.
      (7)   Relationship to other distinctive buildings, sites or areas which
are eligible for preservation as described in § 155.116(E), based on
architectural, historic or cultural motif.
      (8)   Portrayal of the environment of a group of people in an area of
history characterized by a distinctive architectural style.
      (9)   Archaeological value in that it has produced or can be expected to
produce data affecting theories of historic or prehistoric interest.
      (10)   Exemplification of the cultural, economic, social, ethnic, or
historical heritage of the city, state, or United States.
      (11)   Location as a site of a significant historic event.
      (12)   Identification with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the culture or development of the city, county, state or nation.
      (13)   A building, structure, or place that because of its location has
become of historic or cultural value to a neighborhood or community.
   (E)   Designation procedure.
      (1)   Designation of any property as a Historic Landmark Overlay District
may be proposed only by the owner or the authorized agents of the individual
property to be designated. Any such proposal shall be filed with the Planning
and Development Director upon prescribed forms and shall include all data and
proposed landmark guidelines required by the Historic Landmark Commission and
the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (2)   The Historic Landmark Commission shall recommend approval,
disapproval or modification of the proposal to the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
      (3)   Each proposal shall be considered by the Historic Landmark
Commission following a public hearing. A record of pertinent information
presented at the hearing, shall be made and maintained as a permanent public
record. The Historic Landmark Commission shall reach a decision within 60 days
after holding the required hearing. Notice of the time, place and purpose of
such hearing shall be given by the Director of Planning and mailed ten days
prior to the hearing date to the owners of all adjoining property and property
owners included in the proposed designation, using for this purpose the names
and addresses of the last known owners as shown on the latest real property tax
records received for the Tarrant County Tax Appraisal District. Failure to send
notice by mail to any such property owners where the addresses of such owners
are not so recorded shall not invalidate any proceedings in connection with the
proposed designation.
      (4)   In making a recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission
the Historic Landmark Commission shall consider the conformance or lack of
conformance of the proposed designation with the comprehensive plan of the City
of Mansfield and with the purposes and standards of this chapter.
      (5)   The recommendation of the Historic Landmark Commission shall be
considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission in the same manner as provided
for in an application for rezoning.
      (6)   Action by the Council shall be as provided in § 155.115 with
respect to rezoning.
      (7)   Reapplication for "H" status shall be limited as outlined in §
155.115(E).
   (F)   Procedure to authorize erection, construction, reconstruction,
alterations of structures in a Historic Landmark Overlay District or site.
      (1)   No person shall carry out or cause to be carried out on a landmark
or in a Historic Landmark Overlay District, any alteration, demolition,
construction, reconstruction, restoration, or remodeling, nor shall any person
make any material change in the appearance on any existing landmark or in a
Historic Landmark Overlay District without a permit issued by the city Building
Official. All applications to the city Building Official for a permit involving
landmarks or Historic Landmark Overlay Districts shall be forwarded immediately
by the city Building Official to the Historic Landmark Commission.
Notwithstanding any other provision, or law, the city Building Official shall
not permit any alteration, demolition, construction, reconstruction,
restoration, remodeling, or any material change in appearance to be carried out
on a landmark or in a Historic Landmark Overlay District except pursuant to a
Certificate of Approval issued by the Historic Landmark Commission.
      (2)   The Historic Landmark Commission shall hold a public hearing on all
applications for Certificate of Approval referred to it after notice given in
the same manner as prescribed in division (E)(3). A report of the action taken
or determination made shall be forwarded to the city Building Official not
later than 45 days after receipt of the application by the Historic Landmark
Commission. If no action is taken by the Historic Landmark Commission within
the 45 day period, the permit shall be issued and the applicant notified by the
city Building Official.
      (3)   The Historic Landmark Commission in considering the appropriateness
of any alteration, demolition, new construction, reconstruction, restoration,
remodeling or other modification of any building shall consider, among other
things, the purposes of this chapter; the historical and architectural value
and significance of the landmark or Historic Landmark Overlay District; the
design guidelines as approved in this chapter under division (K)(1). Landmark
guidelines; the texture, material and color of the building or structure in
question or its appurtenant fixtures, including signs; and the relationship of
such features to similar features of other buildings within a Historic Landmark
Overlay District; and the position of such building or structure in relation to
the street or public way and to other buildings and structures.
      (4)   If after considering the foregoing, the Historic Landmark
Commission determines that the proposed changes are consistent with the
criteria for historic preservation established by this chapter, the Historic
Landmark Commission shall issue the Certificate of Approval. In the event of a
determination to deny a Certificate of Approval, the Historic Landmark
Commission shall request consultation with the owner for a period not to exceed
90 days for the purpose of considering means to preservation in keeping with
the criteria and design guidelines. If at the end of that time an acceptable
solution has not been achieved, the Certificate of Approval shall finally be
denied and the applicant so notified by letter; provided the applicant may
appeal to the City Council within 20 days of the date of the letter finally
denying the application, and the City Council may, after a public hearing,
reverse or modify the decision of the Historic Landmark Commission but only if
it finds that: (a) every reasonable effort has been made by the applicant to
agree to the requirements of the Commission; and (b) owing to special
conditions pertaining to the specific piece of property, denial of the
Certificate of Approval will cause undue and unnecessary hardship. The
Secretary of the Interior's Standards For Rehabilitation and Guidelines for
Rehabilitating Historic Buildings are the minimum guidelines that the Historic
Landmark Commission shall use to evaluate each landmark or Historic Landmark
Overlay District.
   (G)   Approval for demolition or removal. If an application is received by
the Planning Department for demolition or removal of any designated historic
landmark, it shall be forwarded to the Historic Landmark Commission upon
receipt of the application.
      (1)   Should the Historic Landmark Commission determine that the
application involves improvements to existing buildings not historically and
culturally significant and not contributing to the integrity of the district,
it may approve the application for demolition or removal provided the owner
comply with the established guidelines for the landmark or Historic Landmark
Overlay District and the general purpose of this district in division (A) of
this section.
      (2)   Should the Historic Landmark Commission determine that the
demolition or removal activity will adversely affect any historical,
architectural, archaeological, or cultural feature of the historic landmark,
and whether such work is appropriate and consistent with the spirit and intent
of this section, it shall recommend restrictions or conditions to the
demolition or removal application.
      (3)   The Historic Landmark Commission may recommend the disapproval of
the application by determining that in the interest of preserving historical
values, the structure, building or site should not be demolished, and in that
event, the application shall be suspended for a period not exceeding 90 days
from the date of application. Within the suspension period, the Historic
Landmark Commission may request an extension of the suspension period by the
City Council. If the City Council, after notice to applicant and public
hearing, determines that there is reasonable grounds for preservation, the
Council may extend the suspension period for an additional period not exceeding
120 days, to a total of not more than 240 days from the date of application for
demolition. During the period of suspension of the application, no permit shall
be issued for such demolition or removal nor shall any person demolish or
remove the building, structure or site. If no action is taken by the City
Council within 240 days from the date of application, the demolition or removal
permit shall be issued and the city Building Official shall so advise the
applicant.
      (4)   This procedure is to allow the city, the owner and the private
sector to explore alternatives to demolition or removal which may provide
viable uses for the subject of the application. In addition, alternate
strategies of ownership and use may be explored with the owner, including use
of other remedies available to the city.
   (H)   Historic landmarks; omission of necessary repairs.
      (1)   The exterior of a designated historic landmark shall be maintained
to insure the structural soundness of such landmark.
      (2)   If the city Building Official and/or the Historic Landmark
Commission finds that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a designated
historic landmark is structurally unsound or in imminent danger of becoming
structurally unsound, the city Building Official will notify in writing the
owner of record of the designated historic landmark of such fact.
      (3)   Upon the giving of ten days written notice to the owner of record
of such designated historic landmark, the Historic Landmark Commission shall
hold a public hearing to determine if the designated historical building is
structurally unsound or in imminent danger of becoming structurally unsound.
The Historic Landmark Commission shall request a report and consider
recommendations from the city Building Official. The report may include
evidence of economic hardship or willful neglect.
      (4)   At the conclusion of the hearing, if the Historic Landmark
Commission finds that the designated historic building is structurally unsound
or in danger of becoming structurally unsound and that no valid reason exists
as to why the owner cannot or should not undertake to safeguard the structural
soundness of the building, it shall in writing notify the record owner of the
finding.
      (5)   The owner of record of a designated historic landmark who has been
notified by the Historic Landmark Commission that such landmark is structurally
unsound or in danger of so becoming shall within 90 days of receipt of such
notice satisfy the Historic Landmark Commission that reasonably necessary
repairs to safeguard the structural soundness of the landmark have been
effected.
      (6)   If the Historic Landmark Commission determines that the building is
structurally unsound but there are valid reasons why the owner cannot or should
not undertake to safeguard the structural soundness of the building, it shall
forward to the City Council its recommendation as to what action, if any,
should be taken on the structure.
      (7)   Any applicant or interested person aggrieved by a ruling of the
Historic Landmark Commission under the provisions of this section may, within
30 days after the ruling, appeal to the City Council.
   (I)   Suspension of building and demolition permits pending landmark
application. No building or demolition permit will be granted once the
application has been received by the Planning Department. The Historic Landmark
Commission shall notify the City Building Official within 24 hours if it deems
that destruction of a possible eligible landmark building or site is imminent.
This notification shall be in writing and explain the reason for the action of
the Historic Landmark Commission. This notification authorizes the city
Building Official not to allow any building or demolition permits even though
no application for Historic Landmark Overlay District Zoning has been applied
for by the owner of the particular landmark building or structure in question.
   (J)   Local Historic Preservation Officer. The Director of Planning or his
designee shall serve as the Local Historic Preservation Officer to act as
Executive Secretary to the Historic Landmark Commission, who shall be the
custodian of its records, shall conduct official correspondence and generally
supervise the clerical and technical work of the Historic Landmark Commission
as required to administer this chapter. In addition, the Director shall:
      (1)   Carry out, assist and collaborate in studies and programs designed
to identify and evaluate structures, sites and areas worthy of preservation;
      (2)   Consult with and consider the ideas and recommendations of civic
groups, public agencies, and citizens interested in historical preservation;
      (3)   Inspect and investigate structures, sites and areas which are
believed worthy of preservation;
      (4)   Submit to the Historic Landmark Commission for public hearing and
approval, and subsequently maintain (and resubmit as required) a list of
structures and other features deemed deserving of official recognition although
not designated as historic landmarks or Historic Landmark Overlay Districts,
and take appropriate measures of recognition, and maintain a documentary
inventory;
      (5)   Disseminate information to the public concerning those structures,
site and areas deemed worthy of preservation, and encourage and advise property
owners in the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of landmarks and
property of historical interest;
      (6)   Consider methods other than those provided for in this chapter for
encouraging and achieving historical preservation, and make appropriate
recommendations to approval bodies and other public and private agencies; and
      (7)   Establish such policies, rules and regulations as are deemed
necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
   (K)   Building implementation procedures.
      (1)   Landmark guidelines. The following guidelines shall be used by the
Historic Landmark Commission in considering the issuance of a Certificate of
Approval for construction, reconstruction, restoration, remodeling or
alteration of landmarks:
         (a)   The Secretary of the Interior's "Standards for Rehabilitation
and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings" as adopted by Ordinance
No. 919.
         (b)   Design guidelines for historic Mansfield. Design guidelines are
applicable to commercial and non-residential historic landmarks within the
city.
         (c)   Design Guidelines for Historic Residential Properties as adopted
by Resolution No. 2138. These design guidelines are applicable to any historic
residential landmark in the City of Mansfield, regardless of the use of the
building.
      (2)   Other specific guidelines promulgated by the Historic Landmark
Commission as provided hereinafter.
      (3)   Promulgation of guidelines. Following the submission of a set of
guidelines by the applicant with the submittal of the designation request and
upon designation by the City Council, the Historic Landmark Commission shall
within 60 days review for approval such guidelines prepared by the applicant
specifically for that district for use by property owners and the
administrative staff in implementing the intent of this chapter. A copy of
these guidelines shall be on file in the Office of the Building Official. The
guidelines will classify all structures and sites within the district as one of
the following: (a) landmark; (b) contributing element; or (c) non essential
element as defined in division (B) of this section.
      The guidelines shall establish acceptable physical characteristics of
structure, signs, sites and modifications thereto including layout and location
on site, size, shape, materials and textures, fenestration and interiors where
applicable. The Historic Landmark Commission may suspend action on any requests
affecting any Historic Landmark Site or Historic Landmark Overlay District
pending the preparation of the guidelines. Landmark Sites and Historic Landmark
Overlay District guidelines may be reviewed and modified by the Historic
Landmark Commission.
      (4)   General maintenance and repair. Ordinary repair or maintenance
which does not involve changes in architectural and historical value, style or
general design is exempt from the provision of this section. It is incumbent
upon the Historic Landmark Commission to make clear to the owner of a landmark
site or owners of buildings or structures within a Historic Landmark Overlay
District to clarify what particular activities would come under the heading of
ordinary repair or maintenance.
   (L)   Re-designation of a Historic Landmark Overlay District. The re-
designation of a Historic Landmark Overlay District shall follow the same
procedure as a request for a Historic Landmark Overlay District.
   (M)   Coexistence with other use classification. Use classifications as to
all property which may be included in a Historic Landmark Overlay District
shall continue to be governed by the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city
and the procedures therein established.
   (N)   Coexistence with other codes and ordinance. This will not replace or
supersede any local, state or national code or ordinance regarding health,
life, safety or the general public welfare.
   (O)   Penalty. It shall be unlawful to construct, reconstruct, structurally
alter, remodel, renovate, restore, demolish, raze, or maintain any building,
structure, or land in a Historic Landmark Overlay District in violation of the
provisions of this section, and the city in addition to other remedies, may
institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful
construction, restoration, demolition, razing, or maintenance, to restrain,
correct, or abate such violation, to prevent any illegal act, business, or
maintenance on such premises.
   (P)   Liability for adversely affecting historic structure or property.
      (1)   In this section, "historic structure or property" means a historic
structure or property that:
         (a)   Is included on the National Register of Historic Places;
         (b)   Is designated as a Recorded Texas Historic Landmark;
         (c)   Is designated as a State Archaeological Landmark;
         (d)   Is determined by the Texas Historical Commission to qualify as
eligible property under criteria for inclusion on the National Register of
Historic Places or for designation as a Recorded Texas Historic Landmark or as
a State Archaeological Landmark;
         (e)   Is certified by the Texas Historical Commission to other state
agencies as worthy of preservation; or
         (f)   Is designated as a historic landmark or placed in a Historic
Landmark Overlay District by the City of Mansfield.
      (2)   A person is liable to the city for damages when the person:
         (a)   Demolishes, causes to be demolished, or otherwise adversely
affects the structural, physical, or visual integrity of a historic structure
or property; and
         (b)   Does not obtain a Certificate of Approval and a demolition or
building permit from the city Building Official as required in division (G) of
this section before beginning to demolish, cause the demolition of, or
otherwise adversely affect the structural, physical or visual integrity of the
historic structure or property.
      (3)   (a)   If the structural, physical or visual integrity of the
historic structure or property is adversely affected to the extent that it is
not feasible to restore the structural, physical or visual integrity
substantially to its former level, the damages are equal to the cost of
constructing, using as many of the original materials as possible, a new
structure or property that is a reasonable facsimile of the historic structure
or property plus the cost of attorney's, architect's, and appraiser's fees and
other costs related to the enforcement of this section.
         (b)   If it is feasible to restore the structural, physical, or visual
integrity of the historic structure or property substantially to its former
level, the damages are equal to the cost of the restoration, using as many of
the original materials as possible, plus the cost of attorney's, architect's,
and appraiser's fees and other costs related to the enforcement of this
section.
      (4)   Instead of accepting monetary damages, the city may permit the
liable person to construct, using as many of the original materials as
possible, a structure or property that is a reasonable facsimile of the
demolished historic structure or property or to restore, using as many of the
original materials as possible, the historic structure or property and to pay
the cost of attorney's, architect's, and appraiser's fees and other costs
related to the enforcement of this section.
      (5)   Damages recovered under this section shall be deposited in a
special fund in the city treasury and may be used only to construct, using as
many of the original materials as possible, a structure or property that is a
reasonable facsimile of the demolished historic structure or property; to
restore, using as many of the original materials as possible, the historic
structure or property; or to restore another historic structure or property, as
determined by the city.
      (6)   The construction of a facsimile structure or property under
divisions (P)(4) or (5) must be undertaken at the location designated by the
city, which may be the same location as that of the demolished historic
structure or property.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86; Am. Ord. OR-2289-23, passed 1-23-23)
§ 155.070 SE, SECONDARY FREEWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General purpose and description.
   (A)   General purpose and description.
      (1)   This district shall function as an overlay zoning district the
regulations of which are superimposed and shall supersede the regulations of an
approved standard zoning district; such standard zoning districts identified as
PR, A, SF-5AC/24, SF-12/22, SF-9.6/20, SF-8.4/18, SF-8.4/16, SF-7.5/18, SF-7.5/
16, SF-7.5/12, SF-6/12, 2F, MF-1, MF-2, OP, C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1, I-2, MH and PD
District.
      (2)   Where provisions of the Secondary Freeway Overlay Districts shall
be applicable to any property which is adjacent to and within 500 feet of an
existing "FR", Freeway Overlay District in the City of Mansfield, the Secondary
Freeway Overlay District is created as an overlay district whereby it is
recognized that certain specific standards are appropriate and necessary that
such standards shall be superimposed and shall supersede the regulations of an
approved standard zoning district. Where such district regulations are in
conflict with the provisions of these sections, all regulations of the approved
standard zoning districts shall be in effect except as identified in this
section.
   (B)   Specific standards of the Secondary Freeway Overlay District.
      (1)   No single-family homes shall be permitted unless a specific use
permit is granted by the City Council under the provisions of §
155.080.
      (2)   Outside storage shall be screened with an eight foot opaque fence
and shall not be stacked or raised above the height of the screening fence. The
open display of outside storage without a screening fence is prohibited unless
a specific use permit is granted by the City Council under the provisions of §
155.080.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86; Am. Ord. OR-2223-21, passed 10-11-21)
FORM-BASED CODE DISTRICTS
§ 155.071 RESERVED.
§ 155.072 D, DOWNTOWN DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The primary purpose of this district is to enable and
encourage increased private investment in the historic downtown and in its
immediate environs. It is further the purpose of this district to build on the
work protecting the historic and cultural heritage of the historic downtown for
the inheritance of future generations. The following policies provide further
clarification on the purpose of this district:
      (1)   That mixed-use development should be enabled and encouraged as a
pattern of development to increase the residential density and the intensity of
activity within the historic downtown in support of viable and diverse locally-
oriented businesses and cultural institutions;
      (2)   That development within the historic downtown should be attractive
to the past, the present, and the future generations, and allow them to
participate in its economic growth;
      (3)   That small-scale, incremental development should be promoted and
encouraged alongside larger development;
      (4)   That building regulations should equitably balance the rights of
the individual and the interests of the community as a whole;
      (5)   That building form individually and collectively defines and
supports the public realm;
      (6)   That building configuration should support walkability, safe
streets, and safe public spaces, creating pedestrian friendly neighborhoods;
      (7)   That building configuration should define streets and public spaces
as rooms, and should vary by context and intensity in coordination with
neighboring properties; and
      (8)   That the harmonious and orderly evolution of the historic downtown
and its surrounding areas should be secured through regulating the form of
buildings.
   (B)   Definitions. This division provides the specific definitions for terms
in this section that are either technical in nature or that otherwise may not
reflect a common usage of the term. If a term is not defined in this division,
then the Director of Planning shall determine the correct definition.
      A-STREETS. Those streets that by virtue of their pre-existing pedestrian-
supportive qualities, or their future importance to pedestrian connectivity,
are held to the highest standards prescribed by this section.
      ACCESSORY UNIT. A dwelling unit not greater than 800 square feet, and
sharing ownership and utility connections with a principal building; and the
dwelling may or may not be within an outbuilding and it may or may not be for
rent.
      ALLEY. A way designated to be a second means of vehicular access to the
rear or side of properties; an alley may connect to a vehicular driveway
located to the rear of lots providing access to outbuildings, service areas, or
parking areas, and containing utility easements.
      ATTIC. The interior part of a building contained within a pitched roof
structure.
      AWNING. A shading structure, cantilevered or otherwise entirely supported
from a building, and used to protect outdoor spaces from sun, rain, and other
natural conditions. AWNINGS are typically used to provide cover for outdoor
seating for cafes and restaurants.
      B-STREETS. Those streets that by virtue of their use, location, or
absence of pre-existing pedestrian-supportive qualities, may meet a standard
lower than that of A-streets.
      BED AND BREAKFAST. An owner-occupied lodging type offering one to five
bedrooms, permitted to serve breakfast in the mornings to guests.
      BOUTIQUE HOTEL. A type of lodging function, offering a minimum of ten,
but no more than 125 bedrooms in a building or buildings, and permitted to
provide food service at all times. A boutique hotel shall provide a premium
experience that is dedicated to arts, culture, and history and shall provide
distinguished accommodations not common to the surrounding area and the region.
A boutique hotel shall allocate a minimum of 10% of its total building area to
a combination of the following specific uses: (i) a bakery; a bistro; a cafe; a
coffee shop; a corner market or a corner store; a restaurant; or a destination-
oriented retail establishment; (ii) personal service; and (iii) meeting space
available for gatherings, including conferences. A boutique hotel shall have
architectural design and site design treatments that further enhance an
authentic art, culture and history experience of the district. The total
building area allocated for food service, personal service, and retail shall be
calculated and be provided with assigned parking according to retail function;
and the total building area allocated for meeting space shall be calculated and
be provided with assigned parking according to other function.
      BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical extent of a building measured in stories.
      C-STREETS. Those streets that may meet a standard lower than that of B-
streets.
      CIVIC SPACE. An outdoor area permanently dedicated for public use.
      COMMERCIAL. The term collectively defining lodging, office, and retail
functions.
      DOORYARD. A type of frontage with a shallow setback and a front garden or
a patio, usually with a low wall or a hedge at the front lot line.
      DOWNTOWN ZONES (D-ZONES). One of several areas that are on a zoning map
regulated by this section. D-zones are administratively similar to the land use
zones in conventional codes, except that in addition to the usual building use,
density, height, and setback requirements, other elements of the intended human
habitat are integrated, including those of the private lot and the building and
its frontage.
      DRIVEWAY. A vehicular lane within a lot, often leading to a garage.
      ENCROACH. To break the plane of either a vertical or horizontal
regulatory limit with a structural element, so that it extends into a setback,
into the public right-of-way, or above a height limit.
      FACADE. The exterior wall of a building that is set parallel or nearly
parallel to a lot line bordering a street or civic space. Facades facing
streets and civic space define the public realm and are therefore more
regulated than the exterior walls facing the other property lines.
      FOOD TRUCK SALES PARK. A site approved through a specific use permit that
allows for a permanent location for four or more food trucks. All such sites
shall include required infrastructure and public seating for all food trucks
serving guests in the park.
      FRONT SETBACK. The distance from the front lot line to the point where a
building may be constructed. This area shall be maintained clear of permanent
structures with the exception of encroachments.
      FRONTAGE. The area between a building facade and vehicular lanes, and it
is inclusive of its built and planted components.
      FRONTAGE BUILDOUT. The percentage of the lot width that is occupied by
the building facade within the front setback.
      FUNCTION. The use or the uses accommodated by a building and its lot.
      GALLERY. Frontage wherein the facade is aligned close to the lot line
abutting a street or civic space with an attached cantilevered shed or
lightweight colonnade overlapping the sidewalk. See Diagram 7 at the end of
this section.
      GLAZING. The transparent area of a building facade.
      INN. A type of lodging function, offering up to ten bedrooms, permitted
to serve breakfast in the mornings to guests.
      INTERCOLUMNIATION. The distance between two columns.
      LINER BUILDING. A building specifically designed to mask a parking lot or
parking structure from a street or civic space.
      LIVE-WORK. A mixed-use unit consisting of a residential and a commercial
function. It is intended to be occupied by a business operator who lives in the
same structure that contains the commercial activity.
      LODGING. A function available for daily and weekly renting of bedrooms.
      LOT. A parcel of land accommodating a building or buildings under single
ownership.
      LOT COVERAGE. The percentage of a lot covered by buildings and other
roofed structures.
      LOT LINE. The boundary that legally and geometrically demarcates a lot.
      MANOR HOUSE. A small two-story multi-family residential building of two
to four dwelling units that reads visually like a detached single-family
residence. The habitable area of the units shall not be greater than 1,200
square feet; and may be for rent, or for sale as a condominium. See Diagram 5
at the end of this section.
      MIXED-USE. Multiple functions permitted within the same building through
superimposition or adjacency, or in multiple buildings by adjacency, or at a
proximity determined by warrant.
      MURAL. Any piece of artwork painted, tiled, or otherwise applied directly
on or affixed to an exterior wall.
      OFFICE. Characterizing premises available for the transaction of general
business, but excluding retail use.
      OTHER FUNCTION. Any function other than residential.
      OUTBUILDING. An accessory building, and usually located toward the rear
of the same lot as a principal building.
      PARKING STRUCTURE. A building containing one or more stories of vehicular
parking above or below grade.
      PASSIVE SPACE. An outdoor area within a private lot dedicated for
pedestrian-oriented uses and visibly accessible from a street or civic space;
it is privately owned and maintained. See Diagram 6 at the end of this section.
      PATIO. A floor encroaching from a first story door that is enclosed by a
fence or wall and may or may not be elevated from the sidewalk. See Diagram 8
at the end of this section.
      PLANTER. The element of the public right-of-way which accommodates trees
and public lighting.
      PORCH. An open-air room appended to a building, with floor and roof, but
no walls on the sides facing frontages. See Diagram 9 at the end of this
section.
      PRINCIPAL BUILDING. The main building on a lot, usually located toward
the front of the lot.
      PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE. The main point of access for pedestrians into a
building.
      RESIDENTIAL. Premises available for long-term human dwelling.
      RETAIL. Premises available for the sale of merchandise and food service.
      RETAIL FRONTAGE. A frontage designated on the regulating plan that
requires the provision of a shopfront, encouraging the first story to be made
available for retail use.
      ROW HOUSE. A single-family dwelling that shares a party wall with another
of the same type and occupies the full width of the front setback.
      SHOPFRONT. A frontage conventional for retail use with substantial
glazing wherein the facade is aligned relatively close to the lot line
bordering a street or civic space with the building entrance at sidewalk grade.
See Diagram 10 at the end of this section.
      STOOP. A frontage wherein the facade is aligned close to the front lot
line with the first story elevated from the sidewalk for privacy, with an
exterior stair and landing at the entrance. See Diagram 11 at the end of this
section.
      STORY. A habitable level within a building by which height is measured,
excluding an attic or a raised basement.
      STREETSCREEN. A freestanding wall required to be built within a frontage,
or co-planar with a facade.
      VARIANCE. A ruling that would permit a practice that is not consistent
with either a specific provision or the purpose of this section.
      WARRANT. A ruling that would permit a practice that is not consistent
with a specific provision of this section but is justified by its intent.
   (C)   Applicability.
      (1)   The provisions of this section are activated by "shall" when
required, and by "may" when optional.
      (2)   The provisions of this section, when in conflict, shall take
precedence over those of other codes, ordinances, regulations, and standards
except for:
         (a)   Chapter 91 (Fire Protection and Prevention);
         (b)   Chapter 150 (Building Regulations); and
         (c)   The Subdivision Control Ordinance.
      (3)   The provisions of this section or the numerical metrics of its
tables, when in conflict with any of its diagrams and illustrations, shall take
precedence.
      (4)   The boundaries of this district shall be as shown in Table 1; and
the boundaries of this district may be expanded to areas located outside of
this district, provided that their boundaries are added to Table 1. Unless
otherwise noted in this section, boundaries of D-zones shall be mapped along
street centerlines and along rear lot lines and side lot lines.
      (5)   Planned unit development district regulations, as set forth in §
155.066, shall not be applicable within this district.
   (D)   Non-conformities.
      (1)   When a building or structure is proposed to be constructed or to be
modified, the building or structure shall comply with the provisions of this
section. Any non-conforming building or structure may only be expanded or
modified if the expansion or modification decreases the non-conformity and
thereby results in greater conformance with the provisions of this section.
      (2)   The temporary or the illegal use of property shall not be
sufficient to establish the existence of a non-conformity or to create rights
in the continuation of a non-conformity.
      (3)   Where buildings exist on adjacent lots, the Director of Planning
may require that a proposed building match the setbacks and heights of adjacent
buildings rather than the provisions of this section.
      (4)   Where sidewalks exist on adjacent lots, the Director of Planning
may require that a proposed sidewalk match the width and materials of existing
sidewalks rather than the provisions of this section.
      (5)   Any addition to or modification of a property located in this
district, and also located in the H, Historic Landmark Overlay District, shall
be subject to approval by the Historic Landmark Commission prior to review by
the Director of Planning.
   (E)   Warrants and variances.
      (1)   There shall be two types of deviations from the requirements of
this section: (i) warrants and (ii) variances.
      (2)   A warrant shall allow a practice that is not consistent with a
specific provision of this section, but is justified by the purpose. The
Director of Planning shall have the authority to administratively approve or
disapprove any request for a warrant. Director of Planning decisions may only
be appealed to the City Manager or his/her designee within 15 days of the
Director of Planning decision. Appeals shall be filed with the Department of
Planning.
      (3)   A variance is a ruling on a deviation other than a warrant.
Variances may be granted by the Board of Adjustments with a recommendation
provided by the Department of Planning.
      (4)   Variance requests heard by the Board of Adjustments shall be heard
as per the rules set forth in § 155.113.
   (F)   Instructions. This section sets forth the standards applicable to the
development and to the modification of structures and other elements of the
built environment within private lots.
      (1)   The plans and the applications for proposed projects in this
section shall require a pre-development meeting. This meeting shall include the
applicant and their design professionals and the associated city departments.
      (2)   The plans and applications required by this section shall be
subject to administrative approval.
      (3)   This section requires two types of plan submittals: (i) site plans
and (ii) building plans. The building plans required for zoning review do not
include any of the construction documents that are required for building
permits. Both building plans and construction plans shall be submitted together
for review.
      (4)   Site and building plans submitted for approval shall demonstrate
compliance with:
         (a)   Streetscape standards;
         (b)   Lot standards;
         (c)   Building requirements;
         (d)   Building function;
         (e)   Parking standards;
         (f)   Landscape standards;
         (g)   Building frontage;
         (h)   Building massing;
         (i)   Building materials and configuration;
         (j)   Signage standards;
         (k)   Passive space;
         (l)   Special building requirements, if any;
         (m)   Special lot assemblage plans, if applicable;
         (n)   TOD, Transit Overlay District, if applicable; and
         (o)   Warrants, if any.
   (G)   Description of downtown zones. The D, Downtown District, is further
divided into three distinct downtown zones and one special district (D-zones)
using the rural-to-urban transect to provide neighborhood structure for the
historic downtown and environs. The rural-to-urban transect is a means for
considering and organizing the human environment according to intensities
ranging from the most rural condition to the most urban condition. The D-zones
are primarily classified by the: (i) physical intensity of the built form, (ii)
complexity of uses within the zone, and (iii) relationship between the natural
and built environment. The D-zones are calibrated to reflect existing and
future contexts and their descriptions shall be as follows:
      (1)   D-1, Sub-Urban Zone. This zone consists of residential areas with
some commercial and mixed-use activity adjacent to higher intensity zones. The
character of this zone consists of detached single-family residential
surrounded by lawns and landscaped yards with limited office. Pedestrians may
be occasionally present, and trees are within the public right-of-way.
      (2)   D-2, Urban Transition Zone. This zone consists of a mixed-use, but
a primarily residential urban fabric. The character of D-2 zones consists
predominately of attached buildings accommodating office, restaurant, and
retail mixed with row houses and small multi-family residential buildings.
There is substantial pedestrian activity in this zone and trees and public
lighting are within the public right-of-way.
      (3)   D-3, Urban Center Zone. This zone consists of mixed-use of the
greatest variety and the highest intensity. The character of this zone consists
of attached buildings that form a continuous street wall and accommodate
diverse entertainment, multi-family residential, office, restaurant, and
retail. The D-3 Zone has the highest pedestrian and transit activities; and
trees and public lighting are within the public right-of-way.
      (4)   SD-1, Broad Street Corridor. This special district is intended to
direct the re-use of historic buildings and their lots along portions of Broad
Street from residential to office, restaurant, and retail uses. This special
district is further intended to incubate and nurture new and distinct
businesses for the historic downtown and its immediate environs.
   (H)   Streetscape standards. Streets in D-zones shall be assigned their
designations according to Table 2. The following standards shall apply to the
design and streetscape of new streets and to the modification of existing
streets within D-zones:
      (1)   A-streets. The streetscape standards for A-streets shall be in
accordance with the Historic Mansfield Downtown Design Plan and other plans and
policies adopted by the City Council.
      (2)   B-streets.
         (a)   The minimum public right-of-way width shall be 50 feet.
         (b)   The minimum pavement width shall be 29 feet (i.e., measured from
back of curb to back of curb).
         (c)   The planter width shall be a minimum of four-and-a-half feet.
         (d)   Trees shall be planted at 40 feet on center average within the
planter.
         (e)   Public lighting shall be installed at 60 feet on center average
within the planter.
         (f)   Public lighting shall be a post type fixture.
            1.   Public lighting shall be a maximum of 16 feet in height.
            2.   Public lighting shall be 30 feet from the intersection of two
streets.
         (g)   The design of public lighting shall be approved by the Director
of Planning.
      (3)   C-streets.
         (a)   The minimum public right-of-way width shall be 50 feet.
         (b)   The minimum pavement width shall be 29 feet (i.e., measured from
the back of curb to back of curb).
         (c)   The planter width shall be a minimum of four feet.
         (d)   Trees shall be planted at 40 feet on center average within the
planter.
      (4)   Smith Street. The future modification of Smith Street is envisioned
to safely accommodate pedestrians, cyclists, and transit users, and to provide
an attractive public realm able to support community events including festivals
and outdoor food sales. Streetscape standards for Smith Street shall be in
accordance with the plans and policies adopted by the City Council.
      (5)   Alleys.
         (a)   The minimum alley public easement right-of-way width shall be 20
feet.
         (b)   The minimum pavement width shall be 14 feet.
         (c)   Buildings and structures shall be set back a minimum of ten feet
from the centerline of the alley, except as provided below:
            1.   Garages accessed by an alley shall be set back from the
centerline of the alley a minimum of 15 feet.
            2.   The design of alleys and the setbacks of structures from
alleys shall accommodate utilities and refuse collection. Paved areas for
utilities and refuse collection shall be a minimum of ten feet from the
centerline of the alley.
         (d)   Alleys shall terminate at streets.
         (e)   The minimum curb radius at the intersection of a street shall be
determined by warrant.
      (6)   Walkways. One walkway no wider than five feet and providing access
from the principal entrance to the street shall be permitted. Walkways shall be
paved in brick, concrete, or stone.
      (7)   Pedestrian connections to trail network. All multi-family
residential, mixed-use, or commercial buildings to be developed or redeveloped
on lots abutting Pond Branch Linear Park Trail, Walnut Creek Linear Park Trail,
or any other future trail network funded by the city shall provide a paved
pedestrian connection directly to the trail. The width of the pedestrian
connection and paving materials shall be subject to approval by the Director of
Parks and Recreation.
      (8)   Utilities. Utilities shall be placed underground, and within the
public right-of-way, including alleys.
      (9)   Except for streetscape standards adopted for A-streets and Smith
Street, the streetscape standards may be modified by a warrant.
   (I)   Lot standards. This section regulates lots within D-zones, and
standards shall be applied as follows:
      (1)   Lots in D-zones shall front on a street or a civic space.
      (2)   Lots in D-zones may be of any width and of any depth.
      (3)   Lot coverage by buildings shall not exceed the maximum percentage
by D-zone as provided in below:
         (a)   D-1 zones: 50% maximum.
         (b)   D-2 zones: 60% maximum.
         (c)   D-3 zones: 70% maximum.
         (d)   SD-1: none.
      (4)   In D-1 and D-2 zones, only two buildings may be built on each lot,
one principal building and one outbuilding.
   (J)   Building requirements. This division regulates the placement, height,
and construction of buildings within D-zones, and standards shall be applied as
follows:
      (1)   Principal buildings. All principal buildings shall be setback from
the boundaries of their lots by D-zone as provided in below:
         (a)   Front:
            1.   D-1 zones: a minimum of 15 feet and a maximum of 30 feet.
            2.   D-2 zones: no minimum and a maximum of 30 feet.
            3.   D-3 zones: no minimum and a maximum of 30 feet.
            4.   SD-1: shall be determined by warrant.
         (b)   Side: no minimum and no maximum in any D-zone.
         (c)   Rear: a minimum of 15 feet (except as provided above for alley
loaded configurations in §
155.072(H)(5).
         (d)   The front setback requirements may be modified by warrant to
accommodate slopes over 10%.
      (2)   Outbuildings. All outbuildings shall be setback as follows:
         (a)   The side setback shall be a minimum of five feet as measured
from the side lot line.
         (b)   The rear setback shall be a minimum of five feet as measured
from the rear lot line.
      (3)   Setback considerations for utilities. The front, rear, and side
setback requirements in this section may be modified to accommodate utility
easements and utility services (e.g., meters, pedestals, and other equipment).
      (4)   Building height. Building height shall be as follows:
         (a)   Building height is measured in stories for each habitable level
above-ground level according to the following:
            1.   Stories shall be measured from finished floor to finished
ceiling.
            2.   Stories above the ground floor are limited to a maximum height
of 14 feet.
            3.   Stories combined to exceed a maximum height of 14 feet shall
be counted as multiple stories.
            4.   Attics are not included in building height measurement and
shall not exceed a maximum height of 14 feet.
         (b)   Principal buildings shall not exceed a maximum of four stories
in height in the D-1 and D-2 zones; and principal buildings in the D-3 zones
and the TOD shall not exceed a maximum of six stories in height. An increase in
building height which exceeds six stories may only be granted subject to review
and recommendation by the Director of Planning and approval by the City
Council.
         (c)   Outbuildings shall not exceed two stories in height and shall be
no higher than the principal building on the same lot.
         (d)   For free-standing parking structures, building height shall be
measured in feet. Free-standing parking structures shall not exceed 30 feet in
height.
         (e)   For parking structures attached to a building or buildings for
at least 50% of their perimeter, stories may exceed the limit for parking
structure height provided they do not exceed the eave height of the attached
building or buildings.
         (f)   Height limits for belfries, clock towers, chimney flues,
elevator bulkheads, or masts shall be determined by warrant.
      (5)   Habitable area.
         (a)   The habitable area for a single-family residence or a row house
shall be a minimum of 1,800 square feet.
         (b)   The habitable area for a multi-family residence shall be a
minimum of 700 square feet.
         (c)   The habitable area for an accessory unit within a principal
building or an outbuilding shall not exceed 800 square feet.
      (6)   Tenant flexibility.
         (a)   The design of commercial spaces at the first and second story
shall anticipate restaurant requirements. Accommodation for restaurant venting
and sewage utilities such as grease traps and interceptors shall be designed
into the building.
         (b)   Buildings shall provide maximum clear space between interior
columns for first story retail and activity space.
   (K)   Building function. This division delegates the use or the uses of
buildings and their lots within D-zones, and standards shall be applied as
follows:
      (1)   Building use shall be limited to the allowable building functions
by D-zone according to Table 3.
      (2)   The following building uses are modified, and additional
restrictions shall be applied as follows:
         (a)   Bed and breakfast. The maximum length of stay shall not exceed
ten days; and
         (b)   Live-work.
            1.   The commercial function is restricted to the first story.
            2.   The specific use shall be determined by warrant.
            3.   The business operator shall reside at the unit.
            4.   The floor area assigned to the commercial function shall not
exceed 1,000 square feet.
         (c)   Multi-family residential building.
            1.   No single use multi-family residential building shall be
permitted.
            2.   Active first story commercial use shall be required, but
excluding the building area allocated to other business activities related to
the multi-family residential building including, but not limited to, lobby,
office, and waiting areas for service. The building area allocated to other
business activities shall not count towards active first story commercial use
minimum floor area requirements.
            3.   The building area available for commercial use shall provide a
minimum depth of 40 feet. In D-2 zones, the minimum building area available for
commercial use shall be 5,000 square feet. In D-3 zones, the minimum building
area available for commercial use shall be 10,000 square feet. Recommended or
advised commercial uses include: a bakery; a bistro; a cafe; a coffee shop; a
corner market or a corner store; a dry cleaner; a pharmacy; a restaurant; or a
destination or a neighborhood-oriented retail establishment.
            4.   The area allocated to commercial use shall be calculated and
provided with parking according to retail function.
            5.   The first story of the front facade shall comply with the
building frontage provisions for shopfronts as provided in §
155.072(N)(14). The shopfront may be combined with an awning or a gallery.
            6.   A warrant from these additional restrictions may only be
granted subject to review and recommendation by the Director of Planning and
approval by the City Council.
      (3)   The following specific uses are not allowed within D-zones:
         (a)   Adult entertainment or adult-themed retail sales;
         (b)   Automotive sales, automotive repair, or automotive service;
         (c)   Body piercing parlors or tattoo parlors;
         (d)   Car wash;
         (e)   Check cashing;
         (f)   Drive-through window or drive-through service;
         (g)   Gas station;
         (h)   Liquor store;
         (i)   Pawn shop, secondhand shop, or thrift store;
         (j)   Retail sales of tobacco products as a primary use; and
         (k)   Wholesale business.
   (L)   Parking standards.
      (1)   Required parking. Parking requirements shall be determined by use
as provided below:
         (a)   A residential function with one bedroom (including accessory
units) shall require 1.0 assigned parking spaces per unit.
         (b)   A residential function with two or more bedrooms shall require
2.0 assigned parking spaces per unit.
         (c)   A lodging function shall require 1.0 assigned parking spaces per
bedroom.
         (d)   An office function shall require 3.0 assigned parking spaces per
1,000 square feet.
         (e)   A retail function shall require 4.0 assigned parking spaces per
1,000 square feet, except that retail spaces with 1,500 square feet of space or
less shall be exempt from the required parking in this division.
         (f)   Other functions shall require parking in accordance with the
provisions existing in § 155.091.
         (g)   In D-3 zones, the parking provided for multi-family residential
buildings, mixed-use buildings, or commercial functions shall include the
actual parking spaces provided within the lot and along the parking lane
corresponding to the lot.
         (h)   In D-3 zones, 100% of the required parking for office or retail
functions may be provided by a parking lot or parking structure within 800 feet
of the lot.
      (2)   Parking access.
         (a)   Parking shall be accessed by alleys where available.
         (b)   Parking may be accessed by driveways for lots at least 60 feet
wide.
         (c)   Driveways for single-family residences only shall be limited to
12 feet in width. Portions of the driveways for the first 30 feet of depth
shall not be used for parking.
         (d)   Vehicular entrances to all parking lots and parking structures
shall be no wider than 24 feet at the front lot line setback.
      (3)   Garages.
         (a)   Garages for single-family residences shall be detached, except
as provided below. All garages for single-family residences shall be located to
the rear or side of the lot.
         (b)   Front-facing attached garages shall only be permitted on lots
for less than 60 feet in width.
         (c)   1.   Front-facing attached garages shall be set back at least 20
feet behind the facade and shall not exceed 40% of the width of that facade.
            2.   On all front-facing attached garages, a minimum of one opening
for a window shall be provided.
         (d)   Garages for row houses may be attached to or detached from the
dwelling, and shall be rear-facing.
      (4)   Physical requirements for parking lots and parking structures.
         (a)   All parking lots shall be masked from thoroughfares streets and
civic spaces by a building or streetscreen.
         (b)   All parking structures shall be masked by liner buildings at the
first two stories.
      (5)   A minimum of one bicycle rack place shall be provided in proximity
to the principal entrance for every ten vehicular parking spaces.
   (M)   Landscape standards.The landscaping standards existing in the
provisions of § 155.092 shall apply to development and redevelopment within D-
zones.
   (N)   Building frontage. This division prescribes standards that regulate
the quality and the design of building frontages in support of pedestrian
activity and a vibrant public realm. The standards of this division are
intended to ensure that buildings are designed with a clear sense of enclosure
for all streets and civic spaces and enable streets and civic spaces to
function as human-scaled outdoor rooms.
      (1)   Lots fronting two or more streets or civic spaces shall have
building frontages provided along each street or civic space.
      (2)   All buildings shall have their principal entrance along streets or
civic spaces.
      (3)   All single-family residences at the first story shall provide a
porch or stoop at the building frontage.
      (4)   All row houses at the first story shall provide a dooryard or stoop
at the building frontage.
      (5)   All multi-family residential buildings shall provide a dooryard,
patio, or porch for each dwelling at the first story.
      (6)   All office and retail functions at the first story shall have a
shopfront at the building frontage at a minimum.
      (7)   All loading docks and service areas shall be located towards the
rear of the lot.
      (8)   All building frontages shall occupy a minimum percentage of the lot
line as provided below as frontage buildout:
         (a)   D-1 zones: 60%.
         (b)   D-2 zones: 70%.
         (c)   D-3 zones: 80%.
         (d)   SD-1: none.
      (9)   Awnings shall be permitted to encroach to within two feet of a curb
with approval by the Director of Planning.
      (10)   (a)   Balconies and bay windows shall be permitted to encroach to
within five feet from the lot line.
         (b)   All balconies and bay windows shall be no less than three feet
deep.
      (11)   Porches.
         (a)   Porches shall be no less than six feet deep.
         (b)   Porches shall be permitted to encroach to within five feet from
the lot line.
            1.   Stairs to porches may encroach up to the lot line.
            2.   Stairs to porches shall not be permitted to encroach into the
public right-of-way.
      (12)   Stoops:
         (a)   Stoops shall be no less than five feet in depth.
         (b)   Stoops shall be between four feet and six feet in width.
         (c)   Stoops shall be covered by a pitched roof structure.
         (d)   Stoops may be recessed into the main volume of the building
where setbacks are less than five feet.
         (e)   Stoops shall be permitted to encroach to within five feet from
the lot line.
            1.   Stairs to stoops may encroach up to the lot line.
            2.   Stairs to stoops shall not be permitted to encroach into the
public right-of-way.
      (13)   Dooryards.
         (a)   Dooryards may encroach into the front building setback up to
100% of its depth.
         (b)   Dooryards shall be no less than ten feet deep.
         (c)   Dooryards may be raised from average sidewalk grade.
         (d)   Dooryards shall be enclosed on three sides by a fence
constructed of metal or a wall made of brick or stone and four feet in height.
Openings in the fence or wall shall be no larger than is necessary to allow
pedestrian access.
      (14)   Patios.
         (a)   Patios shall be no less than four feet in depth.
         (b)   Patios shall be covered by a pitched roof structure or a balcony
above.
      (15)   Shopfronts.
         (a)   Shopfronts shall be glazed with clear glass for no less than 70%
of the total building wall area between two feet and 12 feet above the adjacent
sidewalk, calculated independently for each building frontage.
         (b)   Shopfronts shall be designed with a bulkhead and display and
transom windows.
         (c)   All bulkheads shall be between two feet and three-and-a-half
feet in height.
         (d)   All display windows shall be placed above the bulkheads, and
below the transom windows.
         (e)   1.   All transom windows shall have dividing muntins and be free
of signage.
            2.   Wall signs, if permitted, may be installed above transom
windows.
         (f)   Shopfront doors, windows, awnings, details, and lighting shall
be designed and constructed as a unified composition.
      (16)   Galleries.
         (a)   Galleries shall be no less than ten feet in depth.
         (b)   Galleries may encroach to within two feet of the curb with
approval by the Director of Planning.
         (c)   Galleries shall clear a minimum of ten feet above the sidewalk.
      (17)   In the absence of a building facade along any part of a lot line
within D-2 and D-3 zones, a free-standing wall shall be built co-planar with
the facade. All streetscreens shall be between two and four feet in height, and
shall have openings no larger than necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian
access.
      (18)   Commercial functions may utilize the public right-of-way for
outdoor seating, serving, display of merchandise, and other business-related
activities provided a contiguous clear path that is a minimum of six feet in
width be maintained within the private lot, the public right-of-way, or a
combination of both.
   (O)   Building massing.
      (1)   Building facades along streets and civic spaces shall not exceed
200 feet in length.
      (2)   Building facades along streets and civic spaces shall have openings
for doors or windows or articulations such as projections or recesses every 20
feet.
   (P)   Building materials and configuration.
      (1)   Building walls.
         (a)   Material.
            1.   Exterior finish shall be brick, stone, stucco, or wood within
D-zones.
               a.   Synthetic exterior finish shall be permitted provided the
finish has the same appearance as the materials noted above and except as
provided below.
               b.   Exterior insulated finishing systems (E.I.F.S.) shall not
be permitted as an exterior finish.
            2.   Bulkheads for shopfronts shall be brick, stone, or stucco.
            3.   Foundations shall be brick, poured concrete, or stone.
            4.   Arches and piers shall be constructed of brick or stone.
            5.   Columns shall be brick, concrete, stone, or stucco.
            6.   Posts shall be composite wood, metal, or wood.
            7.   Stoops shall be constructed of brick or stone and shall match
the adjacent building facade.
            8.   Streetscreens shall be constructed of brick or stone and shall
match the adjacent building facade.
            9.   Building color shall be selected according to building style
and regional precedent.
         (b)   Configuration.
            1.   Where multiple exterior finishes are used on a single
building, they shall only be combined on each facade horizontally, with the
heavier material below the lighter (e.g., stone below brick and stucco, brick
below stucco and wood, and stucco below wood).
            2.   No more than two exterior finishes shall be used on a
building, not including the foundation or trim.
            3.   Building walls shall show the same exterior finish and designs
on all sides.
            4.   Brick or stone shall be integral color and unpainted.
            5.   Stucco shall be cement with smooth-sand finish.
            6.   Exposed exterior wood shall be painted or stained.
            7.   Trim shall not exceed one inch in depth or six inches in width
at corners and around openings. The front entrance trim may be any size or
configuration.
            8.   Arches and piers shall be no less than 12 inches by 12 inches.
            9.   Columns and posts shall be no less than six inches by six
inches at finished dimension.
            10.   Upper story columns and posts shall align with the columns
and posts below.
            11.   Intercolumniation shall be vertically proportioned.
      (2)   Openings.
         (a)   Material.
            1.   Windows shall be made of painted aluminum, wood, or vinyl, and
shall have clear glass.
            2.   Garage doors shall be of metal, wood, or composite wood.
         (b)   Configuration.
            1.   Openings for doors and windows along streets or civic spaces
shall be rectangular or square in proportion.
            2.   Openings for doors and windows above the first story shall not
exceed 50% of the total building wall area, each building facade shall be
calculated independently.
            3.   Openings above the first story shall be centered directly
above the openings on the first story.
            4.   Doors and windows that operate as sliders shall be prohibited
along streets or civic space.
            5.   a.   Windows shall be single-, double-, or triple-hung or
operable casements. Windows shall be rectangular with either vertical or square
proportion. Transoms shall be oriented horizontally with vertically
proportioned panes of glass. Multiple windows in the same rough opening shall
be separated by a four-inch minimum post. The centerline of the window sash
shall align within the centerline of the wall (no flush-mounted windows).
               b.   Windows in building facades of brick, stone, or stucco
shall be recessed a minimum of three inches in depth.
            6.   Muntins shall be true divided panes or be fixed on the
interior and exterior surfaces. Panes shall be similar square or vertical
proportions throughout the building.
            7.   Garage doors, if visible, shall not exceed ten feet in width.
      (3)   Attachments.
         (a)   Material.
            1.   Balcony floors shall be of metal or wood plank.
            2.   Patio floors shall be of brick, concrete slab, or stone.
            3.   Porch floors shall be of concrete slab, stone, or wood plank.
            4.   Stoop floors shall be of brick or stone.
            5.   Awnings shall be of canvas or metal.
            6.   Galleries shall be constructed of metal or wood.
            7.   Chimneys, if visible, shall be brick, stone, or stucco.
         (b)   Configuration.
            1.   The finished floor elevation for stoops shall be a minimum of
two feet from the average sidewalk grade.
            2.   Chimneys, if visible, shall extend to the ground and shall
have a projecting cap.
            3.   Bay windows shall extend to the floor inside and to the ground
outside or be supported by visible brackets.
            4.   Balconies that face streets or civic space and cantilever
shall be supported by visible brackets.
            5.   Awnings shall be sloping rectangles without bottom or side
soffit panels.
      (4)   Roofs.
         (a)   Material.
            1.   Pitched roofs shall be asphalt shingles, metal, or slate.
            2.   Low-slope (flat) roofs shall be commercial quality roofing.
         (b)   Configuration.
            1.   Roofs shall be symmetrically pitched with a minimum angle 6 in
12, except that roofs provided for patios, porches, or stoops may be
symmetrically pitched with a minimum angle 3 in 12. Low-slope (flat) roofs
shall be permitted in D-2 and D-3 zones. Flat roofs shall be surrounded by a
parapet wall no less than three-and-a-half feet high where the roof deck meets
the parapet wall.
            2.   Skylights shall be flat to the roof plane.
            3.   Eaves shall be a minimum of 12 inches deep.
            4.   Rafter tails shall not exceed 6 inches in height at their
ends.
            5.   Roof penetrations, including vent stacks, shall be placed on
the roof slope that does not face a street or civic space.
      (5)   Fences and walls.
         (a)   Fences, walls, and other suitable visual screens in accordance
with the provisions in § 155.094 may be provided along the rear lot lines and
the side lot lines except where both adjoining lot areas are used for surface
parking or outdoor commercial uses.
         (b)   1.   All fences along streets and civic spaces shall not exceed
four feet in height and shall be made of wood picket, iron, steel, or aluminum
that appears to be iron.
            2.   Fences along streets and civic spaces may have columns that
are constructed of brick, stone, or stucco.
         (c)   All streetscreens along streets and civic spaces shall be brick,
stone, or stucco and match the adjacent building facade.
         (d)   All fences, streetscreens, and walls along streets and civic
spaces shall have designs different than the adjacent lots.
      (6)   Screening.
         (a)   Building mechanical equipment and refuse storage shall be
visually screened and not located along streets or civic spaces.
         (b)   Building mechanical equipment on all roof tops shall be screened
in a manner consistent with the architectural design of the building on all
sides. All screening shall be a minimum of 12 inches higher than the building
mechanical equipment to be screened on all sides.
   (Q)   Signage standards.
      (1)   Unless otherwise noted below, all the provisions existing in §
155.090 shall apply to any property developed or redeveloped in accordance with
the provisions of this section.
      (2)   The following permanent signs shall be prohibited within D-zones:
         (a)   Advertising sign; and
         (b)   Electronic message sign and electronic reader board sign.
      (3)   (a)   Except as provided below, the following signs shall be
permitted for residential functions:
         (b)   One address sign, no more than six inches measured vertically,
may be attached to the building in proximity to the principal entrance or at a
mailbox.
      (4)   Except as provided below, the following signs shall be permitted
for other functions:
         (a)   One wall sign may be applied above tenant shopfronts, below
second story windows, and beneath the building cornice line. Wall signs shall
not exceed three feet in height and shall not exceed 90% of the width of the
building facade. Tenant shopfronts located at corner lots may have one wall
sign per building facade.
         (b)   One name plate sign, no more than two square feet, may be
provided for each tenant.
         (c)   One blade sign for each first story tenant, no more than six
square feet, may be permanently installed perpendicular to the facade. Blade
signs shall clear a minimum of eight feet above the sidewalk and project no
more than two feet from the building facade. Tenants on corner lots may install
one blade sign per building facade.
         (d)   One window sign for each first story tenant, no more than nine
square feet, may be installed within the store interior in neon tubing or
applied directly to the glazing. Tenants on corner lots may install one window
sign per building facade. Opaque signs are not permitted.
         (e)   Awnings may include signage in the form of text or graphics
printed or applied directly to the top of the awning. Awnings may include
signage in the form of text or graphics along the flap no more than eight
inches measured vertically by the awning length.
         (f)   One directory sign may be installed in accordance with the
provisions existing in § 155.090.
         (g)   One institutional sign may be installed in accordance with the
provisions existing in § 155.090.
      (5)   A-frame sidewalk signs may be permitted for retail functions in D-
3 zones and shall be subject to the following standards:
         (a)   A-frame sidewalk signs shall not exceed three-and-a-half feet in
height.
         (b)   A-frame sidewalk signs shall not exceed two-and-a-half feet in
width.
         (c)   A-frame sidewalk signs shall not be located within three feet of
a curb.
         (d)   One A-frame sidewalk sign shall be permitted for each retail
tenant at the first story.
      (6)   Marquee signs may be permitted for live theaters in D-3 zones and
shall be subject to the following standards:
         (a)   One marquee sign shall be permitted for each live theater.
         (b)   Marquee signs shall clear ten feet above the sidewalk.
         (c)   Marquee signs may project to within three feet of curbs.
      (7)   Ground-based, monument-type signs may be permitted for multi-family
residential buildings in D-3 zones and commercial buildings in SD-1 zones and
shall be subject to the following standards:
         (a)   One ground-based, monument-type sign shall be setback a minimum
of five feet from the front lot line.
         (b)   Ground-based, monument-type signs shall be constructed of brick,
stone, or stucco.
         (c)   Ground-based, monument-type signs shall be a maximum of six feet
in height and a maximum of eight feet in width.
         (d)   Each sign face of a ground-based, monument-type sign shall be a
maximum of 25 square feet and the total signage on all sign faces shall not
exceed 50 square feet.
      (8)   Murals may only be permitted for multi-family residential, mixed-
use, and commercial buildings in D-3 zones.
      (9)   Temporary signs shall comply with all the applicable regulations
and restrictions found in § 155.090.
   (R)   Passive space. This division provides standards for locating and
designing passive spaces in D-2 and D-3 zones, and standards shall be applied
as follows:
      (1)   Commercial and mixed-use development shall be required to provide
passive space. Passive spaces shall be directly entered from a street or a
civic space, except that such space may be directly entered from the side of
the lot if visible from a street.
      (2)   Passive space may be enclosed with a fence, hedge, or wall.
      (3)   Passive space shall be paved in brick, concrete, gravel, or grass.
      (4)   Passive space shall be privately owned and maintained.
      (5)   Passive space shall be dedicated to one or more of the following:
         (a)   Fountain;
         (b)   Furniture games;
         (c)   Multi-activity area;
         (d)   Outdoor dining;
         (e)   Public art;
         (f)   Water feature; and/or
         (g)   Other similar activities to be determined by warrant.
   (S)   Special building requirements.
      (1)   To the extent that a regulating plan designates any of the
following special requirements, standards shall be applied as follows:
      (2)   A mandatory retail frontage designation requires a building provide
a shopfront at the first story along the entire length of its frontage. The
shopfront may be combined with an awning or gallery.
   (T)   Special lot assemblage plans. Where multiple lots are assembled into
single ownership, and will result in a land area of four or more contiguous
acres, then it may be developed as a single project. Standards shall be applied
as follows:
      (1)   All streets shall terminate at other streets in intersections,
forming a network.
      (2)   All projects shall allocate at least 10% of their area to civic
space. Civic space shall be designed as provided in below and as generally
described in Table 5.
         (a)   Green. Shall be a minimum of 0.5 acres in size and provide the
following improvements at a minimum:
            1.   One bike rack;
            2.   One bench per 1,500 square feet;
            3.   One canopy tree per 4,000 square feet; and
            4.   Lighting and trash receptacles shall be required.
         (b)   Park. Shall be a minimum of 1.0 acres in size and provide the
following improvements at a minimum:
            1.   One bike rack;
            2.   One bench per 2,000 square feet;
            3.   One canopy tree per 8,000 square feet; and
            4.   Lighting shall be required along all paths and trails and
trash receptacles shall be required.
         (c)   Pocket park. Shall be a minimum of 1,000 square feet and a
maximum of 0.25 acres in size and provide the following improvements at a
minimum:
            1.   One bike rack;
            2.   One bench per 1,000 square feet;
            3.   One canopy tree per 1,000 square feet; and
            4.   Lighting and trash receptacles shall be required.
         (d)   Square. Shall be a minimum of 0.2 acres in size and provide the
following improvements at a minimum:
            1.   One bike rack;
            2.   Two benches per 1,000 square feet;
            3.   One canopy tree per 1,000 square feet; and
            4.   Lighting and trash receptacles shall be required.
      (3)   All civic spaces, with the exception of squares, shall front on at
least one street.
      (4)   All furnishings in civic spaces shall meet applicable city
standards.
      (5)   All principal buildings shall be within 800 feet of a civic space.
   (U)   TOD, Transit Overlay District. The TOD, Transit Overlay District, is
assigned to land located in proximity to an existing or funded rail transit
station. The provisions of this section shall be modified as follows:
      (1)   All multi-family residential and mixed-use buildings shall be at
least four stories in height.
      (2)   All office and retail functions within 660 feet of the future rail
station may be exempted from required parking.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7728.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7726.png]
 
TABLE 3
Building Function and Specific Use
 D-1 D-2 D-3 SD-1
TABLE 3
Building Function and Specific Use
                                     D-1 D-2 D-3 SD-1
A.   Residential
Accessory unit                       P   P   P   P
Manor house (up to four units)       P   P   P   P
Mixed-use building                       S   P
Multi-family residential building        S   P
Row house                            S   P   P   P
Single-family residential (detached) P   P   P   P
B.   Lodging
Bed and breakfast (up to five rooms) S   P   P   P
Boutique hotel (up to 125 rooms)             P
Inn (up to ten rooms)                    S   P   P
C.   Office
Business incubator                           P   P
Live-work                            P   P   P   P
Office building                          P   P   P
D.   Retail
Brewery or brewpub                           P   S
Café                                    P   P   P
Entertainment venue                          P
Farmer's market                          S   P   P
Food truck sales park                    S   S
Personal service                         P   P   P
Restaurant                               P   P   P
Retail building                          S   P   P
E.   Other
Childcare center                     P   P   P   P
Conference center                            P   P
Live theater                                 P
Museum                                       P   P
Parking lot                                  P
Parking structure                            P
Religious assembly                   S   S   S   S
Legend:
P:   Permitted by right
S:   Permitted by special use permit
Square left blank:   The use is not permitted
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7724.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7722.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7720.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7718.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7716.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7714.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7712.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7706.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7708.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7710.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7704.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7702.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7700.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7698.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7696.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7694.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7692.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7690.png]
Diagram 12.
Image is for illustrative purposes only, showing a dooryard frontage.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9495.gif]
 
(Ord. OR-2223-21, passed 10-11-21; Am. Ord. OR-2293-23, passed 4-10-23; Am.
Ord. OR-2377-24, passed 8-26-24)
§ 155.073 S, SOUTH MANSFIELD FORM-BASED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
   (A)   Intent. The primary intent of this S, South Mansfield Form-Based
Development District, is to enable and to encourage a development pattern that
is compact, mixed-use, walkable, and sustainable. The secondary intent of this
form-based development district is to create and to reinforce a world-class
entertainment destination, that is in proximity to national and multi-national
corporations and small employers, and will promote the expansion of premium
retail, restaurant, residential, office, and cultural choices, will elevate the
quality of life for residents and businesses, and will contribute immensely to
a robust economic base for the community and immediate environs. To that end,
this form-based development district regulates the development and
redevelopment of property based on the following premises:
      (1)   That building regulations should equitably balance the rights of
the individual and the interests of the community as a whole.
      (2)   That building form individually and collectively defines and
supports the public realm.
      (3)   That building configuration should support walkability, safe
streets, and safe public spaces, creating pedestrian friendly neighborhoods.
      (4)   That building scale should define streets and public spaces as
rooms and they should vary by context and intensity in coordination with
neighboring properties.
      (5)   That workplace, retail, and entertainment, and housing for a
variety of ages and incomes are all in close proximity, with appealing open
spaces and gathering places.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   The provisions of this section shall be activated by "shall" or
"are" when required, and "may" when optional.
      (2)   The provisions of this section, when in conflict, shall prevail
over all those of other codes, ordinances, regulations, and standards of the
City of Mansfield, Texas (the "existing local codes").
      (3)   The existing local codes shall continue to be applicable to all
issues that are not covered by this section, except where the existing local
codes would be in conflict.
      (4)   The definitions and synonyms contains regulatory language that is
integral to this section. Those terms not defined in definitions and synonyms
shall be accorded their commonly accepted meanings. In the event of conflict
between these definitions and those specified in the existing local codes,
those of this section shall take precedence.
      (5)   The provisions of this section or the numerical metrics of its
tables, when in conflict with any diagrams and / or illustrations, shall take
precedence.
   (C)   Warrants and variances.
      (1)   There shall only be two types of deviations from the requirements
of this section: warrants and variances.
      (2)   A warrant is a ruling that shall permit a practice that is
inconsistent with a specific provision of this section, but is justified by the
intent of this section. The Director of Planning shall have the authority to
approve or to disapprove administratively any request for a warrant. The
Director of Planning warrant decisions may only be appealed to the City Manager
within 30 days of the Director of Planning warrant decision. The City Manager
warrant decisions may only be appealed to the City Council, and such appeal
must be made within 30 days of the City Manager warrant decision. All warrant
decision appeals shall be filed with the Director of Planning or their
designee.
      (3)   A variance is any ruling on a deviation from the requirements of
this section other than a warrant. Variances shall be granted only by the Board
of Adjustments, in accordance with the provisions existing in §
155.113, Board of Adjustments.
      (4)   A warrant shall not be available for any of the following:
         (a)   The minimum height for multi-family residential buildings;
         (b)   The required provision of rear alleys;
         (c)   The minimum requirements for parking;
         (d)   The allowable building functions and the specific functions by
transect zone; or
         (e)   To modify or to alter any provisions set forth in a development
plan.
   (D)   Development plan. All applications and plans for development or
redevelopment under this S, South Mansfield Form-Based Development District
shall be pursuant to a development plan reviewed and approved by the City
Council. A development plan shall be approved prior to submittal of any special
land assemblage plans and building plans and site plans for review and
approval. A development plan submitted to the City Council for review and
approval shall include a concept plan depicting proposed layout, proposed
transect zone boundaries, proposed civic space types, proposed development
intensity, proposed building types (including height), and any other applicable
attributes that may be required by the City Council. The development plan shall
additionally include a phasing plan for the development and modification of
buildings. A development plan shall be recorded in the public records and shall
be binding upon all purchasers of property within the project and it may only
be assigned subject to approval of the City Council. A development plan may
only be altered or modified subject to the approval of the City Council. In the
event that a property owner or a developer does not prepare (or have prepared
on their behalf) and present a development plan to the City Council within 90
days for review and approval of a rezoning to S, South Mansfield Form-Based
Development District, then the City Council is authorized to initiate a
rezoning of the property. The property owner or the developer shall abide by
the terms and conditions contained in the development plan. In the event of any
violation of any term or condition in the development plan, the City Council
shall have all rights of enforcement against the property owner or the
developer, all as provided in the existing local codes and the development
plan, including initiating rezoning of the property.
   (E)   Transect zones and special districts. For the purposes of this
section, the "rural-to-urban transect" is defined as a cross-section of the
environment showing a range of different habitats from the most rural to the
most urban condition. The rural-to-urban transect of the human environment that
is used in this section is divided into four "transect zones". Transect zones
are administratively similar to the land use zones found in conventional codes,
except that in addition to the usual building use, parking, height, and setback
requirements, other elements of the intended human habitat are also integrated,
including those of the private lot and building and the public frontage. These
transect zones describe the physical form and the character of a place,
according to the intensity of its land use. The methodology of the rural-to-
urban transect allows for a broad range of building types in each transect
zone, arranged to provide balanced, safe, and walkable streetscapes. The
development and modification of buildings and other elements of the built
environment within the private lot is regulated according to the following
transect zones and special districts. The transect zones are described on
Diagram 1.
      (1)   Urban Edge Transect Zone (T-3). A lower intensity residential area
that has some mixed-use. Outbuildings are permitted. Planting is naturalistic
and building setbacks are relatively deep. Blocks may be large and the roads
irregular to accommodate natural conditions.
      (2)   Urban Transition Transect Zone (T-4). A medium intensity area that
consists of a mixed-use, but a primarily residential urban fabric. It also
contains a wide range of building types. Planting and building setbacks are
variable. Streets typically define medium-sized blocks with buildings set near
to sidewalks.
      (3)   Urban Center Transect Zone (T-5). A medium-high intensity mixed-use
area that consists of buildings that accommodate retail, office, row houses,
and multi-family dwellings. It has a tight network of thoroughfares with wide
sidewalks and steady street tree planting and buildings set adjacent to the
sidewalks.
      (4)   Urban Core Transect Zone (T-6). A high intensity mixed-use area
that consists of the highest height, the greatest variety of uses, and civic
buildings of regional importance. Streets have steady street tree planting and
buildings are set close to wide sidewalks.
      (5)   Entertainment District (Special District No. 1). The entertainment
district is intended for the creation and reinforcement of an entertainment
destination for the community with select retail, residential, office, and
civic choices. All land bounded to the East by the future extension of Heritage
Parkway southward; to the West by State Highway 360; to the North by the
railroad right-of-way; and to the South by Lone Star Road, shall be assigned to
the entertainment district (Special District No. 1) and the provisions of this
section modified as follows:
         (a)   Building height for allowable civic uses shall be determined by
warrant.
         (b)   The following specific uses are not allowed:
            1.   Single-family residential (detached).
      (6)   Transit Oriented District (Special District No. 2). All land
located within 2,640 feet of an existing or a funded rail transit station shall
be assigned to a transit oriented district (Special District No. 2) and the
provisions of this section modified as follows:
         (a)   Reserved.
         (b)   Land within 660 feet of the rail transit station shall be exempt
from the required parking.
      (7)   Regional Center Development District (Special District No. 3). Any
parcel of land that is located within 660 feet of an existing or a funded
limited-access highway shall be assigned to a regional center development
district (Special District No. 3) and the provisions of this section modified
as follows:
         (a)   Principal buildings shall be no less than 1,500 net square feet.
         (b)   Principal buildings shall be no less than four stories.
         (c)   Principal buildings less than four stories dedicated exclusively
to retail establishments or food service establishments may be approved by
warrant.
      (8)   Reserved.
      (9)   The standards for the special districts in this section overlap.
      (10)   A PD, planned development district, shall not be considered as
part of this form-based development district.
   (F)   Regulating plan. Reserved.
   (G)   Instructions. This section sets forth the standards that are
applicable to the development and the modification of buildings and other
elements of the built environment within private lots.
      (1)   This section requires two types of submittals for approval: a
building plan and a site plan. The building plans that are required for zoning
review do not include any construction documents, unless otherwise required.
      (2)   Plans required by this section are subject to administrative
approval by the Director of Planning.
      (3)   Building plans and site plans submitted for approval by the
Director of Planning shall demonstrate compliance with:
         (a)   Entertainment district (Special District No. 1);
         (b)   Transit oriented district (Special District No. 2);
         (c)   Regional center development district (Special District No. 3);
         (d)   Reserved;
         (e)   Lot standards;
         (f)   Building disposition;
         (g)   Building configuration;
         (h)   Frontage standards;
         (i)   Building function;
         (j)   Parking standards;
         (k)   Landscape standards;
         (l)   Signage standards;
         (m)   Nonconformities, if any; and
         (n)   Building materials and configuration.
   (H)   Lot standards. For the purposes of this section, each lot shall be
composed of three lot layers, as shown in Diagram 4-A.
      (1)   The portion of each lot enfronting a thoroughfare or a passage
shall be designated as its principal frontage. Corner lots shall designate a
principal frontage either along the thoroughfare or the passage, and a
secondary frontage along the remaining frontage. Lots, other than corner lots,
enfronting more than one thoroughfare or passage shall have their frontages
determined by warrant, and may be subject to more than one principal frontage.
      (2)   There shall be no minimum nor maximum lot width for any transect
zone.
      (3)   Lot coverage by buildings and other paved surfaces shall not exceed
the maximum percentages by transect zone:
         (a)   T-3 transect zones: 60% maximum.
         (b)   T-4 transect zones: 70% maximum.
         (c)   T-5 transect zones: 70% maximum.
         (d)   T-6 transect zones: 90% maximum.
   (I)   Building disposition. Buildings shall be disposed on a lot as follows:
      (1)   Facades of principal buildings shall be built parallel to a
rectilinear principal frontage line or be built to the tangent of a curved
principal frontage line.
      (2)   Facades of principal buildings shall occupy a minimum percentage of
the principal frontage width within the front setback, as specified below, as
frontage buildout:
         (a)   T-3 transect zones: 40% minimum.
         (b)   T-4 transect zones: 60% minimum.
         (c)   T-5 transect zones: 80% minimum.
         (d)   T-6 transect zones: 80% minimum.
      (3)   All principal buildings, and outbuildings, shall be setback from
the boundaries of their lots by transect zone according to Diagrams 2-A, 2-B,
2-C, and 2-D.
         (a)   The front setback requirements for principal buildings may be
modified by warrant to accommodate slopes over 10%.
         (b)   The front setback requirements for principal buildings, where
ground floor commercial uses are provided, may be increased up to 12 feet by-
right for outdoor seating and outdoor serving.
         (c)   Utility services may require easements at the frontage line, the
side lot lines, and / or the rear lot lines for meters, pedestals, and other
equipment requirements. The setback requirements may be modified by warrant to
accommodate any easements.
      (4)   The rear setback for all outbuildings shall be a minimum of 15
feet, measured from the centerline of the rear alley. In the absence of the
rear alley, the rear setback shall be a minimum of three feet.
      (5)   Specific to the T-3 Transect Zones. Two buildings may be built on
each lot, one principal building at the principal frontage, and one
outbuilding.
      (6)   Specific to the T-4 Transect Zones.
         (a)   Two buildings may be built on each lot, one principal building
at the principal frontage, and one outbuilding.
         (b)   The principal entrance shall be on a frontage line. Forecourts
and recessed stoops that recess the principal entrance from a frontage line are
permitted.
      (7)   Specific to the T-5 and the T-6 Transect Zones.
         (a)   The principal entrance shall be on a frontage line. Forecourts
and recessed stoops that recess the principal entrance from a frontage line are
permitted.
         (b)   Outbuildings are not permitted in the T-6 transect zones.
   (J)   Building configuration.
      (1)   Building height shall be measured in stories for each habitable
level above-ground as provided in below:
         (a)   Stories are measured from finished floor to finished ceiling.
         (b)   For residential building functions, all ground floors shall have
a minimum story height of nine feet.
         (c)   For commercial building functions, ground floors shall have a
minimum story height of 11 feet and a maximum of 25 feet. A single floor level
exceeding 18 feet at the ground floor shall be counted as two stories.
      (2)   Building height is limited to the following maximum heights:
         (a)   Three stories in the T-3 transect zones.
         (b)   Four stories in the T-4 transect zones.
         (c)   There are no limitations on building height in the T-5 and the
T-6 transect zones.
      (3)   Height limits for masts, water towers, belfries, clock towers,
chimney flues, or elevator bulkheads shall be determined by warrant.
      (4)   Outbuildings are limited to two stories in all transect zones and
they shall be no higher than the principal building on the same lot.
      (5)   The habitable space of an accessory unit within a principal
building or an outbuilding shall not exceed 1,000 square feet.
      (6)   Ground floor residential functions shall be raised a minimum of two
feet from the average sidewalk grade at the principal frontage in the T-4, the
T-5, and the T-6 transect zones.
      (7)   For all multi-family residential buildings, building height shall
be no less than four stories.
      (8)   For free standing parking structures only, building height shall be
measured in feet according to below:
         (a)   A maximum of 60 feet in the T-4 transect zones.
         (b)   A maximum of 80 feet in the T-5 and the T-6 transect zones.
      (9)   For parking structures that are attached to a building or
buildings, for at least 50% of their perimeter, stories may exceed the limit
for parking structure height provided that they not exceed the eave height of
the attached building or buildings.
   (K)   Frontage standards.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   The first lot layer shall contain the private frontage,
configured by transect zone according to Diagram 3.
         (b)   Lots enfronting two or more thoroughfares or passages shall have
private frontages along each thoroughfare and passage. Prescriptions for the
second lot layers and the third lot layers shall pertain only to the principal
frontage. The prescriptions for the first lot layer shall pertain to all
frontages.
         (c)   Row houses shall provide a dooryard, a terrace, or a stoop in
the private frontage.
         (d)   Multi-family residential buildings shall provide a dooryard or a
terrace or a stoop for all ground floor dwellings enfronting a thoroughfare or
a civic space.
         (e)   Ground floor commercial functions shall provide a shopfront
frontage at minimum.
         (f)   Ground floor commercial functions may also utilize the public
frontage for outdoor seating, outdoor serving, outdoor display of merchandise,
and other business related activities provided that a minimum six-foot
contiguous clear path be maintained within the public frontage, private
frontage, or combination of both.
            1.   Outdoor displays of merchandise shall be removed from the
frontage between sunset and sunrise.
         (g)   Ground floor entrances to all other building functions shall be
illuminated.
         (h)   Frontages that encroach into the public frontage shall require
that a minimum six-foot contiguous clear path be maintained within the public
frontage, private frontage, or combination of both.
         (i)   In order to encourage diversity in architectural design, private
frontages shall vary from lot to lot.
         (j)   For the purposes of this section, frontages are divided into the
following types:
            1.   Porch and fence;
            2.   Dooryard and terrace;
            3.   Stoop;
            4.   Forecourt;
            5.   Shopfront;
            6.   Gallery; and
            7.   Arcade.
         (k)   In order to encourage diversity in design, building frontages
shall vary from lot to lot.
      (2)   Porch and fence frontages.
         (a)   Fences and hedges may be located along the frontage lines.
         (b)   Fences and hedges at the frontage lines shall be limited to a
maximum height of four feet.
      (3)   Dooryard and terrace frontages.
         (a)   Dooryards and terraces may encroach into the first lot layer up
to 100% of its depth.
         (b)   Dooryards and terraces shall be raised a minimum of two feet
from the average sidewalk grade at the frontage.
         (c)   Dooryards and terraces shall be no less than ten feet deep.
         (d)   Dooryards and terraces shall be bound by fences or walls on
three sides.
            1.   Fences and walls shall be four feet in height.
            2.   Fences or walls shall be provided as part of the dooryard or
the terrace.
      (4)   Stoop frontages.
         (a)   Stoops may be combined with a dooryard or a terrace frontage.
         (b)   Stoops may encroach into the first lot layer up to 100% of its
depth.
         (c)   Stoops shall be raised a minimum of two feet from the average
sidewalk grade at the frontage.
         (d)   Stoops shall be no less than four feet deep.
         (e)   Stoops may be recessed into a building facade where the front
setback is less than four feet.
      (5)   Forecourt frontages.
         (a)   Forecourts shall only be combined with a dooryard or terrace, a
stoop, a gallery, or an arcade frontage.
         (b)   Forecourts may be provided for pedestrians or vehicles.
         (c)   Forecourts may recess from the frontage line.
            1.   Forecourts shall recess no more than 50% of the building
facade.
         (d)   Forecourts shall be limited to 4,000 square feet in area.
         (e)   Forecourts shall be bound by building facades on a minimum of
two sides.
         (f)   The width of the forecourt shall count towards frontage build-
out requirements.
      (6)   Shopfront frontages.
         (a)   All shopfronts shall be freestanding or combined with a gallery
or an arcade frontage.
         (b)   All shopfronts shall be glazed with clear glass for no less than
70% of the ground floor building facade area and shall have a continuous knee
wall between two and three feet above the sidewalk at the principal and the
secondary frontages.
            1.   The principal entrance shall be at sidewalk grade.
            2.   The principal entrance may be recessed up to eight feet in
depth from the building facade.
         (c)   Freestanding shopfronts may be combined with awnings, and
awnings may encroach into the first lot layer up to 100% of its depth and may
also encroach into the public frontage to within two feet of the curb.
            1.   Awnings may be fixed or movable.
         (d)   All awnings shall provide a minimum vertical clearance of ten
feet.
         (e)   All awnings shall project horizontally from the building facade
a minimum of six feet.
      (7)   Gallery frontages.
         (a)   Galleries may encroach into the public frontage to within two
feet of the curb.
         (b)   Galleries shall provide a minimum vertical clearance of ten feet
and project horizontally from the building facade a minimum of ten feet.
         (c)   Public planting and public lighting may only be omitted where
galleries encroach into the public frontage.
         (d)   A gallery frontage may be combined with a shopfront frontage.
      (8)   Arcade frontages.
         (a)   Arcades may encroach into the public frontage to within two feet
of the curb.
         (b)   Arcades shall provide a minimum vertical clearance of ten feet
and project horizontally from the building facade a minimum of ten feet.
         (c)   Public planting and public lighting may only be omitted where
arcades encroach into the public frontage.
         (d)   An arcade frontage may be combined with a shopfront.
      (9)   Specific to the T-3 Transect Zones.
         (a)   Porches shall be no less than eight feet deep.
         (b)   Balconies, bay windows, and other architectural features may
encroach into the first lot layer up to 25% of its depth.
      (10)   Specific to the T-4 Transect Zones.
         (a)   Porches shall be no less than four feet deep.
         (b)   Balconies, bay windows, and other architectural features may
encroach into the first lot layer up to 50% of its depth.
      (11)   Specific to the T-5 and T-6 Transect Zones.
         (a)   In the absence of a building facade along any part of a frontage
line, a streetscreen shall be built co-planar with the facade. A streetscreen
shall be between four and eight feet in height and have openings no larger than
is necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access.
         (b)   Balconies, bay windows, and other architectural features may
encroach into the first lot layer up to 100% of its depth.
   (L)   Building function.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   Building use in this section shall be limited to those allowable
building functions and to those specific uses by transect zone according to
Diagram 5.
         (b)   Building uses requiring a specific use permit shall be subject
to a review and a recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and
approval by the City Council as established in §
155.080.
         (c)   Buildable intensity of the use shall be determined by transect
zone on a per lot basis by the required parking.
      (2)   Additional use restrictions. The following uses are subject to
additional restrictions:
         (a)   Accessory unit.
            1.   An accessory unit may only be provided in the following
locations: within a principal building or an outbuilding or above a free-
standing garage.
            2.   An accessory unit shall provide an entry independent of the
principal building and that is accessible from a rear alley or from a sidewalk.
         (b)   Bed and breakfast.
            1.   The number of bedrooms available for lodging is limited by the
required parking of 1.0 assigned parking spaces for each bedroom, up to five,
in addition to the required parking for the residential unit.
            2.   The lodging shall be owner-occupied.
            3.   Food service may be provided in the morning.
            4.   The maximum length of stay shall not exceed 14 days.
         (c)   Hotel.
            1.   The number of bedrooms available for lodging is limited by the
required parking of 1.0 assigned parking spaces for each bedroom and the area
allocated to food service shall be calculated and provided with parking
according to retail function.
            2.   Food service shall be provided at all times.
         (d)   Live-work unit.
            1.   The business operator shall reside at the property.
      (3)   Prohibited uses. The following uses are not allowed in any transect
zone:
         (a)   Adult entertainment;
         (b)   Automotive sales;
         (c)   Automotive repair and / or automotive service facility;
         (d)   Body piercing parlor and /or tattoo parlor;
         (e)   Car wash;
         (f)   Check cashing;
         (g)   Pawn shop, secondhand shop, or thrift store;
         (h)   Retail sales of guns or weapons as a primary use;
         (i)   Retail sales of tobacco as a primary use;
         (j)   Warehousing, distribution, and / or bulk storage; and
         (k)   Wholesale business.
      (4)   Specific to the T-3 Transect Zones.
         (a)   The building area available for office use on each lot is
limited to the first story of the principal building and the outbuilding.
         (b)   The maximum number of employees and occupants shall not exceed
four for office use.
      (5)   Specific to the T-4 Transect Zones.
         (a)   The building area available for office use on each lot is
limited to the first story of the principal building and the outbuilding.
         (b)   The building area available for retail use is limited to the
first story of buildings at corner locations along avenues or drives.
         (c)   A food service establishment shall be further limited to seating
no more than 60 patrons.
   (M)   Parking standards. Applicable parking regulations and restrictions as
found in §
155.091, shall apply.
      (1)   Parking requirements. Parking requirements shall be determined by
their building function as provided in below:
         (a)   Residential building functions.
            1.   1.0 assigned parking spaces for one bedroom.
            2.   2.0 assigned parking spaces for two or more bedrooms.
         (b)   Lodging building functions.
            1.   1.0 assigned parking spaces for one bedroom.
         (c)   Office building functions.
            1.   3.0 assigned parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of net
office space.
         (d)   Retail building functions.
            1.   4.0 assigned parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of net
retail space.
         (e)   Parking requirements for all other building functions shall be
in accordance with the provisions existing in §
155.091.
         (f)   The following shall be exempt from parking requirements:
            1.   Liner buildings less than 30 feet deep and no more than two
stories shall be exempt from parking requirements.
            2.   Retail spaces under 1,500 square feet of net retail space
shall be exempt from parking requirements.
         (g)   Fractional remainders greater than one-half shall be rounded
upwards.
      (2)   Parking access.
         (a)   All parking shall be accessed by alleys where available, except
as provided below.
         (b)   All vehicular entrances to parking lots and parking structures
shall be no wider than 24 feet at the frontage.
            1.   No vehicular entrance to any parking lot or any parking
structure shall be gated.
            2.   Gates for parking structures may be permitted provided the
gates are internal to the parking structure.
         (c)   All pedestrian access to parking lots and to parking structures
shall be directly to a frontage line, not directly into a building, except for
underground parking levels.
      (3)   Parking location.
         (a)   All garages shall be located at the third lot layer.
         (b)   All carports shall be located at the third lot layer.
         (c)   All parking lots and parking structures shall be located in the
third lot layer.
      (4)   Physical requirements.
         (a)   All parking lots shall be masked from the frontage by either a
building or a streetscreen.
            1.   Parking lots shall be paved in concrete.
            2.   Parking lots may only be paved in asphalt, brick, cobble, or
stone by warrant.
         (b)   All parking structures shall be masked from the frontage by:
            1.   A liner building at the first two stories; or
            2.   When a liner building is not feasible, by use of plantings,
glazing, or frequent openings.
         (c)   A minimum of one bicycle rack place shall be provided within the
public frontage or private frontage for every 20 vehicular parking spaces.
      (5)   Specific to the T-3 Transect Zones.
         (a)   Garages may only be accessed by driveways from the principal
frontage or the secondary frontage by warrant.
            1.   Driveways shall be limited to 12 feet in width in the first
lot layer.
         (b)   Parking lots and parking structures are not allowed.
      (6)   Specific to the T-4 Transect Zones.
         (a)   Parking structures are not allowed.
      (7)   Specific to the T-5 and the T-6 Transect Zones.
         (a)   Parking provided shall include the actual parking spaces that
are provided within the lot and the actual parking spaces that are along the
parking lane corresponding to lot frontages. The parking spaces that are along
the parking lane corresponding to lot frontages shall remain available to the
public and cannot be restricted to use by the enfronting lots.
         (b)   Up to 100% of required parking may be provided off-site by a
parking lot or parking structure within 800 feet of the lot.
   (N)   Landscape standards. Applicable landscaping regulations and
restrictions as found in §
155.092, shall apply.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   All planting and landscape in the private frontage and private
lots shall consist of non-invasive species.
      (2)   Porch and fence frontages. All porch and fence frontages shall be
landscaped as follows:
         (a)   For every 30 feet of frontage line, a minimum of two trees shall
be planted.
         (b)   Native plant perennial landscapes may be used.
      (3)   Dooryard and terrace frontages. All dooryard and terrace frontages
shall be landscaped as follows:
         (a)   Trees and shrubs shall not be required in the private frontage.
         (b)   Landscaping, where installed, shall consist of durable species
tolerant of soil compaction.
         (c)   If planted in the private frontage, trees may match the species
of trees planted in the public frontage.
      (4)   Stoop and forecourt frontages. All stoop and forecourt frontages
shall be landscaped as follows:
         (a)   Trees and shrubs shall not be required in the private frontage.
         (b)   Landscaping, where installed, shall consist of durable species
tolerant of soil compaction.
         (c)   If planted in the private frontage, trees may match the species
of trees planted in the public frontage.
         (d)   Paving, where installed, may match the public frontage except
where paved with pervious materials.
         (e)   Driveways within forecourts shall be limited to 20 feet in width
and portions of driveways in the private frontage may be paved in brick,
cobble, stone, or may be paved to match the adjacent public frontage.
      (5)   Shopfront frontages. All shopfront frontages shall be landscaped as
follows:
         (a)   Trees and shrubs shall not be required in the private frontage.
         (b)   Private frontages shall be paved to match the public frontages.
         (c)   Landscaping, where installed, shall consist of durable species
tolerant of soil compaction.
      (6)   Gallery and arcade frontages.
         (a)   Trees and shrubs shall not be required in the private frontage.
         (b)   Private frontages shall be paved to match the public frontages.
      (7)   Parking lots. All parking lots shall be landscaped as follows:
         (a)   One tree shall be planted for every ten parking spaces.
         (b)   Parking lots consisting of less than 20 parking spaces shall be
exempt from landscaping requirements.
      (8)   Specific to the T-3 Transect Zones.
         (a)   One walkway, no wider than five feet, and providing access to
the principal entrance shall be permitted at all frontages.
            1.   Walkways may consist of pervious materials.
         (b)   One driveway, limited to 12 feet in width, may be permitted at
each frontage.
      (9)   Specific to the T-4 Transect Zones.
         (a)   One walkway, no wider than five feet, and providing access to
the principal entrance shall be permitted at all frontages.
            1.   Walkways may consist of pervious materials.
   (O)   Signage standards. Unless otherwise noted below, all provisions of §
155.090, Sign Standards, shall apply to properties developed in accordance with
this section.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   Temporary signs. Temporary signs may be considered for uses
allowed in any transect zone.
         (b)   Prohibited signs. The following sign types are not allowed in
any transect zone, and are defined in §
155.090:
            1.   Advertising signs.
            2.   Pole signs.
      (2)   Residential building functions.
         (a)   Address signs. One address number that is no more than six
inches as measured vertically, may be attached to the building in proximity to
the principal entrance or at a mailbox.
         (b)   Illumination.  Signage may be externally illuminated.
      (3)   Other building functions.
         (a)   Sign bands.
            1.   One external permanent sign band, not to exceed three feet in
height, may be applied to each building facade.
            2.   Businesses on corner lots may install one sign band per
frontage.
         (b)   Canopy signs.
            1.   One canopy sign for each ground floor business shall be
permitted if located within the first four inches from the outer edges of the
canopy.
            2.   Businesses on corner lots may install one canopy sign per
frontage.
         (c)   Window signs.
            1.   One window sign for each business on the ground floor, no more
than nine square feet, may be installed within the store interior in neon
tubing or applied directly to the glazing. Businesses on a corner lot may
install one window sign per frontage.
            2.   Businesses on corner lots may install one window sign per
frontage.
            3.   Opaque signboards are prohibited.
         (d)   Awning signs. Awnings may include signage in the form of text
along the flap, no taller than six inches and text or graphics on the top,
printed or applied to the fabric.
         (e)   Blade signs.
            1.   One blade sign for each ground floor business, no more than
six square feet each, may be permanently installed perpendicular to the
building facade.
            2.   Blade signs shall clear eight feet above the sidewalk.
            3.   Businesses on corner lots may install one blade sign per
frontage.
         (f)   A-frame sidewalk signs.
            1.   One A-frame sidewalk sign not to exceed six square feet, may
be placed in front of a ground floor business during business hours.
            2.   A-frame sidewalk signs shall be made of metal, wood, or
synthetic wood and shall have a hand-crafted design.
         (g)   Painted mural signs.
            1.   Painted murals may not include copy related to the use or the
uses of the building.
            2.   One painted mural may be applied to the facade of each
building.
   (P)   Non-conformities.
      (1)   Where buildings exist on adjacent lots, the Director of Planning
may require that a proposed building match the setbacks and heights of adjacent
buildings rather than the provisions of this section.
      (2)   Reserved.
   (Q)   Building materials and configuration.
      (1)   Walls.
         (a)   Materials.
            1.   Reserved.
            2.   Columns along frontage lines shall be made of concrete or
stone. Synthetic materials may be permitted provided they have the appearance
of the materials noted above.
            3.   Foundations and piers shall be made of brick, concrete, or
stone.
            4.   Structural posts along frontages shall be made of metal or
wood or composite wood.
            5.   Outbuildings shall be constructed of materials to match the
principal building.
         (b)   Configuration.
            1.   Reserved.
            2.   All exposed exterior wood shall be painted or stained.
            3.   All the exterior walls of a single building shall maintain a
uniform level of quality in materials and detailing.
            4.   All the exterior walls of a single building shall be of three
materials maximum, excluding attachments and raised basements.
            5.   All piers along frontages shall be no less than 12 inches by
12 inches in thickness.
            6.   All structural posts along frontages shall be no less than six
inches by six inches nominal dimension.
            7.   Intercolumniation on the ground floor shall be vertically
proportioned.
      (2)   Roofs.
         (a)   Materials.
            1.   Sloped roofs shall be clad in asphalt shingles, slate, and
terra cotta tile. Sloped roof cladding may include metal, provided that it
complements an architectural style and that it minimizes glare.
            2.   Flat roofs shall be clad in commercial roofing or similar.
            3.   Flat roofs shall be permitted in the T-4, the T-5, and the T-
6 transect zones.
            4.   Green (vegetated) roofs shall be permitted in the T-4, the T-
5, and the T-6 transect zones.
         (b)   Configuration.
            1.   Where used on a building, sloped roofs along frontages shall
have symmetrical pitched roofs with slopes no less than 6:12. Porches, stoops,
and dormers may have shed roofs with pitch no less than 3:12.
            2.   Where used on a building, flat roofs shall be surrounded by a
horizontal parapet wall no less than 42 inches high on all sides where the roof
deck meets the parapet wall.
            3.   Roof penetrations, including vent stacks, shall typically be
placed on the roof slope that does not face a frontage.
      (3)   Openings.
         (a)   Materials.
            1.   All windows shall be made of painted aluminum, vinyl, or wood,
and shall have clear glass.
            2.   All shutters shall be made of wood or composite wood.
            3.   Garage doors shall be made of composite wood or wood.
         (b)   Configuration.
            1.   All doors and windows shall be evenly spaced along the
building facade to create a harmonious composition.
            2.   All door and window header heights shall be consistent along a
building facade.
            3.   All windows along a building facade shall be rectangular in
shape and vertically proportioned, with the exception of transom windows.
Windows that are square in shape may be approved by warrant.
            4.   All windows along a building facade shall be recessed at least
three inches in depth in exterior finish material of brick, stone, or stucco;
and flush-mounted windows are not permitted.
            5.   All windows shall use vertically proportioned panes.
            6.   Shutters shall be operable and useable. If non-operable, the
shutters shall be of proportions which are identical to an operable shutter for
the window. Shutters shall be in louvered panel, solid panel, or board-and-
batten style of construction.
      (4)   Attachments.
         (a)   Materials.
            1.   Where visible, chimneys shall be brick, stone, or stucco.
            2.   Flues may be galvanized or painted black.
            3.   All balcony floors shall be concrete slab, metal, or wood.
            4.   All porch floors shall be of brick, concrete slab, or stone.
            5.   All stoops, including the landing and the exterior stairs,
shall be brick or stone.
         (b)   Configuration.
            1.   Balconies that cantilever shall be supported by brackets made
of concrete beams or profiled sills, or wood beams, or other architectural
support of appropriate scale.
            2.   Bay windows shall extend to the ground or be supported by
concrete or wood brackets of appropriate scale.
            3.   Where visible, chimneys shall extend to the ground, and shall
have a projecting cap on top.
      (5)   Shopfronts.
         (a)   Shopfront windows. First story building facades shall be a
minimum of 70% clear glass as measured between the finished floor and the
finished ceiling, including the glass area of the front door, and shall have a
continuous knee wall above the adjacent sidewalk.
            1.   All shopfront glass shall be clear, and with no more than 10%
tinted.
            2.   Colored, mirrored, or reflective glass is not permitted on any
doors and windows.
         (b)   Knee walls. Shopfronts shall have a minimum 24-inch high solid
knee wall along all thoroughfares. Shopfront knee walls shall be a maximum of
36 inches above the adjacent sidewalk. The knee walls shall be designed as an
integral component of the overall shopfront.
         (c)   Transom windows. Shopfronts shall have a minimum 24-inch high
transom window along all thoroughfares. Shopfront transom windows shall be a
maximum of 48 inches high. The transom windows shall be designed as an integral
component of the overall shopfront.
         (d)   Shopfront entrance doors. Shopfront entrance doors, if recessed,
shall be recessed a maximum of eight feet in depth from the building facade to
allow the door to swing out without obstructing pedestrian flow on the
sidewalk.
            1.   Where appropriate, either sliding doors or folding doors which
allow the activity of the business to open adjacent to and onto the sidewalk,
may be installed for cafes and restaurants.
         (e)   Sign bands. All shopfronts shall have a sign band applied to the
building facade at the top of the first story window. All sign bands shall be
an integral design with the shopfront elevation and its details, and may be a
contrasting color to the building.
         (f)   Awnings.
            1.   Awnings shall be canvas, metal, or glass, and they shall be
coordinated with the top edge of first story doors and windows.
            2.   Awnings shall consist of sloping squares or rectangles,
without side or bottom soffit panels.
         (g)   Shopfront security gates and shutters. Solid metal security
gates and solid metal roll-down shutters shall not be permitted along
frontages. Interior link or grill security devices may be permitted if they can
be completely enclosed or hidden from view when not in use, and subject to the
approval by the Director of Planning.
      (6)   Fences, walls, and other suitable visual screens.
         (a)   Fences, walls, and other suitable visual screens in accordance
with the provisions existing in §
155.094 are prohibited along side lot lines and rear lot lines of multi-family
residential buildings and mixed-use buildings.
         (b)   Fences along frontage lines shall be made of metal or wrought
iron or wood.
            1.   All metal and wrought iron shall be black.
            2.   All wood shall be painted or stained.
            3.   All gates shall be made of metal or wood.
         (c)   Walls along frontage lines shall be constructed of brick, stone,
or stucco.
            1.   All gates shall be made of metal or wood.
         (d)   Streetscreens shall be constructed of a material matching the
adjacent building facade.
      (7)   Building facades shall provide architectural articulations,
including recesses and projections. Architectural articulations are required at
intervals of 25 feet along frontages. Architectural articulations shall be
limited to four for each 100 feet of building facade length and all
architectural articulations shall be a minimum of four feet in depth.
         (a)   The maximum length of a facade for a single building shall not
exceed 300 feet.
         (b)   In order to encourage variety in architecture, building facades
shall not be repealed along a block face or directly across from a
thoroughfare.
         (c)   In mixed-use buildings, ground floor retail functions shall be
distinguished from upper floors with an identifiable break or distinguishing
expression line. This may include cornice lines, projections or recesses;
changes in fenestration; or changes in exterior finish material.
      (8)   Building mechanical equipment such as electric meters, gas meters,
water meters, and transformers and refuse storage shall be visually screened
and not located along frontages.
      (9)   Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be fully screened from all sides
by parapet walls or opaque screening enclosures both of which shall be at least
12 inches greater in height than the equipment.
      (10)   Outdoor refuse and outdoor recycling collection receptacles shall
not be located along frontages. All collection receptacles shall be visually
screened on all sides by a solid wall a minimum of six feet in height, and that
is constructed of a material matching the adjacent building facade. All access
doors into the collection receptacle shall be made of opaque metal matching the
height of the solid walls. Lids shall be required on collection receptacles
that are not in a roofed enclosure.
   (R)   Light levels.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   The design of all streetlights shall be determined by warrant.
      (2)   Specific to the T-3 and the T-4 Transect Zones.
         (a)   No lighting level measured at the frontage shall exceed 1.0 foot
candles.
      (3)   Specific to the T-3 and the T-4 Transect Zones. No lighting level
measured at the frontage shall exceed 2.0 foot candles.
      (4)   Specific to the T-6 Transect Zones.
         (a)   No lighting level measured at the frontage shall exceed 5.0 foot
candles.
   (S)   Special land assemblage plans. A special land assemblage plan is
intended to create and to reinforce a pedestrian oriented and a balanced
pattern of development with a complementary mixture of retail, residential,
employment, and civic choices within a walkable, compact, and visually
harmonious environment, in order to provide for greater integration of public
and private improvements and infrastructure, and to encourage and to enable
thoroughfare connectivity. A special land assemblage plan is required for all
proposed development and redevelopment on a parcel of land or on multiple
parcels of land greater than two acres. The property owner or the developer
shall prepare, or shall have prepared on their behalf, a special land
assemblage plan.
      (1)   Thoroughfare network plan.
         (a)   General.
            1.   Thoroughfares shall terminate at other thoroughfares in
intersections, forming a network.
            2.   Thoroughfares shall be paved in concrete, and they may be
paved in other surface materials including asphalt, brick, cobble, or stone by
warrant.
            3.   Thoroughfares shall have street trees planted on center, every
30 feet.
            4.   Unless otherwise noted below, thoroughfares shall have their
assemblies and designs determined by warrant.
            5.   The thoroughfare network plan shall define blocks not
exceeding the following perimeter lengths, measured as the sum of frontage
lines.
               a.   T-3 transect zones: 3,000 feet.
               b.   T-4 transect zones: 2,400 feet.
               c.   T-5 transect zones: 2,000 feet.
               d.   T-6 transect zones: 1,800 feet.
         (b)   Avenues.
            1.   The minimum sidewalk width shall be six feet.
            2.   The minimum parkway width shall be four feet.
         (c)   Drives and streets.
            1.   The minimum sidewalk width shall be five feet.
            2.   The minimum parkway width shall be four feet.
         (d)   Rear alleys.
            1.   The minimum pavement width shall be 14 feet.
      (2)   Transect zones.
         (a)   The allocation and assignment of transect zones by a property
owner or a developer shall be subject to review and approval of the Director of
Planning.
      (3)   Civic space.
         (a)   A special land assemblage plan shall assign a minimum of 12% of
its aggregate area to civic space.
            1.   The required civic space may be modified by a reduction to no
less than 5% of a special land assemblage plan.
         (b)   A civic space shall be located within a maximum of 800 feet of
each residential unit.
         (c)   A civic space shall conform to one of the types provided below,
and as shown in Diagram 6:
            1.   Green (the minimum size shall be 0.5 acres).
            2.   Park (the minimum size shall be 1.0 acres).
            3.   Playground (there is no minimum or maximum size).
            4.   Square (the minimum size shall be 0.5 acres).
         (d)   Where feasible, parks and squares shall be activated with one or
more of the following program elements:
            1.   Concert space;
            2.   Farmer's market;
            3.   Fountain;
            4.   Outdoor seating and outdoor serving (i.e., food service);
            5.   Performance space;
            6.   Public art;
            7.   Water feature; or
            8.   Waterside staircase.
         (e)   Where civic space abuts any existing or planned pedestrian or
bicycle trails, then the pedestrian and bicycle trails shall be continued
through the civic space.
      (4)   Building disposition.
         (a)   Building setback requirements may be modified except for the
minimum front setbacks in the T-6 transect zones.
         (b)   All special land assemblage plans shall include a diverse mix of
building disposition types.
      (5)   Building function.
         (a)   A special land assemblage plan shall not alter, nor modify, any
of the allowable building functions or specific functions in Diagram 5.
      (6)   Signage.
         (a)   A special land assemblage plan may include additional design
guidelines for signage, provided the guidelines are equal to or better than the
strict application of a design standard as set forth in this section.
            1.   No sign shall exceed a maximum height of 30 feet.
            2.   No prohibited sign type shall be allowed.
            3.   No sign shall be installed within ten feet of public right-of-
way.
      (7)   Building materials and configuration.
         (a)   A special land assemblage plan may include additional design
guidelines for building materials and configuration, provided the guidelines
are equal to or better than the strict application of a design standard as set
forth in this section.
      (8)   Special requirements. To the extent that a special land assemblage
plan designates any of the following special requirements, those standards
shall be applied as follows:
         (a)   A mandatory terminated vista designation that requires that a
building be provided with architectural articulation of a type and a character
that responds visually to its axial location.
         (b)   A cross block passage that requires that a minimum ten-foot-wide
pedestrian access be reserved between buildings.
         (c)   A build-to line requires the placement of the building facade
along the line (forecourts may recess a building entrance from the build-to
line).
      (9)   Approvals process.
         (a)   The Director of Planning shall process administratively special
land assemblage plan applications. The property owner or the developer may
appeal a special land assemblage plan decision to the City Manager.
         (b)   All special land assemblage plans submitted for approval shall
demonstrate compliance with:
            1.   The assignment of existing and planned thoroughfares;
            2.   The allocation of transect zones;
            3.   The allocation of civic space;
            4.   The locations of public art;
            5.   Special requirements, if any; and
            6.   Other applicable attributes that may be required by the
Director of Planning.
         (c)   A special land assemblage plan shall inform the building plans
and site plans subject to administrative review. A special land assemblage plan
shall be approved prior to building plan and site plan submittal.
      (10)   Amendments. For the purposes of this section, any modification to
the special land assemblage plan and its metrics, including changes in transect
zone assignments, are considered "amendments".
         (a)   Amendments to the special land assemblage plan shall not be used
as a reason to add new uses, new structures, or new site improvements that are
not permitted by the regulations of the transect zone in which it is located.
         (b)   All amendments to the special land assemblage plan shall be
approved by the Director of Planning.
      (11)   Development agreement required. A development plan shall be
approved prior to submittal of a special land assemblage plan.
   (T)   Architectural pattern language. Reserved.
   (U)   Public art. Reserved.
   (V)   Definitions. This section provides definitions for terms used in this
section that are technical in nature or that otherwise may not reflect a common
usage of the term. If a term used is not defined in this section, then the
Director of Planning shall determine the correct definition.
      ACCESSORY UNIT. A type of residential unit not greater than 1,000 square
feet sharing ownership and utility connections with a principal building; it
may or it may not be within an outbuilding. Accessory units may only be rented
if the principal building is owner-occupied. Alternatively, a property owner
may live in the accessory unit and rent the principal building (Synonym:
ANCILLARY UNIT).
      ALLEY. A private thoroughfare designated to be a secondary means of
vehicular access to the rear or side of properties; an alley may connect to a
vehicular driveway that is located to the rear of lots providing access to
outbuildings, service areas, and parking, and containing utility easements.
      ARCADE. A private frontage principally for retail use wherein the
building facade is a colonnade supporting habitable space that overlaps the
sidewalk, while the building facade at sidewalk level remains at the frontage
line.
      ATTIC. The interior part of a building contained within a pitched roof
structure.
      AWNING. A fixed or a movable shading structure, and cantilevered or
otherwise entirely supported from a building, that is used to protect outdoor
spaces from sun, rain, and other natural conditions. Awnings are typically used
to cover outdoor seating for restaurants and cafes.
      BALCONY. A platform projecting from an upper-story door that is enclosed
with a balustrade and that is not supported by columns.
      BED AND BREAKFAST. A type of owner-occupied lodging offering one to five
bedrooms, permitted to serve breakfast in the mornings to guests.
      BLADE SIGN. A sign that is made from rigid material mounted perpendicular
to a building wall with one side attached or supported by a device extending
from a building wall.
      BLOCK. The aggregate of the private lots, civic spaces, passages, and
rear alleys, circumscribed by thoroughfares.
      BLOCK FACE. The aggregate of all the building facades on one side of a
block.
      BUILDING CONFIGURATION. The form of a building, based on its massing, its
private frontage, and its height.
      BUILDING DISPOSITION. The placement of a building on its lot.
      BUILDING ELEVATION. An exterior wall of a building that is not along a
frontage line (See BUILDING FACADE).
      BUILDING FACADE. The exterior wall of a building that is set along a
frontage line.
      BUILDING FUNCTION. The use or the uses accommodated by a building and its
lot.
      BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical extent of a building measured in stories.
      BUILD-TO-LINE. A line established within a given lot indicating where the
outer edge of a building must be located relative to frontages.
      BY-RIGHT. Characterizing a proposal or component of a proposal that
complies with this section and is permitted and processed administratively,
without public hearing (See WARRANT).
      CIVIC BUILDING. A building type that is operated by one or more not-for-
profit organizations dedicated to arts, culture, education, and government.
      CIVIC SPACE. An outdoor area permanently dedicated for public use.
      COMMERCIAL. The term collectively defining lodging, office, and retail
building functions.
      CORNER LOT. A lot or parcel of land abutting two or more thoroughfares at
their intersection.
      CROSS-BLOCK PASSAGE. A publicly accessible way providing access through a
block that is restricted to pedestrian use and limited vehicular access.
      DISPOSITION. See BUILDING DISPOSITION.
      DOORYARD FRONTAGE. A type of private frontage with a shallow setback, and
a front garden or a patio, usually with a low wall or a hedge at the frontage
line (Variant: LIGHTWELL, LIGHT COURT).
      DRIVEWAY. A vehicular lane within a lot, often leading to a garage.
      ELEVATION. See BUILDING ELEVATION.
      ENCROACH. To break the plane of a vertical or a horizontal regulatory
limit with a structural element, so that it extends into a setback or extends
into the public frontage or above a height limit.
      ENCROACHMENT. Any structural element that encroaches.
      ENFRONT. To place an element along a frontage.
      FACADE. See BUILDING FACADE.
      FENCE. A permeable metal or a wooden wall, independent of a building,
located along a frontage line.
      FIRST LOT LAYER. The area of a lot that is comprised of the distance
between the frontage line and the required setback including the private
frontage.
      FORECOURT FRONTAGE. A type of private frontage wherein a portion of the
building facade is close to the frontage line and the central portion is set
back.
      FRONT SETBACK. The distance that is from the frontage line to the point
where a principal building may be constructed. This area must be maintained
clear of permanent structures with the exception of encroachments.
      FRONTAGE. The area between a building facade and the vehicular lanes, and
it is inclusive of its built and its planted components. The frontage is
divided into the private frontage and the public frontage.
      FRONTAGE BUILDOUT. The percentage of the lot width that is occupied by
the building facade within the first lot layer.
      FRONTAGE LINE. A lot line bordering a public frontage. Building facades
facing the frontage lines define the public realm and are therefore more
regulated than the building elevations facing the other lot lines.
      GALLERY FRONTAGE. A type of private frontage wherein the building facade
is aligned close to the frontage line with either an attached cantilevered shed
or a lightweight colonnade overlapping the sidewalk.
      GLAZING. The transparent area of a building facade.
      GREEN. A civic space available for unstructured recreation, and spatially
defined by landscaping rather than building frontages. Its landscape shall
consist of lawn and trees all naturalistically disposed.
      GREEN ROOF. A layer of vegetation that is planted over a waterproof
membrane. Additional features of a green roof include support for irrigation
and some type of root management.
      HEIGHT. See BUILDING HEIGHT.
      INTENSITY. The magnitude of development that is permitted within a
standard measure of land area.
      INTERCOLUMNIATION. The distance between two columns.
      LAYER. See LOT LAYER.
      LINER BUILDING. A building that is specifically designed to mask a
parking lot or a parking structure from a frontage.
      LIVE-WORK UNIT. A mixed use unit consisting of a commercial and a
residential function. The commercial function is restricted to the ground floor
and the residential function may be behind or above. It is intended to be
occupied by a business operator who lives in the same structure that contains
the commercial activity or industry.
      LOADING DOCK. An area in which goods and products are moved on and off a
vehicle, and including the stall or berth, apron, and maneuvering room.
      LODGING. A type of building function available for the daily and weekly
renting of bedrooms.
      LOT. A parcel of land accommodating a building or buildings.
      LOT COVERAGE. The percentage of a lot that is covered by buildings and
other roofed structures and paved areas.
      LOT LAYER. A range of depth of within a lot in which there are certain
elements permitted.
      LOT LINE. The boundary that legally and geometrically demarcates a lot.
      LOT WIDTH. The length of the principal frontage line of a lot.
      MANUFACTURING. Premises available for the creation, the assemblage, and /
or the repair of artifacts, using only table-mounted electrical machinery or
artisanal equipment, and including their retail sale.
      MIXED-USE. Multiple functions that are within the same building either
through superimposition or adjacency or in multiple buildings by adjacency.
      MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. A person or a business selling foods other than fresh
fruits or vegetables from a mobile food vehicle, a mobile food cart, or a food
stand.
      MOBILE FOOD VENDOR PARK. A permanent location for four or more mobile
food vehicles. Such sites shall include required infrastructure and public
seating for all vehicles serving in the park.
      MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL UNIT. A residential unit sharing a building and
a lot with other units and / or uses; and may either be for rent, or for sale
as a condominium.
      MURAL. Any piece of artwork that is painted, tiled, or otherwise applied
directly on an exterior wall.
      NON-CONFORMITY. Any existing function, structure, or site improvement
that is in compliance with the zoning regulations that were applicable to it
when it was established, and for which all the required permits were issued,
but which does not conform either in whole or in part to the specific rules and
regulations of this section. Such non-conformity is legal and may continue
except as regulated by this section.
      OFFICE. Characterizing premises available for transaction of general
business, but excluding retail, manufacturing, and artisanal uses.
      OTHER BUILDING FUNCTION. Any building function other than residential.
      OUTBUILDING. An accessory building, that is usually located toward the
rear of the same lot as a principal building.
      PARK. A civic space that is designed as a natural preserve and that is
available for unstructured recreation. Its landscape shall consist of paths and
trails, meadows, waterbodies, woodlands, and open shelters, all
naturalistically disposed.
      PARKING LOT. An area, other than a thoroughfare or an alley, that is
dedicated to unenclosed parking spaces for motorized vehicles.
      PARKING STRUCTURE. A building containing one or more stories of vehicular
parking above or below grade.
      PARKWAY. The portion of the thoroughfare that accommodates street trees
and other landscape.
      PASSAGE. See CROSS-BLOCK PASSAGE.
      PIER. A solid support designed to sustain vertical pressure.
      PLAYGROUND. A civic space designed and equipped for recreation of
children. A playground shall be fenced, and it may include an open shelter.
      PORCH. An open-air room that is appended to a building, with floor and
roof but no walls on the sides facing frontages.
      PRINCIPAL BUILDING. The main building on a lot, and is usually located
toward the frontage.
      PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE. The main point of access for pedestrians into a
building.
      PRINCIPAL FRONTAGE. The private frontage designated to bear the lot
address, the principal entrance into the building, and the measure of minimum
lot width (See FRONTAGE).
      PRIVATE FRONTAGE.  The privately held lot layer between the frontage line
and the principal building facade.
      PUBLIC FRONTAGE. The area between the curb of the vehicular lanes and the
frontage line.
      REAR SETBACK. The distance that is from the rear lot line to the point
where a building may be constructed on a lot. This area must be maintained
clear of permanent structures with the exception of encroachments.
      REGIONAL CENTER DEVELOPMENT. A high intensity mixed-use center.
      REGULATING PLAN. A zoning map or a set of maps that show the thoroughfare
assignments, the transect zones, and the civic spaces of areas subject to, or
potentially subject to, regulation by this section.
      REQUIRED PARKING. The number of parking spaces required to accommodate a
building or buildings that are on a single lot according to the intensity of
their function.
      RESIDENTIAL. Premises available for long-term human dwelling.
      RETAIL. Characterizing premises available for the sale of merchandise and
food service.
      ROW HOUSE. A single-family residential unit sharing a party wall with
another of the same type and that occupies the full frontage line (Synonym:
TOWNHOUSE.)
      SECONDARY FRONTAGE. On corner lots, the private frontage not designated
as the principal frontage. As it affects the public realm, its first lot layer
is regulated.
      SECOND LOT LAYER. That portion of the lot behind the first lot layer and
which includes that portion of the building which enfronts the thoroughfare.
      SERVICE AREA. The portion of a property or a building exclusively
dedicated to service in the form of shipping and receiving, trash and recycling
collection and storage, housing of mechanical equipment, and outdoor storage
areas.
      SETBACK. The area of a lot measured from the lot line to a building
facade or to a building elevation that is maintained clear of permanent
structures, with the exception of encroachments (Variant: BUILD-TO-LINE).
      SHOPFRONT FRONTAGE. A type of private frontage most conventional for
retail use, with substantial glazing, wherein the building facade is aligned
close to the frontage line with the building entrance at sidewalk grade.
      SIDEWALK. The paved section of a public frontage that is dedicated
exclusively to pedestrian activity (Synonym: WALKWAY).
      SIGN BAND. A wall area of a non-residential building built along the
entire width of a principal frontage or a secondary frontage, allocated for the
placement of a sign above a shopfront or at the cornice.
      SQUARE. A civic space designed for unstructured recreation and civic
purposes, spatially defined by building frontages, and consisting of paths,
lawns, and trees, formally disposed.
      STOOP FRONTAGE. A type of private frontage, most conventional for
residential use, wherein the building facade is aligned close to the frontage
line with the first story elevated from the sidewalk for privacy, with an
exterior stair and a landing at the entrance.
      STORY. A habitable level within a building by which height is measured,
but excluding an attic or a raised basement.
      STREETSCREEN. A freestanding wall built along the frontage line, or co-
planar with a building facade (Synonym: STREETWALL).
      TERMINATED VISTA. A location at the axial conclusion of a thoroughfare.
      TERRACE FRONTAGE. A type of private frontage wherein the building facade
is set back from the frontage line by an elevated terrace or a sunken
lightwell. This type buffers residential use from urban sidewalks and it also
removes the private yard from public encroachment (Synonym: LIGHTWELL).
      THIRD LOT LAYER. That portion of the lot that is not within the first and
second lot layer and is least visible from the thoroughfare.
      THOROUGHFARE. A way for use by vehicular traffic and pedestrian traffic
and to provide access to lots and civic spaces, consisting of vehicular lanes
and the public frontage.
      VARIANCE. A ruling that would permit a practice that is inconsistent with
either a specific provision or the intent of this section.
      WARRANT. A ruling that would permit a practice that is not consistent
with a specific provision of this section but is justified by its intent.
      WINDOW SIGN. A logo inscribed on the storefront glass.
   Diagram 1. Transect Zone Descriptions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7831.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7833.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7835.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7837.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7839.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7841.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7843.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7845.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7847.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7849.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7851.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7853.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7855.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7857.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7859.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7861.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7863.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7865.png]
 
(Ord. OR-2262-22, passed 6-27-22; Am. Ord. OR-2277-22, passed 10-24-22; Am.
Ord. OR-2357-24, passed 4-8-24)
SPECIFIC USE PERMIT, SPECIAL EXCEPTION AND OTHER PERMITS
§ 155.080 SPECIFIC USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Purpose. To provide for uses that require special consideration in
certain settings or are of a public or semi-public character often essential or
desirable for the general convenience and welfare of the community, which
without specific consideration may have possible adverse impact on neighboring
properties.
   (B)   Permit required. A building permit or certificate of occupancy shall
not be issued for any use to be located in a zoning district which permits that
use only as a specific use permit unless the specific use permit has first been
approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Application procedure. An application for a specific use permit shall
be filed with the Planning Department in accordance with procedures as set
forth in §
155.115 for zoning ordinance amendment.
   (D)   Site plan requirements. The site plan shall provide the following
information:
      (1)   A complete signed application as provided by the Planning
Department or on the city's website at: www.mansfield-tx.gov.
      (2)   The appropriate fee in accordance with the current fee schedule
adopted by City Council.
      (3)   On a separate 8½" X 11" exhibit, provide a metes and bounds
description of the property included in the zoning change request, including
the total acreage, signed and sealed by a registered surveyor.
      (4)   On a separate 24" X 36" or 22" X 34" sheet, drawn at the same scale
as the plan, show the approximate topography of the plan area, all water
courses that will remain in a natural state, 100-year floodway and 100-year
floodplain per FEMA and other hydraulic and hydrologic studies as necessary.
Provide two copies.
      (5)   On a separate 24" X 36" or 22" X 34" sheet, drawn at the same scale
as the plan, show proposed and existing water and sanitary sewer locations.
Also include the locations and sizes of private water and sanitary sewer lines.
Provide two copies.
      (6)   A separate exhibit and documents indicating the traffic volumes,
turning movements, evaluation of ingress and egress existing and proposed, when
required by the City Engineer.
      (7)   An electronic copy of the plan in accordance with current
established policy.
      (8)   Copies of the plan shall be submitted to the city in the manner
specified by the most current submittal policies. The plan must be drawn to an
acceptable size and scale and must indicate all significant features of the
proposed development to include:
         (a)   A vicinity map locating the property in relationship to existing
major thoroughfares.
         (b)   Title block, preferably in the lower right-hand corner,
including the following: "Site Plan for SUP, name of development, survey and
abstract number or recorded plat information, city, county, state, date of
preparation, acreage and number of lots".
         (c)   Acceptable scale: 1" = 20', 1" = 40', 1" = 100' or as approved.
         (d)   Type size is legible at full scale and when reduced.
         (e)   North arrow, graphic and written scale in close proximity.
         (f)   Name, address, phone and fax of owner/developer and the firm
preparing the plan.
         (g)   A map showing the boundary dimensions.
         (h)   Adjacent or surrounding land uses, zoning, streets, drainage
facilities and other existing or proposed off-site improvements, sufficient to
demonstrate the relationship and compatibility of the site to the surrounding
properties, uses and facilities.
         (i)   The location and size of all streets, alleys, parking lots and
parking spaces, loading areas or other areas to be used for vehicular traffic
and the proposed access and connection to existing or proposed streets adjacent
to the plan area. Include a chart indicating the number of required parking
spaces by use, the method of calculation and the number of proposed parking
spaces.
         (j)   The types of surfacing, such as paving (e.g. concrete, brick,
turf, etc.) to be used at the various locations.
         (k)   The location and size of all fire lanes with all curb radii
adjacent to the fire lane labeled. The nearest fire hydrant dimensioned to the
property corner and all proposed fire hydrants.
         (l)   The location, height, setbacks and minimum floor areas for all
buildings, and if non-residential, the floor ratio. Include the following
building details for non single-family developments:
            1.   Entrance and exits to the building.
            2.   Architectural renderings or elevations of proposed structures
with all exterior materials for roofs, awnings, walls etc. labeled.
            3.   Calculations of the masonry content on each facade and in
total for each building. (Example: Area of front facade = h x l, percent
masonry = 80%)
            4.   Distance between buildings and distance from building to
property lines.
         (m)   The number, location, and dimensions of the lots; and the
setbacks, number of dwelling units, and number of units per acre (density). A
graphic showing a typical lot layout with size and setbacks.
         (n)   The location of all on-site facilities for liquid waste or
method of temporary storage pending disposal, including existing or proposed
septic fields.
         (o)   The location, size and type of each outside facility for waste
or trash disposal. If no facility is shown, provide a note indicating method of
disposal and removal.
         (p)   A tree survey locating all protected trees by type, size and
species and mitigation plan, if required by the city's Natural Resources
Management ordinance. (Refer to the Tree Preservation Application as found on
the city's website.)
         (q)   A landscape plan showing all landscape setbacks and buffers;
parking lot landscaping; and any additional landscaping proposed. A chart
indicating the size, length and width of the landscape areas, with the required
number of plants and the proposed number of plants should be included on the
plan. The landscape plan may be presented on a separate exhibit on the same
sheet size and at the same scale as the site plan.
         (r)   The approximate location and size of greenbelt, open, common, or
recreation areas, the proposed use of such areas, and whether they are to be
used for public or private use. If private, indicate the proposed ownership.
         (s)   The approximate location and size of required Parkland
Dedication areas, as required by the city's Parkland Dedication ordinance for
residential development.
         (t)   The location, type, and size of all fences, berms, or screening
features.
         (u)   A plan, including elevations, showing location, size, height,
orientation and design of all signs regulated by the city's sign ordinance.
         (v)   The location, size and type of all pedestrian areas, bike paths
and sidewalks.
         (w)   The location, size, type and purpose of any outside storage or
outside display and method of screening. Indicate the percentage of outside
storage as compared to the building square footage.
         (x)   Phases of development should be shown and labeled. Provide a
development schedule indicating the start and finish date of each phase and
improvements, broken down by use and acreage.
         (y)   When deemed necessary, the Planning and Zoning Commission or
City Council may ask for more information during the review of a specific use
permit. Likewise, they may waive some of the information if the application is
a simple request to deviate from the existing zoning category on the property.
         (z)   If applicable, show the following mandatory Owners Association
notes:
            1.   A mandatory Owners Association will be responsible for the
maintenance of the "insert list of private amenities and common areas here".
(Example: screening fences, common areas, parks, amenity centers, landscaping,
etc.)
            2.   The Owners Association and associated documents shall be filed
in accordance with the City of Mansfield policies. These documents must be
reviewed by the City Attorney prior to filing the final plat. The documents
shall be filed with the final plat at Tarrant County when deemed necessary by
the Attorney. The documents shall be submitted in a timely manner to allow for
a minimum of 60 days review. Failure to submit the documents or incomplete
documents may result in delay of construction, acceptance of the subdivision or
delay in approval of a building permit. The city does not accept the
responsibility for any delays in construction, approval or acceptance of the
subdivision caused by the failure to submit the association documents or the
inaccuracy of the documents.
   (E)   Public hearings. The notification and public hearing process for a
specific use permit is set forth in § 155.115.
   (F)   Conditions for approval. A specific use permit shall be issued only if
all of the following conditions have been found:
      (1)   That the specific use permit will be compatible with and not
injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property, nor significantly
diminish or impair property values within the immediate vicinity;
      (2)   That the establishment of the specific use permit will not impede
the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding vacant
property;
      (3)   That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary
supporting facilities have been or will be provided;
      (4)   The design, location and arrangement of all driveways and parking
spaces provides for the safe and convenient movement of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic without adversely affecting the general public or adjacent
developments;
      (5)   That adequate nuisance prevention measures have been or will be
taken to prevent or control offensive odor, fumes, dust, noise and vibration;
      (6)   That directional lighting will be provided so as not to disturb or
adversely affect neighboring properties; and
      (7)   That there is sufficient landscaping and screening to insure
harmony and compatibility with adjacent property.
   (G)   Additional conditions.
      (1)   The City Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend to the City
Council that certain safeguards and conditions concerning the operation,
setbacks, ingress and egress, off-street parking and loading arrangements,
landscaping and screening location, construction of buildings and uses, term
limits, etc. be required.
      (2)   The City Council may, in the interest of the public welfare and to
assure compliance with the intent of this chapter, require such development
standards and operational conditions and safeguards as are indicated to be
important to the welfare and protection of adjacent property and the community
as a whole.
   (H)   Time limit. A specific use permit issued under this section shall be
valid for a period of two years from the date of issuance and shall become null
and void unless construction or use is substantially underway during said two-
year period, or unless an extension of time is approved by the City Council.
   (I)   Revocation. A specific use permit may be revoked or modified, after
notice and hearing, for either of the following reasons:
      (1)   The specific use permit was obtained or extended by fraud or
deception; or
      (2)   That one or more of the conditions imposed by the City Council has
not been met or has been violated.
   (J)   Amendments. The Director of Planning and Development may approve minor
variations or revisions from the original specific use permit which do not
increase density, change traffic patterns, or result in any increase in
external impact on adjacent properties or neighborhoods. The Director of
Planning may refer any variation or revision that warrants special
consideration to the City Council for its review. If, in the City Council's
determination, the variation or revision does not constitute a significant
change to a specific use permit, no public hearing will be called and the
revision will be deemed approved. The City Council in its sole discretion may
direct any revision to a specific use permit to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for its review and recommendation and, in such event, said revision
shall follow the procedures set out in §
155.115 herein regarding amendments to the zoning ordinance.
   (K)   Processing fee. A processing fee shall be required for the processing
of each specific use permit request in accordance to the fee schedule ordinance
of the city.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86; Am. Ord. OR-2189-20, passed 10-26-20)
§ 155.081 TEMPORARY USES.
   (A)   Purpose. Certain temporary uses of land are essential to the full
development and utilization of the land for its lawful purpose. The temporary
uses hereinafter enumerated shall not be deemed violations of this chapter when
made under the conditions herein provided.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The permissible temporary uses, the conditions of use
and the zoning districts wherein the same shall be permitted are as follows:
      (1)   Uses allowed in all districts.
         (a)   Construction office. Temporary field or construction offices and
temporary building material storage areas to be used solely for on premise
construction purposes in connection with the property on which they are erected
or within the same platted subdivision may be permitted for specific periods of
time, not to exceed 12 months at a time, in accordance with a permit issued by
the Building Official for cause shown. Such temporary uses shall be
discontinued by the order of the Building Official and in no event shall such
temporary uses continue to exist on the premises after the construction for
which they were erected is completed.
         (b)   Special events. Special events such as shows, exhibitions,
contests, parades, or any outdoor fundraising events or promotions shall only
be permitted when a temporary use permit has been granted by the City Council;
however, in no case shall such events be allowed in excess of seven consecutive
days. Such uses shall be subject to any special conditions imposed by the City
Council for the protection of public interest and welfare of the community.
      (2)   Uses allowed in all residential districts.
         (a)   Real estate sales office. Temporary field real estate sales
offices may be permitted in residential subdivisions for specific periods of
time when approved by the Building Official. Such temporary uses may be located
in a "Model Home" or a portable building within the subdivision, but shall be
discontinued by the order of the Building Official, and in no event shall such
temporary use continue to exist after the subdivision or the increment of same
in which the use is located shall have been occupied or sold in excess of 90%.
      (3)   Uses allowed in C-2, C-3, I-1 and I-2 districts.
         (a)   Carnival or amusement rides. The City Council upon receipt of an
application, may issue a permit for temporary carnival or amusement rides. In
authorizing such permit, the City Council may impose certain reasonable
conditions to protect the public interest and welfare of the community and may
stipulate that such permit shall be effective for an indefinite term.
Thereafter, the holder of such permit may periodically engage in such use with
the approval of the Building Official without further City Council action
provided:
            1.   The Building Official shall be given not less than ten days
notice of any proposed operations under the permit.
            2.   Such operations shall not be conducted for more than eight
consecutive days at a time.
            3.   Such use shall not be engaged more than twice in a 12 month
period.
            4.   Such use shall conform to all City Council imposed conditions
of the permit, including location, hours of operation, and the number and type
of rides and concessions.
            5.   The City Council may terminate the permit at any time.
         (b)   Temporary tent sales or assembly. Temporary tent sales by retail
establishments or tent assemblies by city recognized public or semi-public
organizations may be permitted by the Building Official for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Such temporary uses shall be discontinued by the order of the
Building Official and in no event shall such temporary uses be allowed in
excess of 30 days or more than once a year. All tent sales or assemblies shall
meet the special conditions, if any, imposed by the Building Official and Fire
Marshal for the protection of public interest and welfare of the community. No
tent or similar structure shall be erected in any required yard setbacks or
designated easements.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.082 SPECIAL EXCEPTION.
   (A)   Purpose. Certain uses are classified as special exceptions and may be
permitted in designated districts when specifically authorized by this section
after approval by the Board of Adjustment. Such special exceptions may be
granted in order that the city may develop, in accordance with the intent and
purpose of this chapter, that land may be fully utilized for a lawful purpose,
and that substantial justice may be done.
   (B)   Application required. An application for a special exception shall be
filed with the Planning Department. A building permit or certificate of
occupancy shall not be issued for any use designated herein unless an
application for special exception has first been approved in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. The application shall be accompanied by a site
plan, which, along with the application, will become a part of the special
exception, if approved. The accompanying site plan shall be drawn to scale and
provide the following information:
      (1)   A description of the proposed land use, building or structure;
      (2)   The lot configuration with dimensions, indicating property lines,
setbacks, easements, drainage ways, and boundary street(s);
      (3)   The dimension and location of the proposed building or structure,
and any other existing buildings or structures on the property;
      (4)   The square footage of the proposed building or structure; and
      (5)   If the proposed building is intended to be a replacement of a
previous building or structure, the dimension, location and square footage of
the previous building or structure.
   (C)   Processing fee. A fee shall be required for application for special
exception in accordance with the fee schedule ordinance of the city, except for
uses listed in division (E)(1) of this section, for which no fee shall be
required.
   (D)   Public hearings. The notification and public hearing process to
consider the application for a special exception shall be as set forth in §
155.113.
   (E)   Authorized special exceptions. The following uses may be allowed as
special exceptions subject to full and complete compliance with all conditions
herein provided, together with such other conditions as the Board of Adjustment
may impose.
      (1)   The replacement or reconstruction of a dwelling unit that has a
lawful nonconforming use status due to non-compliance with the minimum floor
area requirement of the PR or residential district where it is located that was
damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or other calamity to the extent that the
cost of the reconstruction or repair exceeds 50% of the replacement cost of the
structure.
         (a)   Conditions of approval.
            1.   The dwelling unit being replaced or reconstructed must have
been built before October 5, 1995;
            2.   The dwelling unit being replaced or reconstructed conforms
with §
155.054;
            3.   The floor area in the replacement or reconstructed dwelling
unit shall not be less than the floor area in the dwelling unit immediately
before the structural damage or destruction;
            4.   The replacement or reconstructed dwelling unit shall not cause
a greater nonconformity to the setback regulations of the zoning district where
it is located than the previous dwelling unit immediately before the structural
damage or destruction; and
            5.   The granting of the special exception does not change the
essential character or appearance of the neighborhood, or diminish or impair
property values within the neighborhood.
      (2)   The placement of heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning (HVAC)
equipment on the ground or on the roof in such a way that the equipment is
visible from the street abutting the property where the equipment is located or
from the boundary of the abutting property.
         (a)   Conditions of approval.
            1.   The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception if it
finds that there is no negative impact to the abutting property or traveling
public and that the cost to visually screen the equipment from the abutting
property or street on higher elevation is unreasonable or unfeasible.
      (3)   The placement of trash container or storage area for refuse or
material awaiting disposal or recycling in such a way that the container or
storage area is visible from the street abutting the property where the trash
container or storage area is located or from the boundary of the abutting
property.
         (a)   Conditions of approval.
            1.   The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception if it
finds that there is no negative impact to the abutting property or traveling
public and that the cost to visually screen the equipment from the abutting
property or street on higher elevation is unreasonable or unfeasible.
      (4)   The reduction or waiver of the required screening for a non-
residential use that abuts property in a residential zoning classification.
         (a)   Conditions of approval.
            1.   The non-residential use must be located on properties owned
and used by the city, Mansfield Independent School District or any church.
            2.   The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception if it
finds that there is no negative impact to the abutting property.
      (5)   A reduction of the 80% minimum masonry construction requirement or
deviation from the masonry material construction requirement imposed on all
dwelling units within any SF, Single-Family Residential or 2F, Two-Family
Residential Districts.
         (a)   Conditions of approval.
            1.   The proposed construction must accommodate architectural
features which are integral to the building design;
            2.   All alternate construction materials must have the same
durability as masonry; and
            3.   The granting of the special exception must not diminish or
impair property values within the neighborhood.
      (6)   An increase in the maximum allowable area or height, or a reduction
of the minimum setback requirements for accessory buildings or structures.
         (a)   Conditions of approval.
            1.   No special exception may be granted by the Board of Adjustment
unless the building or structure is to be located on a lot of 12,000 square
feet in size or larger.
            2.   The Board may grant an increase in building area provided that
the total building area resulting from the approval of the special exception
shall not exceed 4% of the square footage of the lot.
            3.   For properties of 20,000 square feet in size or larger, the
Board may grant an increase in height up to 35 Maximum.
            4.   The Board may grant a reduction in the minimum required
setbacks to allow an accessory building to be located no closer than five feet
from the side property line and seven and one-half feet from the rear property
line, unless the accessory building or structure is intended to house or
contain livestock, in which case the setbacks established in §
155.099(B)(12) shall apply.
            5.   To grant a special exception, the Board must find that there
will be no negative impact to the abutting properties.
      (7)   Temporary batch plants.
         (a)   The Board of Adjustment may grant a reduction in the minimum
300-foot setback from any park, school, child care center, or residential
structure.
         (b)   The Board may allow a temporary batch plant to be located on the
property more than 120 days until a single project is completed.
         (c)   To grant a special exception, the Board must find that there
will be no permanent negative impact to the surrounding properties.
      (8)   The construction of an accessory building attached to a main
residential building by means other than a continuous assembly and common attic
on single-family residential property.
         (a)   Conditions of approval.
            1.   The proposed construction must accommodate architectural
features which are integral to the main residential building design;
            2.   The attached accessory building and main residential building
together shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage allowed by the regulations
of the zoning district in which the property is located;
            3.   The attached accessory building shall be constructed of the
predominant building materials used on the main residential building;
            4.   To grant a special exception, the Board must find that there
will be no negative impact to the abutting properties.
   Examples of semi-attached accessory buildings
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7528.png]
Semi-attached building without architectural      Semi-attached building with
architectural
features integral to the main residential building      features integral to
the main residential building
design - attachment to house is by a simple      design - attachment to house
features arches,
breezeway.                  multi-level roofline, and dormer window.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86; Am. Ord. OR-2323-23, passed 10-9-23; Am. Ord. OR-
2324-23, passed 10-9-23)
§ 155.083 INDUSTRIAL USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Purpose. To provide for industrial uses that require special
consideration in certain settings, which without specific consideration may
have possible adverse impact on neighboring properties.
   (B)   Permit required. A building permit or certificate of occupancy shall
not be issued for any use which is permitted only by an industrial use permit
unless the industrial use permit has first been approved in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and the use has met all the conditions of approval.
   (C)   Application procedure. An application for an industrial use permit
shall be filed with the Planning Department. Upon receiving a complete
application, the Director of Planning will submit it to the City Council for
public hearing and consideration.
   (D)   Site plan requirements. The site plan shall provide the following
information:
      (1)   A complete signed application as provided by the Planning
Department or on the city's website at: www.mansfieldtexas.gov.
      (2)   The appropriate fee in accordance with the current fee schedule
adopted by City Council.
      (3)   On a separate 8½" X 11" exhibit, provide a metes and bounds
description of the property included in the zoning change request, including
the total acreage, signed and sealed by a registered surveyor.
      (4)   On a separate 24" X 36" or 22" X 34" sheet, drawn at the same scale
as the plan, show the approximate topography of the plan area, all water
courses that will remain in a natural state, 100-year floodway and 100-year
floodplain per FEMA and other hydraulic and hydrologic studies as necessary.
Provide two copies.
      (5)   On a separate 24" X 36" or 22" X 34" sheet, drawn at the same scale
as the plan, show proposed and existing water and sanitary sewer locations.
Also include the locations and sizes of private water and sanitary sewer lines.
Provide two copies.
      (6)   A separate exhibit and documents indicating the traffic volumes,
turning movements, evaluation of ingress and egress existing and proposed, when
required by the City Engineer.
      (7)   An electronic copy of the plan in accordance with current
established policy.
      (8)   Copies of the plan shall be submitted to the city in the manner
specified by the most current submittal policies. The plan must be drawn to an
acceptable size and scale and must indicate all significant features of the
proposed development to include:
         (a)   A vicinity map locating the property in relationship to existing
major thoroughfares.
         (b)   Title block, preferably in the lower right-hand corner,
including the following: "Site Plan for SUP, name of development, survey and
abstract number or recorded plat information, city, county, state, date of
preparation, acreage and number of lots".
         (c)   Acceptable scale: 1" = 20', 1" = 40', 1" = 100' or as approved.
         (d)   Type size is legible at full scale and when reduced.
         (e)   North arrow, graphic and written scale in close proximity.
         (f)   Name, address, phone and fax of owner/developer and the firm
preparing the plan.
         (g)   A map showing the boundary dimensions.
         (h)   Adjacent or surrounding land uses, zoning, streets, drainage
facilities and other existing or proposed off-site improvements, sufficient to
demonstrate the relationship and compatibility of the site to the surrounding
properties, uses and facilities.
         (i)   The location and size of all streets, alleys, parking lots and
parking spaces, loading areas or other areas to be used for vehicular traffic
and the proposed access and connection to existing or proposed streets adjacent
to the plan area. Include a chart indicating the number of required parking
spaces by use, the method of calculation and the number of proposed parking
spaces.
         (j)   The types of surfacing, such as paving (e.g. concrete, brick,
turf, etc.) to be used at the various locations.
         (k)   The location and size of all fire lanes with all curb radii
adjacent to the fire lane labeled. The nearest fire hydrant dimensioned to the
property corner and all proposed fire hydrants.
         (l)   The location, height, setbacks and floor areas for all
buildings, the floor area ratio and the following building details:
            1.   Entrance and exits to the building.
            2.   Architectural renderings or elevations of proposed structures
with all exterior materials for roofs, awnings, walls etc. labeled.
            3.   Calculations of the masonry content on each facade and in
total for each building. (Example: Area of front facade = h x 1, percent
masonry = 80%)
            4.   Distance between buildings and distance from building to
property lines.
         (m)   The number, location, and dimensions of the lots.
         (n)   The location of all on-site facilities for liquid waste or
method of temporary storage pending disposal, including existing or proposed
septic fields.
         (o)   The location, size and type of each outside facility for waste
or trash disposal. If no facility is shown, provide a note indicating method of
disposal and removal.
         (p)   A tree survey locating all protected trees by type, size and
species and mitigation plan, if required by the city's Natural Resources
Management ordinance. (Refer to the Tree Preservation Application as found on
the city's website.)
         (q)   A landscape plan showing all landscape setbacks and buffers;
parking lot landscaping; and any additional landscaping proposed. A chart
indicating the size, length and width of the landscape areas, with the required
number of plants and the proposed number of plants should be included on the
plan. The landscape plan may be presented on a separate exhibit on the same
sheet size and at the same scale as the site plan.
         (r)   The location, type, and size of all fences, berms, or screening
features.
         (s)   A plan, including elevations, showing location, size, height,
orientation and design of all signs regulated by the city's sign ordinance.
         (t)   The location, size and type of all pedestrian areas and
sidewalks.
         (u)   The location, size, type and purpose of any outside storage or
outside display and method of screening. Indicate the percentage of outside
storage as compared to the building square footage.
         (v)   Phases of development should be shown and labeled. Provide a
development schedule indicating the start and finish date of each phase and
improvements, broken down by use and acreage.
         (w)   When deemed necessary, the City Council may ask for more
information during the review of an industrial use permit. Likewise, they may
waive some of the information if the application is a simple request to deviate
from the existing zoning category on the property.
   (E)   Public hearings. The notification and public hearing process for an
industrial use permit shall follow those for a specific use permit as set forth
in § 155.115(C).
   (F)   Conditions for approval. An industrial use permit shall be issued only
if all of the following conditions have been found:
      (1)   That the industrial use permit will be compatible with and not
injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property, nor significantly
diminish or impair property values within the immediate vicinity;
      (2)   That the establishment of the industrial use permit will not impede
the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding vacant
property;
      (3)   That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary
supporting facilities have been or will be provided;
      (4)   The design, location and arrangement of all driveways and parking
spaces provides for the safe and convenient movement of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic without adversely affecting the general public or adjacent
developments;
      (5)   That adequate nuisance or hazard prevention measures have been or
will be taken to prevent or control offensive odor, fumes, dust, noise and
vibration;
      (6)   That directional lighting will be provided so as not to disturb or
adversely affect neighboring properties; and
      (7)   That there is sufficient landscaping and screening to insure
harmony and compatibility with adjacent property.
   (G)   Additional conditions. The City Council may, in the interest of the
public welfare and to assure compliance with the intent of this chapter,
require additional development standards, operational conditions and safeguards
concerning items such as setbacks, ingress and egress, off-street parking and
loading arrangements, landscaping and screening, construction of buildings and
uses, term limits, air-quality and sewer pretreatment, security measures, and
federal and state permits that may be important to the welfare and protection
of adjacent property and the community as a whole.
   (H)   Time limit. An industrial use permit issued under this section shall
be valid for a period of two years from the date of issuance and shall become
null and void unless construction or use is substantially underway during said
two-year period, or unless an extension of time is approved by the City
Council.
   (I)   Revocation. An industrial use permit may be revoked or modified, after
notice and hearing, for either of the following reasons:
      (1)   The industrial use permit was obtained or extended by fraud or
deception; or
      (2)   That one or more of the conditions imposed by the City Council has
not been met or has been violated.
   (J)   Amendments. The Director of Planning may approve minor variations or
revisions from the original industrial use permit which do not increase
density, change traffic patterns, or result in any increase in external impact
on adjacent properties or neighborhoods. The Director of Planning may refer any
request for variation or revision that warrants special consideration to the
City Council for its review. If, in the City Council's determination, the
variation or revision does not constitute a significant change to the original
industrial use permit, no public hearing will be called and the revision will
be deemed approved. The City Council in its sole discretion may deny any
request for revision to an industrial use permit.
   (K)   Processing fee. A processing fee shall be required for the processing
of each industrial use permit request in accordance to the fee schedule
ordinance of the city.
   (L)   Limitation of re-applications. No new application for an industrial
use permit shall be heard for a particular parcel of property if within 12
months prior to the date of said application either an application was denied
by the City Council or an application was withdrawn after the giving of public
notice, and such new application currently under consideration includes
property which was all or a part of the previously denied or withdrawn case,
and the application currently under consideration is for the same or a more
intense use as determined by the city; however, on receipt of written request
by the original applicant stating how conditions have changed substantially in
the community since prior consideration of his proposal so as to justify an
earlier review of this matter, the City Council may waive the mandatory delay
period and authorize the acceptance of a new application.
   (M)   Postponement of public hearings at applicant's request. A request for
postponement of a scheduled public hearing on an application for industrial use
permit shall follow those for a specific use permit as set forth in §
155.115(F).
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86; Am. Ord. OR-2189-20, passed 10-26-20)
SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.090 SIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose. To establish regulations and minimum standards which directly
relate to the function of the signs and to the intensity of development of each
particular zoning district.
   (B)   Permit pequirements. No sign, unless herein excepted, shall be
located, constructed, attached, or painted until a building permit application
has been approved by the Planning Department and issued by the Development
Services Department in accordance with the requirements of this section.
   (C)   Sign classifications and definitions. As used in the schedule of sign
standards contained in Table §
155.090(D), the following sign construction types and definitions shall apply:
      (1)   Classifications.
         (a)   Wall sign. A sign which is attached or affixed to the wall of a
building or is an integral part of the wall of a building with the exposed face
of the sign in a plane parallel to and not more than 12 inches from said wall;
providing, however, that electric wall signs may project not more than 18
inches from said wall. A wall sign shall not extend above or beyond the
parallel face to which the sign is attached.
         (b)   Projection sign. A sign which is attached or affixed to a
building wall or structure other than a pole and extends or projects there from
a maximum of four feet.
         (c)   Pole sign. A sign supported by and placed upon not more than two
poles or standards. Extra poles or standards in excess of two may be added with
the approval of the Building Inspector.
         (d)   Directional sign. A temporary pole or ground sign that directs
vehicular traffic. The sign may display arrows, words, or other symbols to
indicate direction to the location of developments, subdivisions, model homes,
garage sales, neighborhood information or businesses.
         (e)   Reader board sign. A changeable copy sign with stripes or
devices attached to the face of the sign to hold readily movable letters and
numerals. The sign may be internally or externally illuminated.
         (f)   Ground sign. A sign which is supported by more than two columns,
poles, uprights or braces in or upon the ground and is not a part of a
building.
         (g)   Monument sign. A freestanding, low profile sign with a solid
base; any poles or supports must be concealed.
         (h)   Unified development sign. A freestanding sign that is supported
from the grade to the bottom of the sign with a solid base and is used to
identify multiple tenants within a unified development.
      (2)   Definitions.
         SIGN. Any object, device, structure, or part thereof, visible from
outdoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract
attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product,
service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures,
designs, symbols, banners, flags, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected
images. Definitions of particular functional and locational types of signs are
listed in this division.
            1.   ADVERTISING SIGN.A sign which is a primary use of land (not
accessory use) and which directs attention to a business, product, activity or
service which is not conducted, sold, offered or located on the premises where
the sign is located.
            2.   AGRICULTURAL SIGN.An accessory sign identifying the farm or
ranch on which it is placed and advertising the produce, crops, animals or
poultry raised or quartered thereon.
            3.   APARTMENT NAME SIGN. An accessory sign for the identification
of an apartment building or complex of apartment buildings and located on the
premises.
            4.   CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A temporary sign identifying the
development on the premises and/or the property owner, architect, contractor,
engineer, landscape architect, decorator or mortgagee engaged in the design,
construction or improvement of the premises on which the sign is located. A
real estate sign shall not be construed as a construction sign.
            5.   DEVELOPMENT SIGN. A temporary sign related to the promotion of
new development and located only on the premises involved in the development.
Builder or contractor names may be displayed on the sign provided that at least
50% of the sign area is devoted towards displaying the name or promotional
information of the development being advertised.
            6.   DIRECTORY SIGN. An accessory sign consisting of building
identification and business names of the individual tenants.
            7.   GENERAL BUSINESS SIGN. An accessory sign or graphic device
which advertises only commodities or services offered on the premises where
such sign is located and where such sign is not of the billboard, poster panel
or painted bulletin type but is a sign designed specifically for the location.
            8.   INSTITUTIONAL SIGN. An accessory sign, which provides public
interest information and/or advertisement related to a school, church or
similar public or quasi-public institution located on the same premise where
the sign is located.
            9.   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER (EMC). A sign that utilizes computer
generated messages or some other electronic means of changing copy.
            10.   NAME PLATE. An accessory sign showing only the name and/or
address of the owner or occupant of the premises on which it is erected or
placed.
            11.   REAL ESTATE SIGN. A temporary accessory sign pertaining to
the sale or rental of property and advertising property only for use for which
it is legally zoned.
            12.   POLITICAL SIGN. Shall be deemed to mean any sign erected for
the purpose of advertising a political candidate or ballot measure; espousing a
political cause; or expressing a person's or group's viewpoint or opinion on a
political issue.
            13.   TEMPORARY SIGN. A non-permanent sign which is intended to be
displayed for a short period of time only. The term temporary sign shall
include but not be limited to search lights, banners, bullhorns, pendants,
spinners, balloons, streamers or other kinds of wind signs. Specific permitting
and display standards for temporary signs are listed in division (K)(2) of this
section.
            14.   WIND SIGN. A temporary accessory sign, which achieves
movement and thus attracts attention by action of wind currents.
            15.   SIGN AREA. The entire area within a circle, triangle or
parallelogram enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem
or any figure of similar character, together with any frame or other material
or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the
sign from the background against which it is placed; excluding the necessary
supports or uprights on which such sign is placed. Where a sign has two or more
faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the
sign, except that where two faces are placed back to back and are at no point
more than two feet from one another, the area of the sign shall be taken as the
area of one face if the two faces are of equal area, or as the area of the
larger face if the two faces are of unequal area.
            16.   FLASHING SIGN. A sign or part thereof, operated so as to
create flashing, change in light intensity, color or copy or intermittent light
impulses more frequent than one every ten seconds and further provided that
electronic message centers as herein above defined shall not constitute
flashing signs. It is further provided that a sign which creates intermittent
light impulses which convey time of day and/or temperature only shall not
constitute a flashing sign.
            17.   SIGN HEIGHT. The measurement from the ground level to the
highest point of the sign.
            18.   LIGHTING. As the term is used in Table (D) hereof, the
illumination of a sign face by the light source exterior to and not a part of
such face or a source of light not exposed to the eye.
            19.   MOTION. As the term is used in Table (D) hereof, the moving
or rotating of a sign or portion thereof, or the giving of the perception of
motion, other than a electronic message center as herein above defined.
            20.   REQUIRED SETBACK. The distance from the property line, right-
of-way line or street curb of all streets adjacent to the premises on which a
sign is located.
            21.   SIGN STRUCTURE. Any part of a sign, including the base,
supporting columns or braces, display surface, or any other appendage thereto.
            22.   PORTABLE SIGN. A sign whose principal supporting structure is
intended, by design, use or construction, to be used by resting upon the ground
for support and which may be easily moved or relocated for reuse. Portable
signs shall include but not be limited to signs mounted upon or designed to be
mounted upon a trailer, bench, wheeled carrier or other non-motorized mobile
structure, with or without wheels, and A-frame and other similar signs, resting
or leaning on the ground or other structures, but not permanently attached
thereto.
            23.   KIOSK SIGN. A free-standing structure located in public
rights-of-way that features the City of Mansfield Identification Panel at the
top of each structure and displays directional information to new homes,
Mansfield Independent School District facilities, and municipal or community
events or facilities.
            24.   SIGN PANEL. An individual sign placard displaying directional
information on a kiosk sign.
            25.   SUBDIVISION SIGN. A sign located at the entrance of a
subdivision that displays the name of the subdivision.
            26.   NEIGHBORHOOD INFORMATION SIGN.  A temporary sign erected
within the boundaries of a platted residential subdivision at the subdivision
entrance or on homeowner's association lots for the sole purpose of providing
information to property owners concerning events within the subdivision.
            27.   WINDOW SIGN. Any sign that is plainly visible from the
outside of the building and located on either the external surface of the
window or on or within 25 inches of the internal surface of the window. This
definition does not apply to the display of building addresses, business hours
of operation, the logos of accepted credit cards, "closed" and "open" signs,
"for sale", "for lease", and similar real estate signs, and "now hiring" signs.
            28.   HUMAN SIGN. A sign held by or attached to a human being who
stands or walks on the ground at a business or other location. A human sign
includes a person dressed in a costume for the purpose of advertising or
otherwise drawing attention to an individual, business, commodity, service,
activity or product.
            29.   TEMPORARY REALTOR OPEN HOUSE DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A temporary
sign used for directing realtors and potential homebuyers to homes for sale
within the city which are open for public viewing.
            30.   INFLATABLE SIGN. A sign made from a non-porous bag or tube of
tough, light material, including fan-blown and lighter-than-air or gas filled
inflatable objects that may be connected with a tether, displaying graphics,
symbols or written copy, or a combination of graphics, symbols and written
copy.
            31.   BLADE BANNER SIGN. A sign made of non-rigid material such as
canvas or vinyl supported by a single vertical pole or frame mounted on the
ground, and shall include a feather, teardrop, wave or flag sign, or any sign
of similar construction and use.
   (D)   Schedules of sign standards. No sign shall be erected, placed,
displayed or located except in accordance with the schedules of sign standards
contained in Table (D) and the provisions of divisions (E) through (K).
   Table (D): Schedule of Sign Standards
      (1)   Permanent signs.
                                                   Min.    Min.
                               Max.                Setback Setback
Type Zoning     Sign           Area   Max .  Max.  from    from     Max.
of   District   Classification in     Height Width Street  Side or  Quantity Lighting Flashing Motion Additional
Sign Where      Permitted      Square in     in    Right-  Rear     / Min.                            Regulations
     Permitted*                Feet   Feet   Feet  of-way  Property Spacing
                                                   Line in Line in
                                                   Feet ** Feet**
                                                             Min.    Min.
                                         Max.                Setback Setback
              Zoning      Sign           Area   Max .  Max.  from    from
Type of Sign  District    Classification in     Height Width Street  Side or  Max. Quantity  Lighting Flashing Motion Additional
              Where       Permitted      Square in     in    Right-  Rear     / Min. Spacing                          Regulations
              Permitted*                 Feet   Feet   Feet  of-way  Property
                                                             Line in Line in
                                                             Feet ** Feet**
                                                                              One per street
                                                                              frontage plus                           See notes (2)
Institutional All         M, W           50     10     10    10      15       one wall sign  Yes      No       No     (6) (7) (10) &
              Districts                                                       on the                                  (11)
                                                                              principal
                                                                              building
Apartment                                                                     One per street                          See notes (2)
name          MF-1, MF-2  M, W           50     10     10    10      15       entrance       Yes      No       No     (3) (4) (7)
                                                                                                                      (10) & (11)
Name plate    All         P, W           2      N/A    None  N/A     N/A      None           No       No       No     See note (6)
              Districts
                                                       See                    One per street                          See § 155.090
                          W              None   N/A    note  N/A     N/A      frontage per   Yes      No       Yes    ( E)
                                                       (1)                    individually
              C-1, C- 2,                                                      owned lot or
General       C-3, I-1,                                                       tract plus one
business      I-2                                                             wall sign per                           See notes (7)
                          M, PR          50     10     10    10      15       tenant who     Yes      No       Yes    (10) & (11)
                                                                              occupies such
                                                                              lot or tract

Advertising   C-3, I-1,   P,G            600    40     None  10      15       See § 155.090 Yes      No       Yes    See note (5)
              I-2                                                             ( F)
Agricultural  A           M, W           32     10     10    10      15       One per street No       No       No     See note (10)
                                                                              frontage
                                                                              One sign per
              All                                                             street                                  See notes (6)
Subdivision   Districts   M, W           32     6      10    N/A     N/A      entrance to    No       No       No     & (10)
                                                                              the
                                                                              subdivision
Directory     OP          M, W           32     6      10    10      15       One per street Yes      No       No     See notes (10)
                                                                              frontage                                & (11)
              All non-                   See
Window        residential N/A            note   N/A    N/A   N/A     N/A      N/A            Yes      No       No     Temporary
              districts                  (12)
Electronic
Message       C-2, C-3,                                                                                               See notes (8)
Center/       I-1, I-2    M              Limited to 50% of the sign area                                              (9) (10) &
Reader Board                                                                                                          (11)
Sign
NOTES:
1.   Width not to exceed 75% of building or store front.
2.   Permitted on face of fence or wall in required front setback.
3.   For building identification only.
4.   Not applicable to rental single-family or two-family dwellings.
5.   Specific use permit required.
6.   Signs permitted in residential districts are also permitted in the PR district.                               LEGEND:
7.   On lots with direct frontage along U.S. 287 and S.H. 360 monument signs may have a maximum height of 15 feet aM - Monument
a maximum sign area of 75 square feet. The sign must be located along the highway frontage of the lot.                sign
8.   Electronic message centers/reader boards may be used by institutional uses in any zoning district.            P - Pole sign
9.   Signs for theaters advertising current and coming attractions shall be exempt from the percentage restriction W - Wall sign
electronic message center and reader board signs.                                                                     G - Ground
10.   See § 155.099(K)(13) for further regulations on monument signs.                                             sign
11.   No freestanding sign may be located within 400 feet of another freestanding sign on the same lot or tract,   PR -
measured along the street right-of-way lines.                                                                         Projection
*   Signs in any Historic Landmark District must comply with the provisions and approval procedures shown in §    sign
155.069.
12.   The total sign area of window sign(s) shall not obscure more than 25% of the total window area on each facade.
Doors shall not contain signage for any message other than business name, hours of operation and payment method, and
such signage shall not exceed four square feet in total area.
**   Where the width of an easement is greater than the required setback, the sign must be located outside of the
easement.
 
      (2)   Temporary signs.
     Zoning                   Max.   Max.   Max.  Min.    Min.    Max.
Type District  Sign           Area   Height Width Front   Side    Quantity/                          Max.     Additional
of   Where     Classification in     in     in    Setback Setback Min.      Lighting Flashing Motion Duration Regulations
Sign Permitted Permitted      Square Feet   Feet  in Feet in Feet Spacing
                              Feet
             Zoning                     Max.   Max.   Max.  Min.    Min.    Max.
             District    Sign           Area   Height Width Front   Side    Quantity/                            Max.         Additional
Type of Sign Where       Classification in     in     in    Setback Setback Min.        Lighting Flashing Motion Duration     Regulations
             Permitted   Permitted      Square Feet   Feet  in Feet in Feet Spacing
                                        Feet
             All
             Residential P, W, G        16     6      None  10      15      One per 60' No       No       No
             Districts                                                      of street                            Temporary -  See notes
Real Estate                                                                 frontage;                            Until sale   (1) (4) &
             All Non-                                                       maximum two                          or rental of (11)
             residential P, W, G        32     12     None  10      15      per street  Yes      No       No     property
             Districts                                                      frontage

             All                                                                                                 Temporary -
             Residential P, W, G        32     12     None  10      15                                           Until        See note
             Districts                                                                                           construction (4) & (5)
                                                                                                                 is completed
                                                                                                                 Temporary -
                                                                            One per                              Until
Construction                                                                site or     Yes      No       No     certificate
             All Non-                                                       street                               of occupancy
             residential P, W, G        32     12     None  10      15      frontage                             is issued,   See note
             Districts                                                                                           or until     (5) & (6)
                                                                                                                 multi-tenant
                                                                                                                 developments
                                                                                                                 are 75%
                                                                                                                 complete
                                                                            Maximum two                          Temporary    See notes
Development  All         P, G           100    20     None  10      15      per         Yes      No       No     for duration (2) (3) &
             Districts                                                      developm                             of permit    (4)
                                                                            ent
             All Non-                   See                                                                                   See note
Window       residential N/A            note   N/A    N/A   N/A     N/A     N/A         Yes      No       No     Temporary    (9)
             Districts                  (9)
                                                                            Two signs
                                                                            per street
                                                                            entrance to
                                                                            a
                                                                            residential
                                                                            subdivisio
                                                                            n; maximum
             All                                                            of three                                          See notes
Neighborhood Residential P, G           4      3      None  None    None    signs on    No       No       No     Temporary    (4) (7) &
Information  Districts                                                      any Homeown                                       (8)
                                                                            er's
                                                                            Associatio
                                                                            n lot with
                                                                            a minimum
                                                                            50'
                                                                            distance
                                                                            between
                                                                            signs
Political    All         All            36     8      None  None    None    N/A         No       No       No     Temporary    See note
             Districts                                                                                                        (10)
NOTES:
1.   Size limited to 4 square feet on occupied residential property.
2.   For new residential subdivisions only.
3.   Must be setback at least 50 feet from the nearest single-family home.
4.   Signs permitted in residential districts are also permitted in the PR district.
5.   For developments larger than 25 acres, one additional sign may be added for each 25 acres.
6.   See §                                                                                                   LEGEND:
155.090(K)(14) for further regulations on non-residential construction signs.                                    M - Monument sign
7.   See §                                                                                                   P - Pole sign
155.090(H) for further regulations on neighborhood information signs.                                            W - Wall sign
8.   Properties in a PR district that are occupied by a residential use or subdivision shall be treated the saG - Ground sign
as it is in a residential district.                                                                              PR - Projection sign
9.   The total sign area of window sign(s) shall not obscure more than 25% of the total window area on each
facade.
10.   These regulations only pertain to political signs on private property; see §
155.090(K)(7) for regulations pertaining to political signs on public property, easement or right-of-way.
11.   See §
155.090(K)(16) for further regulations on real estate signs.
 
   (E)   Special sign standards for multi-tenant office or retail strip
buildings. One additional wall sign may be permitted for a business at the
corner or end of a multi-tenant office or retail strip building subject to the
following regulations:
      (1)   The additional wall sign shall be located on the side facade of the
multi-tenant office or retail strip building. The side facade shall be defined
as any facade that is at an angle of more than 45 degrees to the front facade.
The front facade shall be defined as the facade on which most of the tenant
spaces have their main entrances.
      (2)   The additional wall sign shall not be allowed on the following:
         (a)   On the rear facade of a multi-tenant office or retail strip
building;
         (b)   On any facade that is parallel or nearly parallel to the front
facade of the multi-tenant office or retail strip building; or
         (c)   On any facade that faces an abutting residential zoning district
or an abutting PR zoning district occupied by single-family homes.
      (3)   The location of an additional wall sign on an irregular or non-
traditional shape building shall require the approval of the Zoning
Administrator for compliance with the intent of this section of the zoning
ordinance.
      (4)   The size of the additional wall sign shall not exceed the size of
the primary sign on the front facade of the tenant space; and in no case shall
the additional wall sign exceed 75% of the width of the wall or store front on
which the additional wall sign is placed.
      (5)   The additional wall sign shall be located on the tenant space
served by the sign.
      (6)   The additional wall sign shall only advertise a single tenant.
      (7)   The additional wall sign shall not co-exist with any other signs on
the same building facade that advertise other tenants or the multi-tenant
office or retail strip building.
   (F)   Special standards for advertising signs.
      (1)   Advertising sign structures erected in the C-3, I-1 and I-
2 Districts shall be placed a minimum of 400 feet apart when erected so as to
face the same direction. No such structure shall be located within 400 feet of
a residential zoning district boundary line if the face of the sign is placed
at an angle of less than 90 degrees to the district boundary line, nor shall
such structure be located within 200 feet of a general business sign (i.e. pole
sign or ground sign).
      (2)   Advertising sign structures erected in the C-3, I-1 and I-
2 Districts placed within 600 feet of the right-of-way of a state or federally
controlled highway or freeway shall be permitted when in compliance with the
following:
         (a)   Placed a minimum of 500 feet from any interchange or
intersection.
         (b)   Placed a minimum of 500 feet from any other advertising sign on
the same side of the highway or freeway and 200 feet from any general business
sign, pole sign or wall sign (on premise).
         (c)   Placed no closer than 500 feet to any park, forest, playground
or scenic area as designated by a governmental agency having and exercising
such authority, which is adjacent to any highway.
      (3)   Review of advertising signs. Prior to the issuance of a sign permit
by the Development Services Department, a sign permit application for an
advertising sign shall be submitted, reviewed and approved for a specific use
permit by both the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council.
Additionally, applicants proposing advertising signs shall obtain an Outdoor
Advertising License from the Texas Department of Transportation, prior to the
issuance of any sign permits for advertising signs in compliance with the
Federal Highway Beautification Act of 1965.
      (4)   Before the issuance of a sign permit, an Outdoor Advertising
License shall be obtained for an off-site development sign from the Texas
Department of Transportation by the sign owner in compliance with the Federal
Highway Beautification Act of 1965.
   (G)   Special sign standards for unified development signs.
      (1)   Eligible properties. A unified development sign may be erected in
the C-2, C-3, I-1, or I-2 District for a unified development consisting of two
or more abutting platted lots that are used for a retail center or a
combination of retail/commercial establishments.
      (2)   Criteria for approval. In determining whether to approve multiple
lots as a unified development, the Director of Planning must find that the
following criteria have been met:
         (a)   All areas to be included in a unified development must be part
of a clearly defined, comprehensively planned retail/commercial development.
Attributes of a unified development include:
            1.   Common name identification to the public;
            2.   Shared driveway access and parking; and
            3.   Physical layout of the development results in a cohesive
development.
         (b)   A unified development shall consist of at least ten acres.
         (c)   At least one of the lots being included in a unified development
must have frontage on U.S. 287 or State Highway 360.
         (d)   The area shall not be the combination of disparate premises
joined solely for the purpose of erecting a unified development sign.
         (e)   Developments that are comprised of a single retail/commercial
establishment shall not be considered as a unified development.
         (f)   Developments that are comprised of predominantly office or
industrial uses shall not be considered as a unified development.
         (g)   There shall be no existing or future pole signs or ground signs
within the unified development.
      (3)   Maximum sign area. The maximum area of a unified development sign
shall be based on the size of the unified development as depicted in the table
below:
 
Minimum Size of Unified Development Maximum Area of Unified Development Sign
10 to 19.99 acres                   100 sq. ft.
20 to 29.99 acres                   200 sq. ft.
30 acres or more                    300 sq. ft.
 
      In addition to the maximum sign area listed above, an additional sign
area of 50 square feet shall be allowed on a unified development sign to
display the name of the unified development.
      (4)   Maximum height. The maximum height of a unified development sign
shall be 35 feet.
      (5)   Minimum setback. The minimum setback for a unified development sign
shall be as follows:
         (a)   Ten feet from the street right-of-way line.
         (b)   Fifteen feet from the side or rear lot line.
         (c)   Where the width of an easement is greater than the required
setback, the sign must be located outside of the easement.
      (6)   Maximum quantity. Only one unified development sign shall be
permitted per unified development. Deviation from this requirement shall be
accomplished only through an approved planned development.
      (7)   Co-existence with other signs.
         (a)   A unified development sign may be permitted on the same lot as a
monument sign and may co-exist with other monument signs in the unified
development provided that it shall not be closer than 30 feet to any monument
signs in the unified development.
         (b)   There must be no pole or ground signs within the unified
development. After the approval of a master sign plan and before the
construction of a unified development sign, all existing pole or ground signs
within a unified development must be removed.
      (8)   Master sign plan. Before obtaining a permit and erecting a unified
development sign, the applicant shall submit a master sign plan to the Planning
Department for review. A nonrefundable administration fee of $250 shall
accompany the plan submittal. The master sign plan shall contain the following
information:
         (a)   Name of the unified development;
         (b)   Site plan showing lots, street rights-of-way, driveway access,
parking, and physical layout of the development;
         (c)   Description of the unified development demonstrating compliance
with the criteria of approval shown in division (G)(2);
         (d)   The location, size, height and type of all proposed and existing
signs in the unified development;
         (e)   Any existing pole or ground signs that must be removed and the
consent of the sign owner for the removal; and
         (f)   Any other information required by the Director of Planning to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this section.
      (9)   Approval and appeal process.
         (a)   The Director of Planning shall be responsible for the approval
of a proposed master sign plan and unified development sign.
         (b)   Any decision made by the Director may be appealed to the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
         (c)   The Director may defer the approval of a unified development, a
master sign plan or a unified development sign to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for any reason.
         (d)   Any decision made by the Planning and Zoning Commission may be
appealed to the City Council.
      (10)   Sign permit issuance. A permit for a unified development sign
shall not be issued until construction starts on the first building within the
unified development.
      (11)   Miscellaneous provisions.
         (a)   The unified development sign shall be located outside of any
visibility sight triangle and access drives.
         (b)   The support base and structure for a unified development sign
shall be constructed of masonry material.
         (c)   Electrical equipment, irrigation equipment, controller, writing
or conduit on a unified development sign shall be concealed within the unified
development sign base or sign structure, except that emergency power
disconnects may be located on the exterior of the sign provided that they are
located on the part of the sign opposite and furthest from the street.
         (d)   The bottom of the unified development sign shall rest directly
on the support base with no space in between.
         (e)   The base of the unified development sign shall have the same or
greater width as the sign.
         (f)   Only those properties and businesses within the boundaries of
the unified development shall be included on the unified development sign.
         (g)   A unified development sign shall not be considered as an off-
site sign even if some of the properties and businesses included on the sign
are not located on the lot where the sign is erected.
   (H)   Special sign standards for neighborhood information signs.
Neighborhood information signs may be erected within the boundaries of a
platted residential subdivision without a permit provided the following
regulations are met:
      (1)   No neighborhood information signs shall be erected for a period of
time exceeding 14 days.
      (2)   All neighborhood information signs must be removed within 24 hours
after the event displayed on the sign.
      (3)   No signs advertising the private sale of goods, services or real
estate shall be allowed. Without limiting the foregoing, signs for garage sale
events are not neighborhood information signs and must be permitted under
division (J)(3).
      (4)   No neighborhood information signs shall be located:
         (a)   In city right-of-way or in the public median of any city right-
of-way;
         (b)   Within a visibility triangle or in such a way as to block or
obscure from vision any traffic or safety sign or signal;
         (c)   Within 50 feet from another neighborhood information sign when
located on the same lot; or
         (d)   On private property without the permission of the property
owner.
      (5)   No more than two neighborhood information signs are permitted at
each subdivision entrance.
      (6)   No more than three neighborhood information signs are permitted on
each homeowner's association lot.
      (7)   No neighborhood information sign shall exceed the following
dimensions:
         (a)   Height: 36 inches, as measured from the ground level.
         (b)   Size of sign: Four square feet.
      (8)   Neighborhood information signs shall be made of durable,
weatherproof material. Dirty, torn, faded, dented or otherwise poorly
maintained signs shall be removed.
      (9)   Neighborhood information signs may display the neighborhood event
name, date, time and contact information plus directional arrows, words or
other symbols to indicate directions.
      (10)   No lighting shall be allowed.
      (11)   This section does not grant any right of access to or use of
subdivision entries. Property owner permission is required before erecting any
neighborhood information signs. If the property owner objects to the existence
of the sign, the sign shall not be allowed on the lot of the property owner
objecting to the sign. Also, the city may, notwithstanding the foregoing
provisions, designate certain areas as no sign zones for the purpose of
protecting the public's health, safety and welfare.
      (12)   Neighborhood information signs found in violation of any of the
above requirements may be impounded by the city and, at its option, disposed
of.
   (I)   Special sign standards for electronic message center.
      (1)   Electronic message centers (EMC) shall be equipped with a sensor or
other device that automatically determines the ambient illumination and shall
be programmed to automatically dim to within 0.3 footcandles over ambient
illumination at night as measured per the EMC Illumination Measurement Criteria
of the International Sign Association.
      (2)   The applicant receiving a sign permit for an EMC shall provide a
report demonstrating compliance with the requirements in division (1) above
from a third party consultant prior to final inspection approval of the EMC.
      (3)   When a complaint is received, the owner or operator of an EMC
shall, if required by the city, provide an updated report to verify compliance
with the requirements in division (1) above within five business days.
   (J)   General provisions.
      (1)   No sign other than kiosk signs, political signs, traffic and safety
signs or signals, street name signs, and other signs erected by a public
officer shall be erected in the right-of-way of any public or private street or
alley.
      (2)   The provisions herein contained are applicable to location, size,
use and placement of signs and shall otherwise be considered supplementary to
other City of Mansfield codes and ordinances pertaining to the erection,
maintenance and operation of signs in the city, except where the provisions
contained herein are in direct conflict with the provisions of such codes and
such ordinances, in which event, conflicting provisions of such codes and
ordinances are hereby repealed.
      (3)   Signs shall be permitted for all nonconforming uses in accordance
with the regulations and standards specified in this chapter. Any sign used in
conjunction with a nonconforming use of land or buildings, if such sign is not
in accordance with the provisions of this section, shall be deemed a separate
nonconforming use of land, and shall be subject to the provisions of divison
(L) of this section and § 155.098.
      (4)   No revolving beam or beacon of light resembling any emergency
vehicle light shall be permitted to be erected as part of any sign display in
any zoning district.
      (5)   Obstruction to view. No sign shall be erected, constructed, or
maintained so as to constitute an obstruction of the vision or sight of motor
vehicle drivers or pedestrians at any street intersection, street crossing or
point of traffic concentration. A sign in the direct line of vision or sight of
any motor vehicle driver or pedestrian from any point in a traffic lane within
50 feet of any traffic control sign shall not be permitted.
      (6)   All signs of any nature whatsoever, whether temporary or permanent,
when situated within 15 feet of the curb or edge of any street shall either:
         (a)   Have a clear height of eight and one-half feet from the ground
to the bottom of the sign; or
         (b)   Have a height of not more than two and one-half feet measured
from the top of curb to the top of the sign; provided, that wall signs may be
permitted on a wall which complies with setback and height requirements of the
zoning ordinance.
      (7)   No high intensity light shall be permitted as part of a sign
display visible from an adjacent street in any zoning district; except signs
giving public service information such as but not limited to date or
temperature may be permitted. Lighting shall be shielded to prevent beams or
rays from being directed at any portion of a traveled roadway or an occupied
residential area and shall not be of such intensity or brilliance as to cause
glare or impair vision.
      (8)   Sign regulations for any development placed in a Planned
Development District shall be established by the Planned Development ordinance
and shall specify the maximum height, setback, general types and area of such
signs permitted.
      (9)   All signs must be constructed from substantial materials, free from
defects, using accepted practices of good workmanship. All parts of a painted
sign shall be painted with two coats of good quality water-resistant paint. All
signs are subject to all requirements contained in the City of Mansfield's Code
of Ordinances and are subject to inspections during and after construction.
      (10)   All signs shall be maintained in good appearance and safe
structural condition. The general area in the vicinity of any sign shall be
kept free and clear of sign materials, weeds, debris, trash and litter.
Maintenance or replacement of sign copy or structural repairs shall be
conducted in a manner to protect adjacent properties from debris and litter.
Torn or ragged signs shall be repaired, covered or removed.
      (11)   All signs with the exception of permitted off-premise signs shall
pertain only to the principal use, service rendered, or product sold on the
premises on which the sign is located and contain only information pertaining
to either the name of the occupant, or the kind of business, or the brand name
of the principal commodity being sold, but not including information on
subsidiary products or services, nor information on anything or persons not
located on the premises.
      (12)   Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, any
sign authorized in this chapter is allowed to contain a political or
noncommercial message in lieu of any other message.
      (13)   A permanent sign on an awning shall be permitted in place of a
wall sign, provided that the sign is affixed flat to the surface of the awning.
No awning sign shall be allowed in addition to a wall sign and an awning sign
and wall sign shall not be allowed on the same facade.
      (14)   No sign other than kiosk signs and signs erected by a City of
Mansfield official shall display the registered logo of the City of Mansfield.
   (K)   Sign permitted in all zoning districts. The following regulations
shall apply in addition to the requirements of divisions (D) and (I) of this
section. Signs listed in this section are permitted in all zoning districts and
shall not require permits unless required herein and shall not be counted when
calculating the quantity of signs and the total allowable sign area, provided,
that such sign shall conform with all other applicable regulations:
      (1)   Subdivision signs. Reserved for future use.
      (2)   Promotional signage. Promotional signage may be displayed for grand
openings, special events, sales and promotions, provided that the following
regulations are met:
         (a)   Before erecting or placing a promotional signage display, a
permit must be obtained as required in division (M). Application for permit
must be made on a form provided by the Building Inspection Department. The
application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the exact
location of the display, any message being displayed, plus the configuration
and boundary of the premises where the display will be erected or placed. The
sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions.
         (b)   Each business, institution or occupied tenant space shall be
allowed one promotional signage display three times per calendar year, for a
maximum period of 14 days per display. A minimum of 90 days shall be required
between each promotional signage permit. The 14 day display period will
commence on the first day promotional signage is displayed. In the case of a
special promotion for a grand opening event, a display period may be extended
to 21 days provided that the promotion begins within the first three months of
the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy or business license and the
grand opening is limited to the address noted on the certificate or license.
         (c)   All signage used for a promotional signage display must be
removed at the end of the display period.
         (d)   Promotional signage may include any temporary sign allowed by
this chapter.
         (e)   Promotional signage shall be contained on the property of the
applicant and shall not extend into the city right-of-way. In the case of a
multi-tenant building, promotional signage must be placed directly in front of
the lease or tenant space being advertised, and shall not be placed in front of
any other lease or tenant space. Signage shall not be located in any sight
visibility triangle or visibility easement, nor shall any combustible materials
be placed in contact with lighted signs or any electrical fixtures.
         (f)   Promotional signage shall not display information on any
activity, event or person not located on the premises where the signage is
permitted.
         (g)   Torn or severely weathered promotional signage shall not be
permitted.
         (h)   Inflatable signs may be used in a promotional signage display
subject to the following regulations:
            1.   Inflatable signs shall be ground-mounted.
            2.   Inflatable signs shall not be placed in a sight visibility
triangle or in a manner that obstructs visibility necessary for safe traffic
maneuvering.
            3.   Inflatable signs must be set back from any property line,
parking lot, sidewalk, or fire lane by a minimum distance equal to five feet
plus the height of the inflatable sign.
            4.   Inflatable signs shall not be placed under any overhead
utility lines.
            5.   Inflatable signs shall be kept in good repair and remain
securely attached in such a manner to withstand wind loads.
         (i)   The quantity of signs in a promotional signage display shall be
limited to a maximum of one inflatable sign or three of any other type of
temporary sign per display.
         (j)   A separate permit is required for each 14 day period that
promotional signage will be used.
      (3)   Garage sale signs. Signs pertaining to garage sales shall comply
with the regulations in
Chapter 98 of this code.
      (4)   Public information signs. Signs of a public or non-commercial
nature, which shall include but not be limited to community service information
signs, help wanted signs, public transit service signs, public utility
information signs, safety signs, danger signs, trespassing signs, signs
indicating scenic or historical points of interest, and all signs erected by a
public officer in the performance of a public duty may be erected in all zoning
districts without a permit. All public information signs except signs erected
by a public officer shall not exceed an area of 32 square feet.
      (5)   Flags.
         (a)   Official flags of government jurisdiction, flags indicating
weather conditions and flags which are emblems of on-premise business firms and
enterprises, religious, charitable, public and nonprofit organizations may be
erected in all zoning districts without a permit. No more than one United
States flag, one State of Texas flag, and one emblematic flag shall be
permitted on a single property at the same time.
         (b)   No single flag shall exceed 50 square feet in area.
         (c)   Flagpoles are accessory structures that are incidental to a
principal use or building and shall not be permitted on vacant property without
a principal use or building.
         (d)   The maximum height of a flagpole in any zoning district shall be
35 feet.
         (e)   A flagpole may be located anywhere on a premise provided that
the flagpole shall not be located closer than ten feet to any property line or
within any easement.
      (6)   Plaques. Commemorative plaques by historical agencies recognized by
the city, County or the State of Texas may be erected in all zoning districts
without a permit.
      (7)   Political signs. Political signs may be erected on private property
with the consent of the property owner, subject to the provisions in Table (D)
of this section. Political signs may also be erected on any public property,
easement or right-of-way subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   Political signs shall be made of durable, weatherproof material.
Dirty, torn, faded, dented or otherwise poorly maintained political signs shall
be removed.
         (b)   Political signs shall not be illuminated or have any moving
elements.
         (c)   Political signs shall not be located:
            1.   In any city park or city facility;
            2.   In any easement or right-of-way where adjacent to any city
park or city facility;
            3.   In any easement or right-of-way where the adjacent property
owner objects to the presence of the political sign;
            4.   In any drainage easement or right-of-way;
            5.   In any street median;
            6.   In any state or federal right-of-way;
         (d)   A political sign for any candidate, political, action or issue
shall be located at least 100 feet from another political sign for the same
candidate, political action or issue except when such signs are located at
opposite corners of a street intersection.
         (e)   Political signs for a candidate, political action or issue for
which a resident of Mansfield is not entitled to vote are prohibited.
         (f)   The restrictions in subdivisions (d) and (e) do not apply to
political signs at a designated voting location and in the public easement or
right-of-way immediately adjacent to the designated voting location.
         (g)   Political signs for an official election shall be removed within
14 days after the election or election runoff.
      (8)   Sign on vehicles. Signs on trucks, buses or passenger vehicles
which are used in the normal conduct of business which are bearing current
license plates, which are traveling or lawfully parked upon public right-of-
ways, or any other premises for a period not exceeding four hours or for a
longer period where the primary purpose of such parking is not the display of
any sign.
      (9)   Kiosk signs.
         (a)   The City Council may, by duly executed license agreement, grant
the exclusive right to design, erect and maintain kiosk signs within Mansfield.
         (b)   Kiosk signs must be designed and constructed according to the
specifications contained in the aforementioned license agreement.
         (c)   Prior to erecting any kiosk sign, the licensee shall submit a
sign location map to the Director of Planning and Director of Public Works for
approval.
         (d)   Kiosk sign installations shall include breakaway design features
as required for traffic signs in the street right-of-way.
         (e)   Advertisement or price information is prohibited on kiosk signs.
         (f)   No signs, pennants, flags or other devices for visual attention
or other appurtenances shall be attached to kiosk signs.
         (g)   Kiosk signs shall not be illuminated.
         (h)   Individual sign panels on kiosk signs shall have a uniform
design and color.
         (i)   Kiosk signs shall not interfere with the use of sidewalks,
walkways, bike and hiking trails; shall not obstruct the visibility of
motorists, pedestrians or traffic control signs; shall not be installed in the
immediate vicinity of street intersections; and shall comply with the
requirements of the 25 foot visibility triangle or other visibility easements.
      (10)   Holiday or festive decorations. String lights or strip lighting
and banner for recognized holiday or festive decorations may be erected in all
zoning districts without a permit for a period not to exceed 60 days.
      (11)   Signs not visible. All signs not visible from off the property may
be erected in all zoning districts without a permit.
      (12)   On-premise informational signs. Non-commercial signage, such as
"Enter," "Exit," "One-Way," or "Drive-Thru," signs, that are used to direct
vehicular or pedestrian traffic may be placed on the premises served by the
signs provided that the following regulations are met:
         (a)   On-premise informational signs shall not exceed four square feet
in area and three feet in height.
         (b)   On-premise informational signs shall not display any commercial
message, including business name, graphic or logo.
         (c)   On-premise informational signage may be located anywhere on the
premises, except in city right-of-way, easements or visibility triangles or
visibility easements.
      (13)   Monument signs.
         (a)   Before erecting or placing a monument sign, a permit must be
obtained as required in division (M) of this section. Application for permit
must be made on a form provided by the Building Safety Department. The
application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the exact
location of the monument sign, any message being displayed, plus the
configuration and boundary of the premises where the sign will be erected or
placed. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be
drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions.
         (b)   A monument sign shall have a solid base at least two feet tall
and the base shall have the same or greater width as the sign. The height of
the sign base shall be included when measuring the sign height.
         (c)   Electrical equipment, irrigation equipment, controller, wiring
or conduit on a monument sign shall be concealed within the monument sign base
or sign structure, except that emergency power disconnects may be located on
the exterior of the sign provided that they are located on the part of the sign
opposite and furthest from the street.
         (d)   Except for the sign area, monument signs shall be constructed of
masonry material to match the primary building material. If the primary
building is not masonry, the sign shall be constructed of brick, stone or
split-face cement masonry units.
         (e)   The street address number of the building being served by a
monument sign shall be displayed on the sign where it is legible from the
street. The street address number shall not be included in the calculation of
the signage area.
      (14)   Non-residential construction signs.
         (a)   The provisions of this section shall apply to development on any
property owned and used by the city or the Mansfield Independent School
District, regardless of zoning.
         (b)   For developments larger than ten acres with frontage along U.S.
287, S.H. 360 or a four-lane thoroughfare or larger, as shown on the city's
Master Thoroughfare Plan, construction signs may have a maximum height of 15
feet and a maximum sign area of 64 square feet.
         (c)   When multiple signs are permitted, the allowable sign area for
each sign may be aggregated into one or more larger signs. No single sign shall
have a sign area greater than 132 feet.
         (d)   Permits shall be valid for a period not longer than 36 months.
If display exceeds this time period, the applicant must re-apply for a new
permit and pay all applicable fees.
      (15)   Temporary realtor open house directional signs.
         (a)   Temporary realtor open house directional signs must be no larger
than 24 inches by 18 inches in size (three square feet) and cannot be higher
than three feet above grade. Sign must not be placed closer than 30 feet from
an intersection, measured from the edge of the right-of-way line along any
street, and must not be placed in the median. Signs must not be placed any
closer than three feet from the back of the curb or from the edge of the
pavement.
         (b)   These signs must not obstruct the vision of traffic on the
roadway. Any signs determined to be in a location that causes an immediate
hazard to public safety must be immediately removed by the city.
         (c)   Signs must only direct traffic to properties located within the
city limits.
         (d)   The sign must contain the words "open" or "open house", as well
as a directional arrow. The signs must contain the name of the realty company,
the name of the listing agent and a current phone number (cell phone) in a font
size and manner that is smaller and less prominent than the "open", "open
house" and directional information.
         (e)   No more than four of these signs shall be posted for each
address, including a sign on the property at which the open house is being
held.
         (f)   These signs must be kept in good repair. These signs must be
made of metal and/or plastic. These signs must not be made of wood or paper.
The signs must be self-supporting and placed into the ground. The signs must
not be placed on a utility pole, streetlight pole, sign pole, fence, tree, or
any other manmade or natural feature. The signs must not be illuminated.
         (g)   Placement of these signs shall only be allowed on Fridays,
Saturdays, Sundays and city holidays, and shall be removed no later than two
hours after the open house event. For the purpose of the section, a city
holiday is any day recognized as an official holiday by the City of Mansfield.
The list of official holidays observed by the City of Mansfield shall be
maintained for public viewing on the city's official website.
      (16)   Real estate signs shall comply with the following regulations:
         (a)   Real estate signs shall be removed within 14 days following the
close of a sale of the property.
         (b)   Real estate signs shall be maintained in good condition. Dull or
peeling paint or damage to the material used for such signs shall be sufficient
cause for the city to require repair or replacement or impoundment.
   (L)   Prohibited signs. It shall be unlawful to erect, place, attach, paint,
write, stamp, paste or maintain:
      (1)   Any sign, including a human sign, which is not included under the
types of signs permitted in divisions (D) or (J) of this section.
      (2)   Any sign, with the exception of approved advertising signs,
political signs and kiosk signs, which advertises or publicizes goods,
services, establishments, persons and activities not located on the premises
upon which the sign is maintained.
      (3)   Any search lights, bullhorns, pendants, spinners, balloons,
banners, streamers, flags or other wind signs, any string lights or strip
lighting except as permitted uses under the provisions of this section.
      (4)   Any portable sign, or directional sign which is not included under
the types of signs permitted in divisions (D) through (J) of this section.
      (5)   Any sign, advertisement, poster, placard or handbill upon any lamp
post, electric light, railway, telephone or telegraph pole, fire hydrant, shade
tree, stone cliff or other natural object, or boxing covering public utilities,
or on any bridge, pavement, sidewalk or crosswalk.
      (6)   Any sign, advertisement, poster or other matter on privately or
publicly owned property without having obtained the written permission of the
owner, agents, or occupants of the premises, and without having complied with
other provisions of this chapter pertaining thereto.
      (7)   Any sign or sign structure which constitutes a hazard to public
safety or health.
      (8)   Any sign which obstructs free ingress or egress from a fire escape,
door, window or other required exit way.
      (9)   Any sign which interferes with any opening required for
ventilation.
      (10)   Any sign which makes use of words such as stop, look, one way,
danger, yield or any other similar words, phrases, symbols, lights or
characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse the
vehicular traffic.
      (11)   Any structure or part thereof, or any device or representation
attached to, painted on, or represented on a building, fence, pole or other
structure, which is used as or in the nature of an announcement, direction,
advertisement, or other attention getting purposes, and which is not originally
designed or intended to be a sign.
      (12)   Any wall sign except a name plate sign, on the rear facade of a
building or on any facade that is parallel or nearly parallel to the front
facade of a building. For the purpose of this provision, a front facade shall
be defined as the face on which a business, tenant or occupant has the main
entrance.
   (M)   Continuation and discontinuation of nonconforming signs. All non-
conforming permanent signs, legally existing on the effective date of this
chapter, may continue to exist, provided that no non-conforming sign:
      (1)   Shall be changed to another nonconforming sign.
      (2)   Shall be structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign
or so as to significantly and materially change the shape, size, type or design
of the sign.
      (3)   Shall be re-established after damage or destruction if the
estimated expense of reconstruction exceeds 50% of the reproduction cost.
      (4)   And further, provided that signs which are nonconforming because
they have flashing lights or intermittent illumination shall be given 90 days
from the date of the adoption of this chapter to be brought into compliance
with this chapter.
      (5)   And further, provided that signs which are specifically prohibited
in division (K) of this section shall be discontinued or removed by the owners
of said signs within 180 days from the date of the adoption of this chapter.
   (N)   Application for permit. The application for a sign permit shall be
made by the owner or tenant of the property on which the sign is to be located,
or his authorized agent, or a sign contractor licensed by the city. Such
applications shall be made in writing on forms furnished by the Development
Services Department and shall be signed by the applicant. Every application for
approval shall be accompanied by a plan or plans drawn to scale and including:
      (1)   The dimensions of the sign and, where applicable, the dimensions of
the wall surface of the building to which it is to be attached.
      (2)   The dimensions of the sign's supporting members.
      (3)   The proposed height of the sign.
      (4)   The proposed location of the sign in relation to the face of the
building, in front of which, or on which, it is to be erected.
      (5)   The proposed location of the sign in relation to the boundaries of
the lot upon which it is to be situated. This requirement shall not apply to
wall signs.
      (6)   Any other electrical, structural and architectural data as
applicable. Upon obtaining a building permit, the owner or his authorized agent
shall sign a statement indemnifying and holding the city harmless for any
damages which may result from the placement of said sign including attorney
fees and all costs of litigation.
   (O)   Permit required, exceptions. No permit shall be required for the
erection or alteration of the following:
      (1)   Signs not exceeding two square feet of display surface on a
building, stating merely the name and occupation of an occupant, or other
community service information.
      (2)   Non-illuminated and non-electrical signs not exceeding 32 square
feet used solely to advertise the sale or rental of the premises on which such
signs are located.
      (3)   Signs or markers used by a public utility holding a franchise from
the city for community service information.
      (4)   Temporary non-commercial signs or banners authorized by the
Director of Planning for a period not to exceed 30 days.
      (5)   The changing of the advertising copy or message of a reader board
sign or a painted or printed sign. Electric signs shall not be included in this
exception.
      (6)   The repainting, non-electrical repair or cleaning maintenance of a
sign.
   (P)   Approval of a certificate of occupancy for each new business, facility
or office desiring to continue using an existing sign shall be contingent upon
approval of a sign permit.
   (Q)   Permit fees. A permit fee shall be paid to the Building Safety
Department for each sign permit issued as set forth in the Mansfield fee
schedule ordinance.
   (R)   Removal of signs.
      (1)   Signs found in violation of any of the requirements of this section
shall be impounded and
disposed of.
      (2)   The inspector shall cause to be removed any sign that endangers the
public safety, such as an abandoned, dangerous, or materially, electrically, or
structurally defective sign, or a sign requiring a permit for which no permit
has been issued. The inspector shall provide notice which shall describe the
sign and specify the violation involved and which shall state that, if the sign
is not removed or the violation is not corrected within ten days, the sign
shall be removed in accordance with the provisions in this section.
      (3)   Any time periods provided in this section shall be deemed to
commence on the date of the notice.
      (4)   Notwithstanding the above, in situations when the inspector
determines that a dangerous or defective sign may cause imminent peril to life
or property, he may order the immediate removal of such sign without notice.
      (5)   Any person who relocates, removes or defaces any lawfully erected
sign shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed by this chapter.
      (6)   Notwithstanding the above, illegal banners or temporary signs may
be impounded by the city after notice is attempted to the owner or party
responsible for the sign.
      (7)   In addition to fines and charges of removal and storage of
violating signs, the city may cause the removal or disposal of same found on
any public property, easement or right-of-way without notice to the owner of
the sign.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86; Am. Ord. OR-2223-21, passed 10-11-21)
§ 155.091 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose. To assure that adequate off-street parking and loading areas
are provided with the construction, alteration, remodeling or change of use of
any building or change in the use of land.
   (B)   General provisions.
      (1)   Any person establishing an off-street parking facility or applying
for a building permit for construction, reconstruction, or alteration of the
use of any building, other than a single or two family residence, shall submit
to the building inspector three copies of a plot plan designating the number,
dimensions, and location of off-street parking spaces and curb cuts to be
provided.
      (2)   The plot plan shall be submitted to the Planning Department by the
Building Inspector, and the Director of Planning and Development shall approve
or disapprove the off-street parking facilities and curb cuts.
      (3)   Required off-street parking for residential uses in any PR, Single-
Family Residential, 2F, MF-1 and MF-2 Districts shall be provided on the lot or
tract occupied by the use being served. For non-residential uses in the
aforementioned districts and for permitted uses in all other zoning districts,
off-street parking shall be provided on the lot or tract occupied by the use
being served or upon a tract dedicated to parking use by an instrument filed
for record and consolidated under a single certificate of occupancy with the
main use. Such off-premise parking facility shall be located in the same or
less restrictive zoning district as the use being served, and all or part of
such facility shall be located within a distance not to exceed 300 feet to an
entrance to the building or use being served, measured along the shortest
available pedestrian route with public access.
      (4)   Any existing building or use that is enlarged, structurally
altered, or remodeled to the extent of increasing or changing the use by more
than 50% as it existed at the effective date of this chapter shall be
accompanied by off-street parking for the entire building or use in accordance
with the off-street parking regulations set forth in this section. When the
enlargement, structural alteration, or remodeling is to the extent that the use
is not increased or changed by more than 50%, additional off-street parking
shall only be required for the increased or changed floor area or use.
      (5)   Existing parking spaces may not be used to satisfy additional off-
street parking requirements of this chapter unless the existing spaces proposed
for use in meeting the requirements of this chapter exceed the number required
for the building or use for which the existing spaces are associated. All
parking associated with a building or use from which the spaces are drawn must
meet all requirements of this chapter.
      (6)   Head-in parking. The following provisions shall apply to all head-
in parking adjacent to a public thoroughfare:
         (a)   Head-in parking spaces so situated that the maneuverings of a
vehicle in entering or leaving such spaces is done on a public street or within
public right-of-way shall not be classified as off-street parking in computing
any parking requirements herein.
         (b)   The construction of head-in parking as described in division (a)
above shall be prohibited hereafter. All such head-in parking facilities in
existence at the time of the enactment of this section are hereby declared to
be a nonconforming use of land subject to the provisions of §
155.098.
         (c)   Off-street parking facility related to single or two family
dwellings and zero lot line dwellings shall be exempted from this section.
      (7)   No off-street parking facility shall be located, either in whole or
in part, in a public street or sidewalk, parkway, alley or other public right-
of-way.
      (8)   No off-street parking or loading space shall be located, either in
whole or in part, within any fire lane required by ordinance of the city.
Tandem parking is prohibited unless specifically authorized by this chapter.
      (9)   No required off-street parking facility or loading space shall be
used for sales, non-vehicular storage, repair or service activities.
      (10)   Lighting facilities, if provided, shall be so arranged as to be
reflected away from motorists traveling in an adjacent street and from property
zoned or used for residential purposes.
      (11)   No pavement shall be permitted in the city rights-of-way or in any
required setback where parking facilities are prohibited unless such pavement
is intended for use as a drive approach approved for access to property or such
pavement is required to meet minimum city sidewalk standards.
      (12)   For all multi-family and non-residential uses, parking spaces
shall be striped or otherwise clearly designated on the parking facility
surface, and shall not include any fire lane or other area necessary for aisles
or maneuvering of vehicles.
      (13)   All facilities used for parking, loading, unloading, driveways and
all other vehicular access shall have a pavement constructed of concrete and
comply with all applicable Fire Code and City Engineering Standards; except
those for a single-family residential property that is required to provide a
fire apparatus access driveway may be constructed of alternative equivalent
strength material approved by the Director of Planning, provided that the drive
approach from the street be constructed of concrete. The pavement shall always
be maintained in good condition and repair.
      (14)   All dumpster pads and loading areas in front of dumpsters shall be
constructed with at least six inches of concrete pavement on a scarified and
compacted sub grade. The concrete pavement shall be reinforced with inch steel
bars spaced 18 inches on center each way or six by six, #6 gauge welded wire
fabric. An approved paving fiber may be substituted for the reinforcing steel.
Chairs shall be used to support reinforcement.
      (15)   In determining the required number of parking spaces, fractional
spaces shall be counted to the nearest whole space. Parking spaces located in
buildings needed for repair garages or auto laundry stalls shall not be counted
as meeting the required minimum parking.
      (16)   Where several different property uses will share a joint parking
area, the off-street parking requirements shall be the composite or sum of the
requirements for each type of use and no off-street parking space provided for
one type of use or building shall be included in calculation of off-street
parking requirements for any other uses of buildings.
      (17)   Floor-area of structure devoted to off-street parking of vehicles
shall be excluded in computing the floor area for off-street parking
requirements.
      (18)   In all districts, the required off-street parking for all
permitted uses, except institutional uses and uses permitted in the C-4,
Downtown Business District, shall be available to customers, employees,
tenants, clients and occupants of a use on a prearranged basis, other than an
hourly or fee basis, as free or contract parking.
      (19)   No vehicle shall be parked on a lot or tract occupied by a single-
family dwelling, two-family dwelling or townhouse, unless the area upon which
such vehicle is parked is paved with a concrete surface. Except for the
expansion joints, the paved concrete surface must be constructed as a solid,
continuous span of concrete from edge to edge of the paved parking area.
However, a paved parking area shall not be required for a vehicle parked in a
side or rear yard enclosed by an opaque screening fence at least six feet in
height or complies with division (B)(21) below.
      (20)   Additional residential driveway standards.
         (a)   The maximum width of a paved driveway devoted to off-street
parking in the front yard or side yard with street frontage of a lot occupied
by a single-family dwelling shall not exceed 20 feet plus a paved extension
into the yard between the driveway and the nearest property line, not to exceed
12 feet in width. Except for expansion joints, the paved extension must be
constructed as a solid, continuous span of concrete from the edge of the
driveway to the furthest edge of the paved extension.
         (b)   An existing lawful nonconforming driveway that does not conform
with the requirements in division (19) above may be extended into the yard
between the driveway and the nearest property line, not to exceed 12 feet in
width, using the same materials as the existing driveway (e.g. gravel, paver,
etc.). However, an existing parking area of entirely grass cannot be extended
unless the extension conforms with the pavement requirements in division (A)
above.
         (c)   Circular driveways shall not exceed 16 feet in width.
         (d)   All residential drive approaches shall be constructed to the
width and construction standards established by the city Engineering
Department.
      (21)   No vehicle shall be parked on a lot or tract occupied by a single-
family dwelling, two-family dwelling or townhouse when such vehicle is greater
than 25 feet in overall length (including tongue), unless one of the following
conditions are met:
         (a)   The vehicle is parked in a building, either attached to the main
residential building or detached, completely enclosed by three walls and a
roof, and the open side of the building shall have an opaque gate at least six
feet in height. A building used to meet the foregoing requirement shall comply
with all applicable area, height and setback requirements for attached or
detached accessory buildings; or
         (b)   The vehicle is parked behind the rearmost facade of the
residence and is more than 50 feet away from any property line. The pavement
and screening requirements of this section shall not apply to a vehicle parked
in accordance with this provision; or
         (c)   The vehicle is parked at least 75 feet from the front property
line and at least ten feet from side and rear property lines. No setback will
be required from a side or rear property line where the abutting property is
zoned for non-residential uses. The pavement and screening requirements of this
section shall not apply to a vehicle parked in accordance with this provision.
      (22)   No vehicle rated to have a carrying capacity exceeding one ton
shall be parked on a lot or tract occupied by a single-family dwelling, two-
family dwelling or townhouse, unless such vehicle is being actively loaded or
unloaded.
      (23)   Vehicles parked between a dwelling and the street shall comply
with the following:
         (a)   No other vehicle shall be parked between the front property line
of a lot or tract occupied by a single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling or
townhouse and the portion of the front facade of the residence, including
features such as entryway, front porch, side-entry or J-swing garage, or any
structure protruding from the residence that is furthest from the street.
         (b)   No other vehicle shall be parked on a driveway between the side
property line of a corner lot or tract occupied by a single-family dwelling,
two-family dwelling or townhouse and the facade of the residence closest to the
street, unless the vehicle is parked behind an opaque fence and gate at least
six feet in height.
      (24)   No vehicle shall be parked on a lot or tract occupied by a single-
family dwelling, two-family dwelling or townhouse when such vehicle is situated
on blocks, jacks or anything other than the wheels or mechanisms that are
originally designed to equip such vehicles for traveling purposes.
      (25)   Non-conforming status and exemptions.
         (a)   Any lawful unpaved driveway that was in existence prior to
November 10, 1997, shall be exempted from the paving requirements of this
section.
         (b)   Any other vehicle greater than 25 feet in length that was
lawfully parked on a lot or tract occupied by a single-family dwelling, two-
family dwelling or townhouse prior to November 10, 1997, shall be exempted from
the provisions of division (B)(21) above provided that such vehicles are not
located over a public sidewalk, or within a public right-of-way or visibility
triangle as defined in § 155.092(I)(36).
         (c)   Any other vehicle that was lawfully parked between the front
property line of a lot or tract occupied by a single-family dwelling, two-
family dwelling or townhouse and the facade of the residence that is closest to
the street prior to March 28, 2006, shall be exempted from the provisions of
division (B)(23) above, provided that such vehicles are not located over a
public sidewalk, or within a public right-of-way or visibility triangle as
defined in § 155.092(I)(36).
         (d)   A vehicle lawfully parked under the provisions of divisions (b)
or (c) above may be replaced by another vehicle of the same type and same
dimensions by the same owner or occupant of the property; provided, however,
that the exemptions permitted under divisions (b) and (c) above shall
automatically terminate upon a change in ownership or occupancy of a property
occupied by a single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling or townhouse upon
which the vehicle is parked.
         (e)   Any other vehicle parked on a lot or tract, occupied by a
single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling or townhouse, that is at least one-
half acre in size and fronts on an asphalt roadway with bar ditches shall be
exempt from division (B)(21), regarding maximum vehicle length and from the
provisions of division (B)(21)(b) and (c) regarding the minimum setbacks for
vehicles from the side and rear property lines, provided that such vehicles are
parked behind the portion of the front facade of the residence that is furthest
from the street and are parked on pavement or are screened from view of the
street or adjacent residential properties by an opaque screening fence at least
six feet in height.
      (26)   The parking of any vehicles that are prohibited by the
aforementioned regulations and not exempted by the above provisions shall be
discontinued or removed by the owners of the property upon which the vehicles
are parked. No non-conforming use status shall be acquired by such vehicles.
      (27)   It is not a violation of the aforementioned regulations if: (1) a
recreational vehicle is parked on a driveway or other lawful parking area for
up to 72 hours before or after a trip for loading, unloading or maintenance so
long as such vehicle is parked in compliance with all relevant parking
regulations; or (2) a recreational vehicle of a visiting out-of-town guest is
parked at a residence for up to 72 hours. Upon the application of the resident,
the City Manager or his designee may approve a reasonable extension of time for
the parking of a visiting guest's recreational vehicle based on special
circumstances or undue hardship.
      (28)   The minimum off-street parking requirement for a single-family
dwelling located in the PR District shall be the same as that imposed on a
similar structure in any Single-Family Residential District.
   Parking Group Table
 Use Number of Parking Spaces Required for each Additional Requirements
                                                                                 Number
   Use                                                                           of      Required for Additional Requirements
                                                                                 Parking each
                                                                                 Spaces
1. Residential
   a.   Single-family dwelling                                                2       Dwelling
                                                                                         unit
   b.   Two-family dwelling                                                   2       Dwelling
                                                                                         unit
   c.   Townhouse                                                             2       Dwelling
                                                                                         unit
   d.   Garage apartment                                                      1       Dwelling
                                                                                         unit
                                                                                         Dwelling
                                                                                         unit for
                                                                                         first 50
   e.   Apartment or multi- family dwelling                                   2       units,
                                                                                         thereafter
                                                                                         1.75 parking
                                                                                         spaces for
                                                                                         each unit
   f.   Boarding or Rooming House                                             1       Rooming unit
                                                                                         Guest room
                                                                                         or
                                                                                         residential
                                                                                         unit up to
                                                                                         100 units
                                                                                         then 0.75
                                                                                         per unit
   g.   Hotel, Motel or Tourist Court                                         1       over 100;
                                                                                         50% of these
                                                                                         spaces may
                                                                                         be counted
                                                                                         to satisfy
                                                                                         the parking
                                                                                         requirements
                                                                                         of accessory
                                                                                         uses
                                                                                         Lot, plot,
   h.   Manufactured Home or Mobile Home                                      2       tract or
                                                                                         stand
                                                                                         Two
   i.   Private Dormitory                                                     1       occupants
                                                                                         for designed
                                                                                         occupants
   j.   Zero-lot-line Dwelling                                                2       Dwelling
                                                                                         unit
2. Institutional
                                                                                         200 sq. ft.
   a.   Community or Welfare Center                                           1       of floor
                                                                                         area
   b.   School                                                                1       20 students
      i.   Elementary                                                      1       18 students
      ii.   Junior High                                                    1       1.75
      iii.   Senior High                                                   1       students
      iv.   Trade/Vocational                                                       Student
   c.   College or University                                                 1       4 day
                                                                                         students
   d.   Public Assembly Hall with fixed seating                               1       4 seats
                                                                                         100 sq. ft.
   e.   Public Assembly Hall without fixed seating                            1       of floor     </TCE>
                                                                                         area
                                                                                         4 seats in
   f.   Church                                                                1       sanctuary or
                                                                                         auditorium
   g.   Kindergarten, Day Nursery or Child Care Center                        1       8 pupils
   h.   Hospital - acute or chronic care                                      1       1½ beds
                                                                                         2 employees
                                                                                 1       or
   i.   Hospital - alcoholic, narcotic, psychiatric patients                  1       attendant,
                                                                                         plus
                                                                                         10 residents
   j.   Age Restricted Senior Living Facility                                 1½     Dwelling
                                                                                         unit
                                                                                         300 sq. ft.
   k.   Library or Museum                                                     1       of public
                                                                                         area
                                                                                         200 sq. ft.
   l.   Fraternity or Sorority                                                1       of floor
                                                                                         area
                                                                                         250 sq. ft.
   m.   Student Religious Center                                              1       of floor
                                                                                         area
   n.   Nursing or Assisted Living Facility                                   1       6 beds
   o.   Mortuary or Funeral Chapel                                            1       4 seats in
                                                                                         chapel
                                                                                         300 sq. ft.
   p.   Labor Union                                                           1       of floor
                                                                                         area
3. Recreational, Special Entertainment
   a.   Theater                                                               1       4 seats
   b.   Bowling Alley                                                         4       Lane
                                                                                         100 sq. ft.
   c.   Pool halls, Coin-machine Arcades, Other Commercial Amusements (indoor)1       of floor
                                                                                         area
                                                                                         600 sq. ft.
   d.   Commercial Amusements (outdoors)                                      1       of site area
                                                                                         exclusive of
                                                                                         building
   e.   Ballpark, Stadium                                                     1       8 seats
                                                                                         200 sq. ft.
   f.   Lodges, Fraternal Organization                                        1       of floor
                                                                                         area
   g.   Golf Course                                                                   Minimum of
                                                                                         30 spaces
                                                                                         Space for
   h.   Driving Range or Miniature Golf                                       1       each driving
                                                                                         tee
4. Personal Service and Retail
                                                                                         200 sq. ft.
   a.   Personal Service Shop                                                 1       of floor
                                                                                         area
                                                                                         250 sq. ft.
                                                                                         of floor
                                                                                         area for the
                                                                                         first 3,000
   b.   Retail Store or Shops (inside)                                        1       sq. ft.;
                                                                                         thereafter 1
                                                                                         space for
                                                                                         each
                                                                                         additional
                                                                                         300 sq. ft.
                                                                                         400 sq. ft.
   c.   Furniture Sales, Appliance Sales and Repair                           1       of floor
                                                                                         area
                                                                                         600 sq. ft.
   d.   Open Retail Sales                                                     1       of site area
                                                                                         exclusive of
                                                                                         buildings
   e.   Coin-operated or Self- service Laundry or Dry Cleaning                1       3 washing
                                                                                         machines
5. Foods and Beverage Services
                                                                                         100 sq. ft.
   a.   Eating place (inside), eating only; no drive-through service          1       of floor     Minimum of 12 spaces
                                                                                         area
   b.   Eating place with drive- through service, Bar, Night Club and Private         75 sq. ft.   Minimum of 4 spaces; for drive- through window, see § 155.099(B)(36) for
   Club                                                                          1       of floor     stacking requirements
                                                                                         area
6. Business Services
                                                                                         300 sq. ft.
   a.   Bank                                                                  1       of floor
                                                                                         area
                                                                                         400 sq. ft.
   b.   Savings and Loan or Similiar Institution                              1       of floor
                                                                                         area
                                                                                         150 sq. ft.
   c.   Medical, Dental Clinic or Office                                      1       of floor     Minimum of 5 spaces
                                                                                         area
                                                                                         300 sq. ft.
   d.   Other Office, Business or Professional                                1       of floor     Minimum of 5 spaces
                                                                                         area
7. Automotive and Equipment
                                                                                         200 sq. ft.
   a.   Service Station, including incidental car wash                        1       of floor     Minimum of 4 spaces
                                                                                         area
                                                                                         500 sq. ft.
   b.   Motor Vehicle Repair, Garage or Shop (indoors)                        1       of floor     Minimum of 5 spaces
                                                                                         area
                                                                                         200 sq. ft.
   c.   Motor Vehicle Parts and Accessory Sales (indoors)                     1       of floor
                                                                                         area
                                                                                         1,000 sq.
   d.   Motor Vehicle Parts and Accessory Sales (outdoors)                    1       ft. of floor
                                                                                         area
                                                                                         500 sq. ft.
   e.   Vehicle or Machinery Sales (indoor)                                   1       of floor
                                                                                         area
                                                                                         5,000 sq.
   f.   Vehicle or Machinery Sales (outdoors)                                 1       ft. of floor
                                                                                         area
                                                                                 2       Wash bay
   g.   Self Service Car Wash                                                 tandem  150 sq. ft.  2/3 of the minimum spaces shall be tandem spaces for cars awaiting wash
      Machine Car Wash                                                        spaces  of floor     or vacuum
                                                                                 1       area
8. Storage, Wholesale and Manufacturing
                                                                                         1,000 sq.
   a.   Brick or Lumber Yard or Similiar Area                                 1       ft. of site
                                                                                         area
                                                                                         2,000 sq.
   b.   Open Storage of Sand, Gravel, or Petroleum                            1       ft. of site
                                                                                         area
                                                                                         3,000 sq.
                                                                                         ft. of floor
   c.   Warehouse and Enclosed Storage                                        1       area plus
                                                                                 1       300 sq. ft.
                                                                                         of office
                                                                                         area, if any
                                                                                         5,000 sq.
                                                                                         ft. of site
   d.   Outside Storage                                                       1       area used
                                                                                         for outside
                                                                                         storage
                                                                                         1,000 sq.
                                                                                         ft. of floor
                                                                                         area or
                                                                                 1       for each 5
   e.   Commercial or Wholesale Operations                                    4       employees on
                                                                                         largest
                                                                                         shift,
                                                                                         whichever is
                                                                                         greater
                                                                                         1,000 sq.
                                                                                         ft. of floor
                                                                                         area or
                                                                                 1       for each 5
   f.   Manufacturing Operations                                              4       employees on
                                                                                         largest
                                                                                         shift,
                                                                                         whichever is
                                                                                         greater
                                                                                         300 sq. ft.
                                                                                         for
   g.   Mini-Warehouse                                                        1       manager's
                                                                                         office or
                                                                                         quarters
 
      (29)   Minimum off-street parking standards. The number of off-street
parking spaces required for each building or use shall be determined by
reference to the following table of parking groups. Parking groups are
identified for each building or use in §
155.054(B). For any use not listed, or where the listed regulations are not
applicable in the judgment of the Director of Planning and Development, the
parking requirements shall be determined by the Director of Planning and
Development. Computations of required parking spaces by the Director of
Planning and Development shall be final.
      (30)   The design and dimensions of off-street parking areas shall be in
accordance with the following table of minimum dimensions. Minimum stall widths
shall be nine feet, except for residential and all day office parking which may
utilize stalls eight and one-half feet in width, provided that minimum aisle
widths are increased by one foot. In addition, the dimensions of up to 20% of
the total number of off-street parking spaces may be reduced to eight feet in
width and 16 feet in depth to accommodate compact automobiles. All dimensions
below are in feet.
 
Angles (Degrees)              0    30   45   60   90
Stall, Parallel to Aisle      23.0 18.0 12.7 10.4 9.0
Stall, Perpendicular to Aisle 9.0  16.5 19.0 20.0 18.0
Aisle Width, One-Way          12.0 12.0 12.0 16.0 24.0
Aisle Width, Two-Way          22.0 22.0 22.0 24.0 24.0
Cross Aisle, One-Way          11.0 11.0 11.0 11.0 11.0
Cross Aisle, Two-Way          22.0 22.0 22.0 22.0 22.0
 
      (31)   Off-street parking spaces shall be clearly marked according to the
stall layout on file in the Development Services Department.
      (32)   Parking spaces abutting on adjoining property line or street
right-of-way shall be provided with wheel guards or bumper guards so located
that no part of a normally parked vehicle will extend beyond the property line.
When wheel guards are used, they shall be centered 2.5 feet from the property
line for 90 degree parking, 2.3 feet for 60 degree parking, and 2.0 feet for 45
degree and 30 degree parking.
      (33)   Approval of the parking area layout and design of all off-street
parking areas shall be by the Director of Planning and Development. The
Director of Planning and Development shall determine that spaces provided are
usable, and that the circulation pattern of the area is adequate.
      (34)   Pedestrian access to buildings shall be provided from rights-of-
way and parking areas by means of a pathway leading to at least one public
entrance. Such pathway shall be cleared of all obstructions related to
construction activity prior to the opening of the building to the general
public.
   (C)   Special off-street parking provisions.
      (1)   Required off-street parking space may be located behind the minimum
required front yard in any 2F, MF-1 or MF-2 District.
      (2)   Required off-street parking space may be located in the minimum
required front yard in any PR, A or Single-Family Residential District.
      (3)   All required off-street parking spaces shall be located completely
behind the property line of any district classification provided in this
chapter.
      (4)   In all non-residential districts, surface parking may extend to the
front property line except as prohibited by other sections of this chapter.
   (D)   Handicapped parking regulations.
      (1)   Where curbs exist along pedestrian pathways, as between a parking
lot surface and sidewalk surface, inclined curb approaches or curb cuts having
a gradient of not more than one foot in 12 feet and width of not less than four
feet shall be provided for access by wheelchairs. The maximum allowable slope
of an accessible pathway for disabled individuals shall not exceed 1:20 or 5%
gradient.
      (2)   A parking lot servicing each entrance pathway shall have a number
of level parking spaces, as set forth in the following table:
 
Parking Spaces for the Disabled
Total Space in Lot              Required Number of Reserved Spaces
Up to 50                        1
51 to 100                       2
over 100                        3% of total
 
      (3)   Location. Parking spaces for disabled individuals, both employee
and visitor, should be the spaces within the lot, closest to an accessible
building entrance, and be connected to this entrance by an accessible path.
Such parking spaces shall not include any fire lane aisles or other maneuvering
areas for vehicles.
      (4)   Parking spaces for individuals with physical disabilities shall be
96" wide with a 60" wide access aisle. Access aisles may be shared by two
accessible parking spaces.
      (5)   Access aisles shall be marked to prevent vehicle parking within
their limits.
      (6)   The maximum allowable slope of an access aisle shall be 1:50.
      (7)   Access aisles shall have smooth transitions with adjoining
walkways, either by joining at a common level or by use of curb ramps at
maximum allowable slope of 1:12.
      (8)   The minimum clear width of pathways adjacent to parking spaces
shall not be reduced by vehicle overhang. Wheelstops, railings, billiards, or
other devices, shall be provided, to insure clear width.
      (9)   Identification. Accessible parking spaces shall be designed as
reserved for the handicapped through display of identification signs. Each such
sign must display a profile of a wheelchair with occupant and at least the
words "Handicapped Parking" and be placed so that it will not be obscured by
parked vehicles. The signs shall conform to the standard size, weight, and
length as set forth in the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
      (10)   Care in planning should be exercised so that individuals in
wheelchairs and individuals using braces and crutches are not compelled to
wheel or walk behind parked cars.
   (E)   Bonus for landscaping of off-street parking facilities. The minimum
off-street parking requirements shall be reduced up to a maximum of 10% of the
requirement for those parking facilities designed to accommodate 20 or more
vehicles where a percent of the total parking area has been retained and
developed as landscaped open space area. The percent of the landscaped open
space area shall determine the maximum percent reduction, which will be
permitted in the total number of off-street parking spaces.
   (F)   Off-street loading regulations.
      (1)   The owner and the occupier of any property upon which a business is
located shall provide loading and unloading areas of sufficient number and
facility to accommodate on such business premises all vehicles that will be
reasonably expected to simultaneously deliver or receive materials or
merchandise, and of sufficient size to accommodate all types of vehicles that
will be reasonably expected to engage in such loading or unloading activities.
      (2)   Any person desiring a building permit for the construction,
alteration, or change of use of the land or any business building or structure
shall submit a plot plan to the Building Official designating the number,
dimensions and locations of all loading areas and all proposed avenues of
ingress and egress to the property from adjacent public thoroughfares. The
Building Official shall not issue such permit if it is determined that the
proposed loading and unloading facilities will present a direct or indirect
hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
      (3)   Required off-street loading facilities may be adjacent to a public
alley or private service drive, or may consist of a berth within a structure.
      (4)   No portion of a loading facility may extend into a public right-of-
way or into an off-street parking facility elsewhere herein required.
      (5)   The off-street loading spaces or truck berths shall provide
maneuvering areas on site to prevent any blockage of public right-of-way.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86; Am. Ord. OR-2223-21, passed 10-11-21)
§ 155.092 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Intent. The standards of this section promote public health, safety,
and welfare by establishing minimum standards for the design, the construction,
and the maintenance of landscape improvements for thoroughfares, open spaces,
and development. The standards of this section also enhance the overall
aesthetic condition of the community and public realm with landscaping by:
      (1)   Visually coordinating the public and private realms;
      (2)   Providing spatial definition to the public realm; and
      (3)   Providing for screening of unsightly places and/or mitigation of
visually incongruent conditions.
   (B)   Applicability. The provisions of this section are the minimum
standards for all proposed projects in all zoning districts. Where the
provisions of this section are in conflict with those of the D, S, FR, SE, or
PD Districts, those of the D, S, FR, SE, or PD Districts shall govern. Where
the D, S, FR, SE, or PD Districts are silent on landscaping issues, the
provisions of this section shall govern. The landscape plans required by this
section are subject to administrative approval by the Landscape Administrator.
The Landscape Administrator may permit an alternate landscape practice if it is
consistent with the provisions of this section and furthers the public health,
safety, and welfare and community aesthetics.
   (C)   New development. For the purposes of this section, NEW DEVELOPMENT
shall be defined as any new construction on a vacant or an undeveloped lot or
any addition to existing construction that expands the floor area by the lesser
of 30% or 3,000 square feet in any MF-1, MF-2, OP, C-1, C-2, C-3, D, S, I-1, I-
2, FR, or PD Districts. All landscaping for new development shall be brought up
to the applicable standards of this section within one year from approval of
the landscape plan. For any new development, the Landscape Administrator may
not require that existing buildings, parking lots, retaining walls, or other
visual screens be brought up to the applicable standards of this section within
one year of approval of the landscape plan.
   (D)   Landscape plan required. A landscape plan shall be required for new
development projects in the MF-1, MF-2, OP, C-1, C-2, C-3, D, S, I-1, I-2, FR,
SE, and PD Districts prior to the issuance of any required permit. A landscape
plan shall be prepared by a Registered Landscape Architect (“RLA”) and shall be
submitted along with the applicable permit to the approving department for
review. The Landscape Administrator may not require a landscape plan prepared
by an RLA for new development or sites less than one acre in area. No required
permits shall be issued for building, paving, or construction until a landscape
plan has been reviewed and approved by the Landscape Administrator. Prior to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any building or structure, all
screening and landscaping shall be constructed or installed in accordance with
an approved landscape plan.
   (E)   Enforcement. If at any time after the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy or other license or permit required by the city, that the constructed
or installed landscaping does not conform to the provisions of this section,
then the Director of Regulatory Compliance, or their designee, will issue
notice to the property owner, the authorized representative of the property
owner, or the tenant, describing the nature of the violation and identifying
the action(s) required to fully comply with the provisions of this section. If
the landscaping is not installed or replaced as directed, the property owner,
the authorized representative of the property owner, or the tenant shall be in
violation of the provisions of this section. Violations of this section shall
be punished in accordance with §
10.99 of the Code of Mansfield, Texas.
   (F)   Security. Landscaping shall not impede the ability of pedestrians to
look out, over, or into public areas (i.e., natural surveillance). Property
owners and developers and their RLAs are encouraged to utilize the basic
concepts of Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (“CPTED”) when
preparing landscape plans. The Landscape Administrator may consider basic
concepts of CPTED as alternatives to landscape plant locations where security
issues may be presented.
   (G)   General standards. The following criteria and standards shall apply to
all landscaping, landscape materials, and their construction and installation,
in all zoning districts:
      (1)   All projects shall be sensitive to natural surroundings. Site
designs shall minimize grading and follow the natural contours to the greatest
extent. Graded slopes should be rounded and contoured to blend with the
terrain.
      (2)   Landscape construction and installation shall be aesthetically
pleasing and be consistent with the following principles and techniques:
         (a)   Property owners and developers are encouraged to construct and
to install landscapes of plants native to the region, including drought-
tolerant materials that can provide shade.
         (b)   Property owners and developers are encouraged to construct and
to install landscapes that will provide spatial definition forthe public realm
(i.e., provide clear delineation between private and public space).
         (c)   Property owners and developers are encouraged to install a
limited palette of tree species in order to achieve a unique visual identity
for the community.
         (d)   Property owners and developers are encouraged to install and
construct unique landscape improvements that will screen or mitigate conditions
that are incongruent with visually harmonious and aesthetically pleasing
development.
         (e)   Property owners and developers are encouraged to install and to
construct high-quality landscape improvements that will mask surface parking
lots from view while enhancing building architecture and urban design.
      (3)   Parking spaces and building mechanical equipment shall be
prohibited within buffer yards, street landscape setbacks, and landscaped
medians, islands, or areas. Decorative fences and walls, subject to review and
approval by the Landscape Administrator may be considered as a part of the
landscaping improvement if they are integrated into the landscape plan and
provided that they do not adversely impact plantings.
      (4)    Signs and sidewalks are permitted in buffer yards, street
landscape setbacks, and landscape medians, islands or areas in compliance with
all other aspects of the City of Mansfield, Texas Code of Ordinances.
Landscaping improvements shall be installed and constructed in a manner to
prevent interference with signage; and, likewise, ground-based or monument-type
signage shall be integrated into the landscape plan to ensure compatibility.
      (5)   No portion of the required landscape setback shall be located
within the public right-of-way.
      (6)   Non-living landscaping materials such as wood chips and mulch may
be used in, around, and under trees, shrubs, and other plants, unless otherwise
required by the Landscape Administrator. Rock, crushed granite and gravel may
be considered landscape materials if approved by the Landscape Administrator as
part of a comprehensive site design, meeting aesthetics and functional
criteria.
      (7)   Curbing or other protective devices or barriers shall be installed
to protect landscape buffer strips and street landscape setbacks from vehicular
encroachment. In order to accommodate drainage, curbing does not have to be
continuous. No motor vehicle shall be driven on any landscape buffer strip or
street landscape setback.
      (8)   Landscaped medians or islands with raised curbs shall be used to
define surface parking lot entrances; the ends of all parking aisles; the
location and pattern of primary internal access driveways; and to provide
pedestrians with refuge areas and walkways.
      (9)   Plant materials shall conform to the standards of the recommended
plant list in this section.
      (10)   During the months of June through August, only containerized trees
may be planted, unless otherwise approved by the Landscape Administrator.
      (11)   Required trees are encouraged to be placed along the south and
west sides of any residential property in the PR, SF, 2F, MH, MF-1, MF-2, D, S,
and PD Districts in order to provide seasonal shade, sun, and temperature
regulation and to encourage the conservation of energy used in buildings and
structures through strategic shading and wind breaks.
      (12)   Grass seed, sod and other materials shall be clean and reasonably
free of weeds and noxious pests and insects.
      (13)   The soil shall be prepared in a manner consistent with accepted
planting procedures prior to the installation of sod, grass seed or other
materials.
      (14)   In the MF-1, MF-2, OP, C-1, C-2, C-3, D, S, I-1, I-2, FR, SE, and
PD Districts, plastic, rubber or non-durable edging shall be prohibited.
Concrete, metal, and other durable edging shall be provided between planting
beds and other landscaped areas.
      (15)   Ornamental trees shall have three trunks or canes with a minimum
caliper of one inch per trunk as measured six inches above grade at time of
planting. Ornamental trees shall be selected from the recommended plant list in
this section.
      (16)   Ornamental trees shall have a minimum crown spread of 15 feet at
maturity. Ornamental trees having a mature crown spread of less than 15 feet
may be substituted by grouping the trees to create the equivalent crown spread
of 15 feet.
      (17)   Canopy trees shall be a minimum caliper of three inches as
measured six inches above grade and seven feet in height at time of planting.
Canopy trees shall be selected from the recommended plant list in this section.
      (18)   Unless otherwise approved by the Landscape Administrator, tree
plantings shall not include more than 50% of the same tree species.
      (19)   Canopy trees shall have a minimum crown spread of 25 feet at
maturity.
   (H)   Planting standards.
      (1)   Where trees are not able to stand on their own, trees shall be
staked with an at grade root ball securing system. The system shall securely
anchor the root ball, while allowing the trunk and crown to move naturally. The
system shall not use materials and methods that penetrate or damage the root
ball. Grade root ball securing systems must be removed after one growing
season. Above grade staking systems such as “T” posts with wires, hoses,
straps, or guy wires wrapped around the tree trunk, shall not be allowed unless
authorized by the Landscape Administrator.
      (2)   Non-dwarf variety shrubs shall be a minimum of three feet in height
measured above grade at time of planting. Dwarf variety shrubs shall be a
minimum of two feet in height measured above grade at time of planting.
      (3)   Hedges required by the provisions of this section shall be planted
and maintained to form a continuous, unbroken, solid visual screen of three
feet in height measured above grade within 18 months of planting. The design of
the plantings may meander or curve within the required landscape setback or
buffer yard.
      (4)   Landscaping, except required grass and low ground cover, shall not
be located closer than three feet from the edge of any parking space.
      (5)   Evergreen vines not intended as ground cover shall be a minimum of
two feet in height measured above grade at time of planting.
      (6)   Grass areas shall be sodded, plugged, sprigged, hydro-mulched, or
seeded, except that solid sod shall be used on slopes and in swales or when
necessary to prevent erosion. Grass areas shall be established with complete
coverage within a six-month period from planting, and shall be re-established,
if necessary, to ensure grass coverage of all areas.
      (7)   Grass or ground cover planted in the street landscape setback shall
extend to the street pavement or curb.
      (8)   Ground cover used in-lieu-of grass shall be planted in such a
manner as to present a finished appearance and reasonable completed coverage
within one growing season.
      (9)   All landscaped areas shall be irrigated in accordance with the
requirements of this section. Natural areas or areas identified as “no
disturbance zones” need not be irrigated.
      (10)   Earthen berms with small vertical differentials may have side
slopes not to exceed three-to-one (i.e., three feet of horizontal distance for
every one foot of height). Earthen berms with larger vertical differentials
shall be reviewed by the Landscape Administrator and such review shall be
coordinated with the City Engineer for appropriate slope criteria. All berms
shall contain necessary drainage provisions and be approved by the City
Engineer.
      (11)   The Landscape Administrator approves the placement of all trees.
With the exception of street trees, trees shall be planted as far away from
public utility lines as possible while still within the required landscape
area, unless approved by the Landscape Administrator and the City Engineer. If
the tree planting is approved, the Landscape Administrator may require
alternative-planting methods including, but not limited to, the use of root
barriers, may be required.
      (12)   Where overhead utilities exist or are planned, ornamental trees
may be required by the Landscape Administrator, rather than large canopy tree
plantings, at a replacement density of two ornamental trees for each required
canopy tree. No tree which has a mature height of 25 feet or greater shall be
planted beneath an existing or proposed overhead utility line.
      (13)   Landscaping may be situated on or within a public utility or
drainage easement provided that the plantings or improvements shall first be
approved by the Landscape Administrator before their construction or
installation, and that the city and any public utility service provider shall
have the right to remove temporarily or permanently all or a part of any
plantings or improvements which may endanger or interfere with its respective
systems within said easement and shall not be liable for damages or replacement
of such growths or improvements.
      (14)   For mature trees overhanging or adjacent to streets, fire lanes or
other access ways, a minimum 14 foot vertical clearance shall be maintained.
      (15)   For mature trees overhanging or adjacent to walkways and paths, a
minimum nine foot vertical clearance shall be maintained.
      (16)   All trees, plantings, and plant materials shall conform to the
greatest extent with the best management practices and techniques for planting
and pruning, American National Standard Institute (ANSI A300).
      (17)   The property owner, the authorized representative of the property
owner, or the tenant shall be responsible for mowing and maintenance of earthen
berms.
      (18)   All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy and growing
condition at all times. The following landscaping maintenance note shall be
placed on each landscape plan:
      “Landscaping Maintenance: The property owner, tenant or agent, shall be
responsible for the maintenance of all required landscaping in a healthy, neat,
orderly and live-growing condition at all times. This shall include mowing,
edging, pruning, fertilizing, irrigation, weeding, and other such activities
common to the maintenance of landscaping. Landscaped areas shall be kept free
of trash, litter, weeds and other such materials not a part of the landscaping.
Plant materials that die shall be replaced with plant materials of similar
variety and size.”
      (19)   Obstruction prohibited. No planting, retaining wall, fence, or
other visual screen shall be constructed or installed so that it obstructs the
vision of a motorists or cyclists approaching any thoroughfare, alley, or
intersection. For the purposes of this provision, visual obstruction shall be
deemed as any planting, retaining wall, fence, or other landscape construction
or installation that is taller than 36 inches above ground level at the
property line, except for single trees having single trunks, which are pruned
to a height of seven feet above ground level.
      (20)   Visibility triangle required. No planting, retaining wall, fence,
or other visual screen shall be constructed or installed so that it obstructs
the vision of motorists or cyclists approaching any street or driveway
intersection. At all thoroughfare or driveway intersections, clear visibility
shall be maintained across the lot for a proper distance along both
thoroughfares and driveways as required by the Mansfield Roadway and Access
Management Design Criteria.
   (I)   Xeriscaping. For the purposes of this section, XERISCAPING is defined
as a method of landscaping that emphasizes water conservation, accomplished by
following sound horticultural and landscaping practices, such as planning and
design, soil improvement, limited turf areas, use of mulches, use of low-water
demand plants, efficient irrigation practices and appropriate maintenance. The
use of xeriscaping is intended to promote prudent use of the city’s water
resources and reduce the need for additional water system infrastructure and to
help ensure viability of required plantings during periods of drought. All
landscaping shall comply, where feasible, with the following requirements
designed to reduce water usage:
      (1)   Required plant materials shall be selected from those identified as
native plants, and those that have been adapted to the local climate and
conditions. Native plants and planting practices are identified through the
“Texas SmartScape” program as published by the North Central Texas Council of
Governments Regional Storm Water Management Program.
      (2)   Where specific conditions reduce the likelihood that these plant
materials will survive, alternative plants may be provided, subject to review
and approval by the Landscape Administrator.
      (3)   Plants not recommended in the “Texas SmartScape” program are
subject to the review and approval of the Landscape Administrator. The
Landscape Administrator may require the applicant provide additional
information related to the hardiness, adaptability and water demands of the
plant(s) when used.
      (4)   For maximum reduction in water usage, xeriscape plants should not
be interspersed in plant massings with plants requiring higher water usage.
Property owners and developers are encouraged to design irrigation systems and
watering schedules that supply the appropriate amount of water for plantings,
without overwatering.
      (5)   Permeable pavement in low-traffic areas or overflow parking may be
approved by the Landscape Administrator and by the City Engineer where
conditions are favorable to filter storm water and reduce run-off. Adequate
strength of the permeable pavement must be proven by the applicant to ensure
pavement life.
   (J)   Irrigation.
      (1)   All new development shall be irrigated by an underground irrigation
system that may include a drip irrigation system. This irrigation system shall
adhere to the manufacturers’ specifications and the rules and regulations
established by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), or its
successor agency, and the provisions set forth in
Ch. 54 of the City of Mansfield, Texas Code of Ordinances (Water Demand
Management and Drought Contingency Plan).
      (2)   All underground irrigation systems in the public right-of-way,
including medians and parkways, shall be subject to review and approval by the
City Engineer.
      (3)   All underground irrigation systems shall be designed by an
irrigator licensed by the State of Texas.
      (4)   All underground irrigation systems shall be designed and installed
and be maintained, altered, repaired, serviced, and operated in a manner that
will promote water conservation as defined by
Ch. 54 of the City of Mansfield, Texas Code of Ordinances (Water Demand and
Drought Contingency Plan).
      (5)   All new development in the PR, A, SF, 2F, and MH Districts in which
the first plat was approved on or before November 12, 2012, shall be exempt
from the requirements of this division (H).
   (K)   Walkability. All new development in the MF-1, MF-2, OP, C-1, C-2, C-3,
D, S, I-1, I-2, FR, SE, and PD Districts shall integrate walkways and other
pedestrian paths into the required landscape plan. Walkways and other
pedestrian paths shall comply with the following:
      (1)   At a minimum, walkways and other pedestrian paths shall be
integrated into new development as follows:
         (a)   For a new development proposing a single building, walkways and
pedestrian paths shall be connected to those existing or proposed on adjacent
lots or parcels of land, and to sidewalks along the street wherever possible.
         (b)   For a new development proposing two or more buildings,
sidewalks, walkways, and pedestrian paths shall:
            1.   Be connected to those existing or proposed on adjacent lots or
parcels of land, and to sidewalks along the street wherever possible; and
            2.   Shall provide direct pedestrian connections to the entrance of
each individual tenant space on the ground floor, to passive space, and to
other civic and open spaces to increase pedestrian activity.
      (2)   Walkways and pedestrian paths shall be appropriately landscaped
with trees, plantings, planting beds, ground covers, benches, and similar
subject to review and approval by the Landscape Administrator. The sidewalks,
walkways, and pedestrian paths may be intersected by vehicular drives internal
thoroughfares and driveways.
      (3)   Unless otherwise approved by the Director of Planning or designee
to match existing sidewalks, walkways and pedestrian paths shall be a minimum
of six feet in width and shall extend along the entire length of the exterior
wall of building having at least one building entrance for pedestrians. In
addition, other walkways and pedestrian paths shall be constructed as
appropriate to bring customers from parking areas to the customer entrance
should be provided.
      (4)   All walkways and other pedestrian paths shall maintain a minimum
unobstructed width of three feet, unless otherwise approved by the Director of
Planning or designee.
      (5)   To the extent possible, the portion of a building facade at the
ground floor shall provide any combination of arcades, awnings, canopies, or
other similar shading structures subject to the review and approval of the
Director of Planning or designee to protect building entrances and adjacent
outdoor spaces from sun, rain, and other natural conditions.
      (6)   The pavements of such sidewalks, walkways, and other pedestrian
paths shall be brick, cobble, concrete, stone, or other similar material.
Walkways and pedestrian paths in surface parking lots shall be differentiated
from parking area pavement through a change in surface texture, material,
style, and/or color.
         (a)   Pavement strength must be at least equal to the adjacent
pavement.
         (b)   Porous paving materials in order to increase stormwater
infiltration on the site may be used subject to the review and approval of the
Landscape Administrator.
      (7)   Pathways intended for joint pedestrian and bicycle use shall have a
minimum pathway width of ten feet, unless otherwise approved by the Director of
Community Services.
      (8)   Notwithstanding the above, buildings dedicated to arts, culture,
education, government, and places of worship shall provide internal pedestrian
walkways appropriate to their traffic circulation patterns (i.e., pick up and
drop off areas); where they connect to neighborhoods; and as needed for
multiple ingress and egress points to their type of land use.
      (9)   The design and the construction of all walkways and pedestrian
paths shall conform to all provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA) Guidelines.
   (L)   Aesthetics and passive space. All new development in the MF-1, MF-2,
OP, C-1, C-2, C-3, FR, SE, and PD Districts shall dedicate a minimum of 10% of
the total building floor area to passive space. For the purposes of calculating
passive space requirements in the FR and SE Districts, the calculations shall
apply to the entire parcel of land, where abutting a highway. All new
development on parcels of land in the I-1 and I-2 Districts fronting on
Heritage Parkway and Lone Star Road only, shall dedicate a minimum of 2,000
square feet of area to passive space. Passive space shall be located within 100
feet of the geographic center of the parcel of land, except as reviewed and
approved otherwise by the Director of Planning to accommodate site constraints
and provided that such location is consistent with the intent of these
provisions; and such space shall be entered directly from a thoroughfare, a
walkway or other pedestrian path. Examples of passive space are depicted in
Diagrams 1, 2, and 3 as attached to Ord. OR-2316-23.
      (1)   All buildings dedicated to arts, culture, education, government,
and places of worship shall be exempt from the provisions of this division (L).
      (2)   All new development shall dedicate a minimum of 10% of the total
building floor area to passive space. Passive space shall be entered directly
from a thoroughfare, a walkway or other pedestrian path, or a civic or open
space.
         (a)   Passive space may be enclosed with a fence, hedge, or wall.
         (b)   Passive space shall be paved in brick, concrete, gravel, or
grass.
         (c)   Passive space shall be maintained by the property owner, the
authorized representative of the property owner, or the tenant(s).
         (d)   Passive space shall have benches and two or more of the
following program elements:
            1.   Concert space.
            2.   Dog park.
            3.   Festival.
            4.   Fountain.
            5.   Furniture games.
            6.   Multi-activity area.
            7.   Outdoor dining.
            8.   Performance space.
            9.   Public art.
            10.   Water feature.
            11.   Other similar activities and architectural features subject
to the review and approval of the Director of Planning or designee.
      (3)   Each area, focal feature, or amenity shall be sized appropriately
to fit the design, activity, occupants and population of the development.
      (4)   These areas, focal features, or amenities shall have direct access
to the internal pedestrian walkways and shall not be constructed of materials
that are inferior to the principal materials of the building and landscape.
      (5)   When reviewing passive space designs for compliance with the
provisions of this division (L), the Director of Planning or designee may
permit sharing of program elements and activities for master planned new
development in the OP, C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1, I-2, FR, SE, and PD Districts.
   (M)   Application procedure. A landscape plan shall accompany an application
for a building, paving, or construction permit for new development in the MF-1,
MF-2, OP, C-1, C-2, C-3, D, S, I-1, I-2, FR, SE, and PD Districts and shall be
submitted to the appropriate department for review in accordance with the
specified submittal requirements. The landscape plan shall provide the
following information:
      (1)   Appropriate title and page numbers;
      (2)   Title block to include the street address, lot and block numbers,
subdivision name, city, state and date of preparation;
      (3)   Name and address of property owner;
      (4)   Name and address of person preparing plan with proof of
qualifications;
      (5)   Written and graphic scale at a minimum of 1” = 40’ or greater;
      (6)   North arrow;
      (7)   Boundaries of the area covered by the landscape plan with
dimensions;
      (8)   Location and size of existing or proposed public or private streets
or alleys;
      (9)   Location of existing or proposed structures, pavement, walkways,
and driveways;
      (10)   Location of existing or proposed easements;
      (11)   Location of existing or proposed drainage ways, and significant
natural features;
      (12)   The width of all required or proposed landscape buffer yards shown
and labeled;
      (13)   The width of all required or proposed landscape setbacks shown and
labeled;
      (14)   The size and type of all screening, included construction details,
shown and labeled;
      (15)   Location, size and species of all trees to be preserved with
protection measures identified on plans;
      (16)   Location, quantity, size and name of all proposed landscape
features, including plants, paving, benches, screens, fountains, statues,
earthen berms, ponds (to include depth of water), topography of the site and
any other proposed feature;
      (17)   Maintenance note, see division (F)(18);
      (18)   Enhanced pavement proposed labeled;
      (19)   Berms delineated with one foot contour intervals;
      (20)   Irrigation sleeves on the landscape, irrigation, paving and site
plans;
      (21)   Parking calculations to determine the number of trees required in
the parking areas;
      (22)   Landscape calculations to explain how the numbers and types of
plants were determined;
      (23)   Any other pertinent information deemed necessary by the Landscape
Administrator or City Engineer;
      (24)   Plant list shown in a similar format as shown in division (CC),
Recommended plant list.
   (N)   Buffer yard and screening. All new developments, except those in the D
and S Districts, are required to provide buffer yards and screening in
accordance with the provisions of this division. However, in the D (e.g., D-2,
D-3, and SD-1) and S (e.g., T-4, T-5, and T-6) Districts only, all permitted
mixed-use and other non-residential development shall comply with the
applicable provisions for the C-2 District where abutting any property zoned as
PR, A, and SF District. For all permitted mixed-use and other non-residential
development in the D (e.g., D-2, D-3, and SD-1) and S (e.g., T-4, T-5, and T-6)
Districts abutting a single-family residential (detached) lot, the applicable
provisions for the C-2 District shall also apply.
      (1)   For the purposes of this section, a BUFFER YARD is defined as a
strip of land, together with a specified amount of plantings and any structures
that may be permitted or required between land uses to eliminate or minimize
conflict between the uses.
      (2)   Buffer yards shall be located within and along the outer perimeter
of a lot or boundary line and entirely on private property. No part of any
visual screening shall be located in public right-of-way.
      (3)   Only those structures used for buffering and/or screening purposes
shall be located within a buffer yard. The buffer yard shall not include any
paved area, except for pedestrian sidewalks or paths or vehicular drives that
may intersect the buffer yard and which shall be the minimum width necessary to
provide pedestrian or vehicular access.
      (4)   The Landscape Administrator in coordination with the City Engineer
may review and approve an alternative type, location or configuration of buffer
yard or visual screening to avoid potential interference with public utilities
or flood water conveyance. The alternative recommendation shall meet the intent
of this section to screen or buffer uses. Wood fencing or chain link fencing
are not permitted alternatives. Preservation of existing natural areas and
vegetation may be considered as alternatives to separate incompatible land
uses.
      (5)   Trees, shrubs, and ground cover shall be planted in the buffer yard
by the developer or owner of the developing property according to the type of
buffer yard required.
      (6)   To determine the type of buffer yard and screening required, the
developer must know the zoning and proposed use of his property and the zoning
and existing use of any adjacent properties. The developer must first find
either the zoning or proposed use of the property being developed in the first
column of the table below, then look for the zoning or existing use of any
adjacent property in the top row of the table. The types of required buffer
yards and required screening are listed horizontally across from the proposed
use or zoning of the property being developed and under the corresponding
column heading depicting the zoning or existing use of the adjacent properties.
      (7)   Types of required buffer yards and screening:
                                                    Existing
 SF, 2F, PR w/ MF,       OP, C-1, C-2 C-3, I-1, I-2 Church,    Vacant PR MH
 Res           Townhouse                            School, or
                                                    City Use
                                                      Existing
           SF, 2F, PR MF,       OP, C-1, C- C-3, I-1, Church,    Vacant PR MH
           w/Res      Townhouse 2           I-2       School, or
                                                      City Use
SF, 2F, PR NA         NA        NA          NA        NA         NA        NA
w/Res      NA         NA        SW8**       SW8**     WF6        NA        NA
MF,        BY50       BY10      BY10        BY10      BY10       BY50      BY10
townhouse  SW6        NA        SW6**       SW6**     SW6        NA        SD6
OP, C-1,   BY20       BY10      BY10*       BY10*     BY10       BY20      BY10
C-2        SW8        SW6       NA          NA        SW6        NA        SW6
C-3, I-1,  BY30       BY10      BY10*       BY10*     BY10       BY30      BY10
I-2        SW8        SW6       NA          NA        SW6        NA        SW6
Church,    BY10       BY10      BY10        BY10      BY10       BY10      BY10
school, or SD6        SD6       NA          NA        NA         NA        NA
city use
MH         BY20       BY10      BY10        BY10      BY10       BY10      BY10
           SD6        SD6       SW6**       SW6**     SD6        SD6       SD6
*Tree plantings are reduced by 50%. When plantings are reduced, trees must be
staggered between properties.
**Not applicable if adjacent property is vacant.
PR w/Res means a lot or tract that is zoned PR and occupied by a residential
use.
 
      (8)   BY10: Minimum ten foot wide buffer yard with one tree planted for
every 25 linear feet or portion of said landscape buffer strip.
      (9)   BY20: Minimum 20 foot wide buffer yard with one tree planted for
every 25 linear feet or portion of said landscape buffer strip.
      (10)   BY30: Minimum 30 foot wide buffer yard with one tree planted for
every 25 linear feet or portion of said landscape buffer strip.
      (11)   BY50: Minimum 50 foot wide buffer yard with a double row of
plantings. One row shall contain deciduous canopy trees placed at one tee per
50 linear feet. A second row shall contain evergreen canopy trees placed at one
tree per 50 linear feet.
      (12)   Buffer yards are not required within the same multi-family
residential, town home or manufactured home subdivision on separately platted
lots.
      (13)   Where the adjacent property is in a Planned Development District,
the required buffer yard and screening shall be determined by the uses
permitted in the Planned Development District that abut the property being
developed.
      (14)   When a lot line is adjacent to two zoning districts, the required
buffer yard shall comply with the more restrictive requirement.
      (15)   Existing manufactured home rental communities or subdivisions are
exempt from the buffer yard requirements.
      (16)   For developments in the I-1 and I-2 Districts, which are not
abutting any properties in a residential zoning classification or a PR District
classification that is occupied by a residential use, the required buffer yard
may be waived in lieu of a designated landscaped area of at least 10% of the
total lot area. This landscaped area shall contain additional plant materials
to enhance customer walkways, building fronts, outdoor seating areas or other
similar areas preferably in front of or to the side of buildings or in parking
areas.
      (17)   When a shared drive or building is situated along or over a common
property line, the Landscape Administrator may allow a substitute of either:
         (a)   A drive aisle median strip adjacent to the shared drive as
described later in this section; or
         (b)   Require a landscape area with the equivalent square footage and
trees as in the required buffer yard to be placed anywhere else on the site in
addition to all the other required landscaping.
      (18)   A seven and one-half foot screening wall construction and
maintenance easement shall be provided by the developer of any residential
development submitted after the approval date of this ordinance that abuts non-
residential zoning in order to facilitate the construction and perpetual
maintenance of the masonry screening wall that is required on the non-
residential property under the provisions of this section.
      (19)   SW6: Minimum six and maximum eight foot tall screening wall.
      (20)   SW8: Eight foot tall screening wall.
      (21)   The SW6 and SW8 screening walls required in this section shall be
constructed of the following materials:
         (a)   Brick, stone or split-face concrete masonry unit;
         (b)   Pre-cast concrete wall or pour in place concrete wall with a
similar appearance as brick, stone or split-face concrete masonry unit.
      (22)   SD6: Minimum six foot and maximum of eight foot screening device.
      (23)   The SD6 screening devise required in this section shall be
constructed of the following materials.
         (a)   Wood - Cedar or redwood only;
         (b)   Masonry - Brick, stone, decorative or split-face block only;
         (c)   Pre-cast concrete wall or pour-in-place concrete walls with a
similar appearance as wood or masonry;
         (d)   Wrought iron or tubular steel provided that screening shrubs
(able to screen up to six feet in height within 18 months of planting) are
placed adjacent to the fence on private property;
         (e)   Combination of two or more of the above construction materials;
or
         (f)   Other alternate construction materials provided that the
Planning and Zoning Commission explicitly authorize them.
      (24)   Notwithstanding the above, the school district may use chain link
fencing with slats that provide 90% opaqueness.
      (25)   Construction design of the screening wall and device shall be in
accordance with the following:
         (a)   Screening device shall be constructed with cedar or redwood
panels and supported by horizontal rails of the same materials. Galvanized
steel posts with concrete footings shall be placed at intervals of no longer
than eight feet on center. The galvanized steel posts shall be a minimum 15 to
18 gage and minimum 2-3/8” in diameter. There shall be at least three
horizontal rails for a six foot high fence and four horizontal rails for an
eight foot high fence. A hole with a minimum diameter of ten inches and a
minimum depth of 24 inches shall be required for the concrete footings.
         (b)   The side of a screening device with horizontal rails and posts
shall not face the adjacent property or street along the perimeter of the
development.
         (c)   When a screening wall is built in phases for a development, the
color, height, style and exterior finish for all phases shall be as closely
similar as possible, and shall, in no case, be incompatible. The screening wall
shall be equally finished on both sides.
         (d)   All screening walls required by this section shall be
constructed of materials with earth tone colors or traditional masonry colors.
Screening walls with nontraditional masonry colors shall be prohibited.
         (e)   Smooth-face concrete masonry units (i.e., haydite blocks) shall
not be permitted as construction material for screening.
         (f)   The screening wall or device shall be designed and constructed
to prevent any drainage or erosion problems.
         (g)   A metal “L” or similar support bracket shall be situated under
the bottom row of brick or stone of the screening wall.
         (h)   The height of a screening wall or device shall be measured from
the ground level at the bottom of the wall or device. However, a screening wall
or device erected on top of a retaining wall or structure shall not exceed six
feet in height as measured from the bottom of the screening wall or device to
the top thereof.
         (i)   Designs for the SW6 and SW8 shall be prepared and sealed by a
professional architect or engineer and designed in accordance with the City of
Mansfield Building Code.
      (26)   The owner of the property with the required screening shall be
responsible for the maintenance of the screening in a structurally sound
condition. This provision does not relieve abutting property owner of liability
for damage caused by such owner or his employees, agents, or contractors.
   (O)   Residential subdivision screening and buffering.
      (1)   Screening and buffering of a residential subdivision shall comply
with the requirements of the Subdivision Control Ordinance, as amended.
      (2)   Buffering shall be provided in the form of a common area lot(s)
wherever a residential subdivision is adjacent to a public thoroughfare. The
intent is to create an aesthetically pleasing corridor which encourages harmony
and discourages monotony, while ensuring safety and security and reducing noise
and glare in neighborhoods. Community perimeter walls or fences shall be
constructed of masonry materials or ornamental metal, such as wrought iron, or
a combination of both, and located within a minimum 20 foot landscaped area
adjacent to the thoroughfare.
      (3)   In addition to the enhanced entryway standards in § 155.056, a
variety of plant materials shall be provided from division (CC), Recommended
plant list, or as approved by the Landscape Administrator. Twenty-five percent
of the length of the screening device shall have shrub beds, flower beds and
groundcover. At minimum, one canopy tree and one ornamental tree shall be
provided every 50 linear feet, or portion thereof.
   (P)   Street landscape setback.
      (1)   When any townhouse is constructed on a lot in a MF-1 or MF-
2 District, a 25 foot wide landscape setback shall be provided along the entire
boundary of the lot that abuts a public street. The setback shall not include
any paved area, except for pedestrian walkways or paths or vehicular drives
that may intersect the setback and which shall be the minimum width necessary
to provide pedestrian or vehicular access.
      (2)   When any apartment (i.e., multi-family) is constructed on a lot in
a MF-1 or MF-2 District, a 50 foot wide landscape setback shall be provided
along the entire boundary of the lot that abuts a public street. The setback
shall not include any paved area, except for pedestrian walkways or paths or
vehicular drives that may intersect the landscape setback and which shall be
the minimum width necessary to provide pedestrian or vehicular access. Other
building setbacks may also apply (Refer to Table (B)(1) in §
155.055).
      (3)   When any land use is established on a lot in the OP, C-1, C-2, C-3,
I-1, I-2, FR, SE, and PD Districts, a 20 foot wide landscape setback shall be
provided along the entire boundary of the lot that abuts a public street,
exclusive of driveways and access ways at points of ingress and egress to and
from the lot. For single-family residential (detached) in a PD District, a 20
foot wide landscape setback shall not be required along any lot line bordering
a street or civic space or other required open space.
      (4)   When a permitted building dedicated to arts, culture, education,
government, and places of worship is established on a lot in a PR, A, SF, 2F,
MF-1, or MF-2 District, a 20 foot wide landscape setback shall be provided
along the entire boundary of the lot that abuts a public street, exclusive of
driveways and access ways at points of ingress and egress to and from the lot.
      (5)   Within the required landscape setback, one canopy tree shall be
provided for each 40 feet or portion thereof, except that for any multi-family
dwelling, one canopy tree and one ornamental tree shall be provided for each 40
feet or portion thereof.
      (6)   Trees planted within the landscape setback may be clustered or
staggered in order to achieve a naturalistic disposition, provided tree spacing
shall not be greater than 50 feet.
   (Q)   Parking lot perimeter landscaping. In the MF-1, MF-2, OP, C-1, C-2, C-
3, I-1, I-2, FR, SE, and PD Districts, and for all permitted buildings
dedicated to arts, culture, education, government, and places of worship in any
zoning district, all surface parking lot, vehicular use and maneuvering areas
that are not visually screened from thoroughfares and civic spaces or other
required open space by buildings shall be screened from view of thoroughfares
and civic spaces and other required open spaces in accordance with the
following requirements:
      (1)   The screening shall be a minimum height of three feet, at maturity,
(in case of plants) above the grade of the parking lot, vehicle use and/or
maneuvering areas.
      (2)   The screening shall consist of one or a combination of the
following:
         (a)   Screening shrubs;
         (b)   Sodded berms; or
         (c)   Screening wall constructed of brick, stone, or stucco (i.e.,
hard-coat with three-step process) material masonry building material that
complement the building, three feet high with shrubs.
      (3)   The screening may occur within the street landscape setback.
      (4)   Landscaping, except required grass and low ground cover, shall not
be located closer than three feet from the edge of any parking space. Wheel
stops may be used if desired.
   (R)   Parking lot internal landscaping. Any parking lot that contains 20 or
more parking spaces shall provide internal landscaping as provided below:
      (1)   A ratio of one canopy tree for every ten parking spaces shall be
provided throughout any surface parking lot.
      (2)   Planting areas for trees within the parking rows of a surface
parking lot shall be achieved by one or both of the following:
         (a)   A continuous landscaped median strip, at least six feet wide
(back-of-curb to back-of curb) between rows of parking spaces. Trees shall be
placed at intervals no greater than 40 feet apart or fraction thereof.
         (b)   Landscape islands, at least the minimum size of a regular
parking space of nine by 18 feet or 162 square feet.
      (3)   Parking lots that are designed with planted or raised landscape
islands shall design the islands so as not to interfere with the opening of car
doors in adjacent spaces.
      (4)   Every required landscape island must include one canopy tree.
   (S)   (1)   Surface parking lot end caps. One landscape island shall be
located at the terminus of each row of parking and shall contain one tree.
      (2)   Landscape islands are not required when the surface parking lot
spaces are located behind a building and are screened from view of the street
or civic space or other required open space for warehousing and distribution,
manufacturing or wholesale uses.
   (T)   Drive aisles into non-residential projects. A landscape median strip
with a minimum width of six feet (back-of-curb to back-of-curb) shall be
incorporated in the parking lot design to separate the parking area and the
drive aisle with direct connection to the street. One tree shall be planted for
every 40 linear feet or fraction thereof.
   (U)   Foundation area and ground equipment landscaping.
      (1)   In the OP, C-1, C-2, C-3, D, S, I-1, I-2, FR, SE, and PD Districts,
and all permitted buildings dedicated to arts, culture, education, government,
and places of worship in any zoning district, a minimum four foot wide
landscape area shall be required adjacent to or within ten feet of all building
façades with building entrances and building façades facing a public street
(exclusive of driveways, access walkways, and loading docks and service and
delivery areas).
      (2)   Planting shall emphasize softening large expanses of building
walls, accenting building entrances and architectural features, and screening
mechanical equipment and shall include a variety of grass, ground cover,
plants, flower beds, shrubs and trees.
      (3)   Where there are extended roofs or similar architectural features
including, but not limited to awnings and canopies are used to provide a
covered walkway adjacent to a building, foundation plantings may be omitted.
However, landscaping is encouraged to distinguish vehicular areas from the
building(s).
      (4)   Plantings shall be situated around, along or adjacent to the low
wing walls or screening walls required in this section.
   (V)   Retaining walls. Retaining walls four feet in height or taller shall
be made of brick or brick veneer or stone or stone veneer and shall be capped.
Retaining walls less than four feet in height shall be supplemented with
evergreen shrubs subject to the review and approval of the Landscape
Administrator.
   (W)   Detention/retention ponds.
      (1)   Detention and retention ponds, or other holding areas that are part
of a storm/surface water system, shall be enhanced as an amenity of the new
development.
      (2)   When not designed as an integral part of a landscape plan or
featured as an amenity (i.e., water features in a wet bottom basin or
recreation/open space in a dry bottom basin) all detention ponds, retention
ponds, or other similar holding areas shall be screened from view from any
existing or future public street, from existing or planned civic spaces or
other required open spaces, and from adjoining property. Screening may be
accomplished using landscape materials that complement the overall design of
the site or screening walls or devices matching the predominant building
materials used on the adjacent buildings or landscaping. When screening walls
or devices are used, provisions should be made for safety, access and
maintenance of any pond areas.
      (3)   The development of any storm/surface water system shall be in
accordance with all applicable design criteria established by the Public Works
Department.
   (X)   Street intersection landscape areas. For all new development in the
MF-1, MF-2, OP, C-1, C-2, C-3, D, S, I-1, I-2, FR, SE, and PD Districts, where
lots or parcels of land are located at the intersection of two streets where at
least one street has a right-of-way width of 60 feet or larger as shown on the
city’s thoroughfare plan, a 30 foot landscape setback shall be provided
parallel to the minimum visibility triangle required by the Mansfield Roadway
and Access Management Criteria. No landscaping improvement shall be installed
or constructed within any visibility triangles.
   (Y)   Other landscape areas. For all development in the MF-1, MF-2, OP, C-1,
C-2, C-3, D, S, I-1, I-2, FR, SE, and PD Districts a minimum of 10% of each lot
shall be devoted to living landscaping which shall include grass, ground cover,
plants, flower beds, shrubs and trees. Required street landscape setbacks,
intersection landscaping, foundation landscaping and landscape buffer yards may
be included in this calculation. Parking lot internal and perimeter landscaping
shall not be included in the calculations unless an area exceeds the minimum
requirement of this section, then the additional area may be included.
   (Z)   Residential landscape requirements. Landscape plans prepared by an RLA
are not required for any lot or parcel of land in the PR, A, SF, and 2F
Districts; however, home builders shall submit a landscape plan prepared by an
RLA for common areas and civic space and other required open space for the
proposed project that meets the applicable standards of this section. A
landscape plan prepared by an RLA shall be required for all residential
projects in the D, S, and PD Districts.
      (1)   Every lot in a PR, A, SF, 2F, MF-1, MF-2, D, and S District shall
provide a minimum number of canopy trees per lot or dwelling as follows:
Zoning District Minimum Number of Trees Required
Zoning District                 Minimum Number of Trees Required
PR                              4 per a lot
A                               N/A
SF-12/22/ SF-5AC/24             4 per lot
SF-9.6/20                       3 per lot
SF-8.4/18 or 16                 3 per lot
SF-7.5/16 or 12 and SF-6/12     2 per lot
2F                              1 per dwelling
MF-1 or MF-2                    1 per
D (i.e., D-1)*                  2 per lot
D (e.g., D-2, D-3, and SD 1)*   Determined by warrant
S (e.g., T-3, T-4, T-5, and T 6 Determined by warrant
*In the D and S Districts, frontage trees must comply with the street type
requirements for these districts. Minimum site plantings will be determined by
warrant.
 
      (2)   All required trees shall be planted prior to approval of final
inspection or occupancy of the applicable dwelling unit.
      (3)   All residential streets shall have streetscapes planted with trees.
Trees shall be planted in all parkways (i.e., portion of the street that
accommodates street trees and other landscape) where a parkway is a minimum of
four feet in width, unless otherwise approved by the Director of Planning or
designee. Street tree species shall be subject to review and approval by the
Landscape Administrator. No street tree shall be planted within 30 feet of an
intersection.
   (AA)   Residential foundation plantings.
      (1)   In the PR, SF, 2F, D, S, and PD Districts, shrubs shall be planted
for at least 25% of the length of the foundation fronting a thoroughfare or a
civic space or other required open space for all single-family residential
(detached). This provision shall not apply to any foundation screened from the
thoroughfare or civic space or other required open space by a fence, hedge,
wall, or other visual screen subject to the review and approval by the
Landscape Administrator.
      (2)   In the MF-1, MF-2, D, S, and PD Districts, a single row of
evergreen shrubs shall be planted along the entire length of the building
facade of each townhouse (including row houses) and multi-family residential
building, excluding driveways, walkways, and other pedestrian paths.
      (3)   In the MF-1, MF-2, D, S, and PD Districts, evergreen shrubs shall
be planted around HVAC units, meters, transformers, and other utility units;
trash containers, refuse or recycling storage facilities; pool equipment, or
service areas, as well as around and adjacent to the screening walls required
by this section. Openings or access to the equipment shall not be obstructed
and openings shall be oriented so that they are not visible from the public
right-of-way or open space to the extent practical. The height of the shrubs
required herein shall be equal to or greater than the height of the HVAC units,
meters, transformers, and other utility units; trash containers, refuse or
recycling storage facilities; pool equipment, or service areas required to be
visually screened.
      (4)   Unless specified otherwise, the above screening shrubs shall be a
minimum of two feet in height at the time of planting and not of a dwarf
variety.
   (BB)   Residential lawn requirements.
      (1)   In the PR, SF, 2F, D, S, and PD Districts, the front, side and rear
yards adjacent to a single family residential dwelling (detached), that is
outside of any rear yard fencing shall be planted with grass or ground cover,
exclusive of driveways, sidewalks, flower beds, gardens, and other planting
prior to final inspection. Regardless of the zoning district, for lots over
20,000 square feet, the area around the dwelling extending 25 feet from the
pad, shall be planted with grass or ground cover, exclusive of driveways,
sidewalks, flower beds, gardens, and the like prior to final inspection.
      (2)   In the MF-1 and MF-2 Districts, all lawns shall be sodded or
planted in ground cover, exclusive of driveways, sidewalks, flowerbeds,
gardens, and other permitted landscape material prior to final inspection.
      (3)   All residential lawns and landscaping shall be irrigated with an
underground irrigation system as specified in this section. On large lots, the
area of irrigation may be limited to 12,000 square feet, subject to approval by
the Landscape Administrator.
   (CC)   Preservation credits.
      (1)   The following preservation credits shall be considered when
developing around existing quality trees.
      (2)   Quality trees preserved on a site meeting the herein specifications
may be credited toward meeting the tree requirement of any landscaping
provision of this section for that area within which they are located,
according to the following table:
 
Diameter (DBH) of Existing Tree Credit against Tree Requirement
6" to 8"                        2 trees
9" to 15"                       3 trees
16" to 30"                      4 trees
31" to 46"                      5 trees
47" or more                     8 trees
 
      (3)   For purposes of this section, the Diameter at Breast Height (DBH)
dimension shall be measured at four and one-half feet above the ground and
shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.
      (4)   Existing trees, not on the approved tree list, may receive credit
if authorized by the Landscape Administrator.
      (5)   Credit will be revoked where trees intended for preservation
credits are damaged due to, among other things, construction, broken branches,
and soil compaction or soil cut/fill.
      (6)   To receive credit for existing trees in a parking area, the island
or area around the trunk of the tree must be enlarged and sized properly to
ensure the best scenario for survival.
      (7)   Prior to any construction or land development, the developer shall
clearly mark all trees to be preserved. Protective barriers shall be installed
and maintained throughout the development process. The developer shall not
allow the movement of heavy equipment or the storage of equipment, materials,
debris, or fill to be placed within the drip line of any trees. This is not
intended to prohibit the normal construction required within parking lots.
      (8)   During construction, the developer shall not allow cleaning of
equipment or material under the canopy of any existing tree or group of trees.
There shall be no disposal of any waste material such as, but not limited to,
paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar, and the like under the canopy
of any existing tree or group of trees.
      (9)   No attachment or wires of any kind, other than those of a
protective nature, shall be attached to any tree.
      (10)   If any tree that was preserved and used as a credit toward
landscaping requirements is later removed for any reason, it shall be replaced
by the number of trees for which it was originally credited. Replacement trees
shall have a minimum trunk caliper of three inches.
   (DD)   Prohibited plant list. The plants listed below shall not be used to
fulfill the planting requirements of this section.
      (1)   Prohibited trees:
Common Name Botanic Name
Common Name     Botanic Name
Arborvitae      Thuja accidentalis
Arizona Ash     Fraxinus velutina ‘Arizonia’
Bois D’arc    Maclura pomifera
Bradford Pear   Pyrus calleryana ‘Bradford’, ‘Callery’
Chinese Tallow  Sapium sebiferum
Cottonwood      Populus deltoides
Elm, Siberian   Ulmus pumila
Lombardy Poplar Populus nigra italica
Maple, Silver   Acersaccharinum
Mimosa          Albizzia julibrissen
Mulberry        Morus alba
Willow          Salix species
 
      (2)   Prohibited shrubs:
 
Common Name Botanic Name
Euonymus    Euonymus japonicus
Ligustrum   Ligustrum japonicum
Pittosporum Pittosporum tobbira
Loquat      Eriobotrya japonica
Oleander    Nerium oleander
 
   (EE)   Recommended plant list. All plants used to satisfy this section shall
be of a species common or adaptable to this region of Texas. The following is a
list of recommended plants. Plant material not on this list must be approved by
the Landscape Administrator before installation.
      (1)   Recommended canopy trees:
Common Name Botanic Name
Common Name             Botanic Name
American Elm            Ulmus americana
Austrian Pine           Pinus nigra
Bald Cypress            Taxodium distichum
Bald Cypress, Montezuma Taxodium mucronatum
Black Hickory           Carya texana
Black Walnut            Juglans nigra
Elm, Cedar              Ulmus crassifolia
Chinese Pistache        Pistacia chinensis
Eastern Red Cedar       Juniperus virginiana
Gingko                  Ginko biloba
Green Ash               Fraxinus pennsylvanica
Gum Bumelia             Bumelia lanuginosa
Magnolia, DD Blanchard  Magnolia Grandiflora ‘DD Blanchard’
Magnolia, Southern      Magnolia grandiflora
Maple, Big Tooth        Acer grandidentatum
Oak, Bigelow            Quercus sinuata
Oak, Black              Quercus velutina
Oak, Blackjack          Quercus marilandica
Oak, Bur                Quercus macrocarpa
Oak, Chinquapin         Quercus muehlenbergi
Oak, Lacy               Quercus laceyi
Oak, Live               Quercus virginiana
Oak, Mexican White      Quercus polymorpha
Oak, Post               Quercus stellata
Oak, Sawtooth           Quercus accutisima
Oak, Shumard            Quercus shumardi
Oak, Texas Red          Quercus buckleyi
Pecan                   Carya illinoensis
Rusty Blackhaw          Viburnum rufidulum
Sweet Gum               Liquidambarstyraciflua
Texas Ash               Fraxinus texensis
Texas Walnut            Juglans microcarpa
 
      (2)   The following recommended tree species shall be allowed in medians
and rights-of-way when approved by the city. Additional tree species with non-
aggressive root systems/deep root systems may be authorized for planting in
such areas by the Landscape Administrator.
Common Name Botanic Name
Common Name                    Botanic Name
Bald Cypress ‘Shawnee Brave�Taxodium distichum ‘Shawnee Brave’
Chinese Pistache ‘Keith DaveyPistacia chinensis ‘Keith Davey’
Elm, Cedar                     Ulmus crassifolia
Elm, Allee                     Ulmus chinensis, Allee
Gingko                         Ginko biloba
Goldenrain Tree                Koelreuteria paniculata
Black gum                      Nyssa sylvatica
Honeylocust, Thornless         Gleditsia tricanthos f. inermis
Maple, Big Tooth               Acer grandidentatum
Maple, October Glory           Acer rubrum 'October Glory'
Maple, Trident                 Acer buergerianum
Oak, Durand                    Quercus sinuata var. sinuate
Oak, Monterrey                 Quercus polymorpha
Oak, Chinquapin                Quercus muehlenbergi
Sweetgum                       Liquidambarstyraciflua
Sycamore, American             Platanus occidentals
Sycamore, Mexican              Platanus mexicana
 
      (3)   The following recommended tree species are understory and
ornamental trees. They are allowed to be planted in overhead utility easements
where required. These species were selected due to their relatively small
mature size and growth characteristics. Trees planted in these areas shall be
planted at a ratio of two trees for every one canopy tree required.
Common Name Botanic Name
Common Name              Botanic Name
Carolina Buckthorn       Rhamnus caroliniana
Cherry Laurel            Prunus caroliniana
Crape Myrtle             Lagerstroemia indica
Desert Willow            Chilopsis linearis
Eve’s Necklace         Sophora affinis
Eldarica Pine            Pinus eldarica
Goldenrain Tree          Koelreuteria paniculata
Hercules Club            Zanthoxylum dava-herculis
Japanese Black Pine      Pinus thunbergii
Mexican Buckeye          Ungnadia speciosa
Mexican Plum             Prunus mexicana
Native Hawthorns         Crataegus spp
Permsimmon               Diospyros virginiana
Ponderosa Pine           Pinus ponderosa
Possumhaw Holly          Ilex decidua
Prairie Flame-leaf Sumac Rhus lanceobta
Redbuds                  Cercis spp.
Rusty Blackhaw Viburnum  Viburnum rufidulum
Savannah Holly           Ilex opaca ‘Savannah’
Shantung Maple           Acer truncatum
Slash Pine               Pinus elliottii
Southern Wax Myrtle      Myrica cerifera
Texas Buckeye            Aesculus arguta
Vitex                    Vitex agnus-castus
Yaupon Holly             Ilex vomitoria
 
      (4)   Recommended shrubs:
Common Name Botanic Name
Common Name             Botanic Name
Dwarf Burford Holly     Ilex burfordii ‘nana’
Dwarf Chinese Holly     Ilex cornuta ‘Rotunda’
Dwarf Crape Myrtle      Lagerstroemia indica
Dwarf Wax Myrtle        Myrica pusilla
Dwarf Yaupon            Ilex vomitoria ‘nana’
Eleagnus                Eleagnus ebbengii
Flowering Quince        Chanomeles ‘Texas Scarlet’
Forsythia               Forsythia intermedia
Foster Holly            Ilex x attenuata ‘Foster’
Glossy Abelia           Abelia grandiflora
Japanese Barberry       Berberis thunbergi
Nandina                 Nandina Domestica
Nellie R. Stevens Holly Ilex x ‘Nellie R. Stevens’
Pampas Grass            Cordateria Selloana
Photinia                Photinia Fraseri
Red Barberry            Berberis thunbergii
Red Yucca               Hesperaloe parvifolia
Sea Green Juniper       Juniperus Chinensis ‘Sea Green’
Spiraea                 Spiraea prunifolia
Tam Juniper             Juniperus sabina ‘Tam’
Texas Sage              Leucophyllum frutescens
Variegated Privet       Ligustrum sinense ‘Variegata’
 
   (FF)   Landscape plan summary charts. These charts shall be completed with
information and provided on every landscape plan submittal. They represent the
minimum amount of information required. The charts may be amended from time to
time, as needed, without revising the section.
Summary Chart - Buffery Yards/Setbacks
Location of                  Bufferyard                          Screening
Buffer Yard Required/ Length or Setback Canopy Ornamental Shrubs Wall/Device
or Setback  Provided         Width/Type Trees  Trees             Height &
                                                                 Material
Summary Chart - Buffery Yards/Setbacks
Location of                  Bufferyard                          Screening
Buffer Yard Required/ Length or Setback Canopy Ornamental Shrubs Wall/Device
or Setback  Provided         Width/Type Trees  Trees             Height &
                                                                 Material
North       Required                                         
           Provided                                         
East        Required                                         
           Provided                                         
South       Required                                         
           Provided                                         
West        Required                                         
           Provided                                         
* Note any credits used in calculations:
a.
Other comments:
1.
2.
3.
 
Summary Chart - Interior Landscape
 Landscape Area  % of Landscape Canopy Trees Ornamental Shrubs Ground Cover (in
 (in Sq. Ft.)    Area                        Trees             Sq. Ft.)
Summary Chart - Interior Landscape
         Landscape    % of                   Ornamental        Ground Cover
         Area (in Sq. Landscape Canopy Trees Trees      Shrubs (in Sq. Ft.)
         Ft.)         Area
                                                          
Required                                                   
Provided                                                   
                                                          
* Note any credits used in calculations:
a.
Other Comments:
1.
2.
3.
 
 
Summary Chart - Interior Parking Lot Landscaping
# Of Required Parking Spaces
# Of Provided Parking Spaces
# Of Tree Islands Provided
* Note any credits used in calculations:
a.
Other Comments:
1.
2.
 
 
* Existing Tree Credit Summary
                              Applied to
                        Canopy Trees      Understory Trees
                              Trees @ 6" - 12" DBH                                                          
                              Trees @ Greater than 12" DBH                                                       
 
 
   (GG)   Typical plant material list summary charts.
QNTY SYM COMMON NAME BOTANICAL NAME SIZE HT NOTES
QNTY SYM       COMMON NAME     BOTANICAL NAME  SIZE    HT         NOTES
CANOPY TREES                                  
##      �Cedar Elm       Ulmus           4" cal.           Single trunk
                               crassifolia
##      �Bur OakO        Quercus         4" cal.           Single trunk
                               macrocarpa
##      �Lace Bark Elm   Ulmus           4" cal.           Single trunk
                               parvifolia
##      �Sawtooth Oak    Quercus         4" cal.           Single trunk
                               accutisima
##      �Bald Cypress    Taxodium        4" cal.           Single trunk
                               distichum
ORNAMENTAL                                    
TREES
##      �Austrian Pine   Pinus nigra     30 gal. 6' - 8'  Full branch
                                                                  pattern
##      �Shantung Maple  Acer truncatum  30 gal. 8' - 10'    
##      �Vitex VT        Vitex agnus-    B&B     6' - 8'     
                               castus
##      �Savannah Holly  Ilex opeca      15 gal. 8' - 10'    
##      �Possumhaw Holly Ilex decidua    B&B     6' - 8'     
SHRUBS                                                         
##      �Eleagnus        Eleagnus        3 gal.            Plant 30" on
                               ebbengii                           center
##      �Nellie R.       Illex x 'Nellie 5 gal.            Plant 5' on
               Stevens Holly   R. Stevens'                        center
##      �Texas Sage      Leucophyllum    5 gal.            Plant 3' on
                               frutescens                         center
##      �Red Yucca       Hesperaloe      5 gal.            As shown
                               parvifolia
##      �Tam Juniper     Juniperus       3 gal.            Plant 3' on
                               Sabina                             center
GROUNDCOVERS                                                   
##      �Creeping        Juniperus       3 gal.            Plant 24" on
               Juniper         horizontalis                       center
##       Maidenhair      Miscanthus spp. 3 gal.            Plant 3' on
               Grass                                              center
##       Winter Creeper  Euonymus        4" pot            Plant 12" on
                               fortunei                           center
               Virginia        Parthenocissus                     3' O.C. under
##      �Creeper         quinquefolia    1 gal.            existing Post
                                                                  Oak
 
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86; Am. Ord. OR-2223-21, passed 10-11-21; Am. Ord. OR-
2264-22, passed 7-11-22; AM. Ord. OR-2316-23, passed 7-10-23)
§ 155.093 SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SCREENING OF MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT AND
SERVICE AREAS.
   (A)   Equipment screening.
      (1)   Multi-family residential development.
         (a)   Exposed conduit, ladders, utility boxes, stack pipes and drain
spouts shall be painted to match the primary color or color sequence to aid in
blending with the color of the building.
         (b)   All buildings designed with parapet walls or other similar
architectural elements shall be constructed to a height of not less than one
foot above the horizontal plane of the highest (after-installation height)
roof-mounted mechanical unit, HVAC and/or other equipment (e.g. satellite
dishes, solar panels, etc.). If free clearance or otherwise unobstructed flow
or space is required by the Fire or Building Code, equipment should be
positioned beyond the parapet wall so as not to be visible.
         (c)   Electrical transformers, gas meters and other service areas
shall be screened from view of a public street or adjacent property.
         (d)   In all multi-family developments, heating, ventilation, and air-
conditioning (HVAC) equipment on the roof shall be screened so that they are
not visible from the street or the boundary of the abutting property.
         (e)   The screening of HVAC equipment on the ground shall utilize
construction materials that match the predominant material used on the
building; no wood or chain-link fences shall be allowed.
      (2)   Non-residential development. The provisions in this section shall
apply to new buildings or new developments in the OP, C-1 through C-3 Zoning
Districts, Planned Developments and in the I-1 or I-2 Zoning Districts that are
within the Freeway Overlay District or within 300 feet from the boundary of any
property in a residential zoning classification or a PR zoning classification.
         (a)   Exposed conduit, ladders, utility boxes, stack pipes, drain
spouts and gas meters shall be painted to match the primary color or color
sequence to aid in blending with the color of the building.
         (b)   For new buildings and developments with building permit
applications submitted on or after September 14, 2004, parapet walls or other
similar architectural elements shall be constructed to a height of not less
than one foot above the horizontal plane of the highest (after-installation
height) roof-mounted mechanical unit, HVAC and/or other equipment (e.g.
satellite dishes, solar panels, and the like). If free clearance or otherwise
unobstructed flow of space is required by the Fire or Building Code, equipment
should be positioned within the parapet wall so as not to be visible from the
street or abutting properties.
         (c)   For new buildings and developments with building permit
applications submitted on or after September 14, 2004, all ground-mounted
service equipment such as air conditioners; electrical transformers, telephone
line pedestals and gas meters; trash compactors; satellite dishes and other
service areas (e.g. grease collection areas/facilities, box storage, plastic
container storage, storage racks, etc.) shall be located behind the building,
or if located on the side of the building shall not be forward of the midpoint
of the side building elevation, except that switch gear devices may be located
at any place on a property.
         (d)   All ground-mounted service equipment and service areas shall be
screened from view of public rights-of-way and abutting properties as follows:
            1.   When any portion of an electrical transformer or telephone
line pedestal is located within five feet of a building, the transformer or
pedestal shall be screened by a screening wall.
            2.   Electrical transformers and telephone line pedestals located
more than five feet from a building, gas meters, and satellite dishes shall be
screened by a screening wall or by a hedgerow of dense evergreen shrubbery or
plant materials to form a visual screen using plant materials approved by the
Landscape Administrator.
            3.   Switch gear devices shall be screened by a hedgerow of dense
evergreen shrubbery or plant materials to form a visual screen using plant
materials approved by the Landscape Administrator.
            4.   All other types of service equipment and service areas shall
be screened by a screening wall.
         (e)   Developments for which building permit applications were
submitted prior to September 14, 2004, shall be exempt from the provisions of
this section, provided that all heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning
(HVAC) equipment on the ground or on the roof shall be screened so that they
are not visible from the street abutting the property or the boundary of the
abutting properties.
         (f)   Where ground-mounted service equipment and service areas are
screened by a screening wall, the wall shall be constructed of materials that
match the predominant material used on the building; no wood or chain-link
fences shall be allowed. The wall shall be landscaped in compliance with §
155.092. The base of the wall shall be elevated four inches from grade,
excluding columns, to accommodate ventilation and drainage.
         (g)   Screening of ground-mounted service equipment and service area,
whether by a wall or landscaping, shall be of a height not less than the height
of the equipment being screened.
         (h)   Screening walls and landscape screening shall adhere to policies
and standards for access, operational clearances, safety and ventilation of the
utility company and/or equipment owner.
         (i)   The cost of installing, maintaining, and replacing screening
walls and/or landscaping required by this section shall be the responsibility
of the property owner or developer, and not the responsibility of the utility
company providing service to the property. A utility company shall not be
responsible for the replacement of any required screening wall or landscaping
removed by the utility company to permit reasonable access to the service
equipment.
      (3)   All development.
         (a)   The fencing, screening or enclosure of individual rooftop
equipment shall not be permitted.
         (b)   The developer shall provide a line-of-sight drawing with
building permit application upon request by city staff to ensure compliance
with the provisions in this subdivision.
         (c)   In case that visual screening of HVAC equipment cannot be
achieved due to topographic differences between abutting properties, or between
the property and the abutting street, the developer or owner may appeal to the
Board of Adjustment for a special exception as set forth in §
155.082.
   (B)   Trash containers, refuse or recycling storage screening.
      (1)   Trash container and storage area for refuse or material awaiting
disposal or recycling shall be visually screened on three sides with a fence or
wall not less than the height of the trash container or the refuse or materials
being stored. The remaining side shall be equipped with an opaque gate.
      (2)   The screening shall utilize construction materials that match the
predominant material used on the building; no wood or chain-link fence
materials shall be allowed except for the opaque gate.
      (3)   In case the visual screening required above cannot be achieved due
to topographic differences between abutting properties, or between the property
and the abutting street, the developer or owner may appeal to the Board of
Adjustment for a special exception as set forth in §
155.082.
   (C)   Loading dock and truck berth screening.
      (1)   In C-1, C-2 or C-3 zoning, all loading docks and truck berths not
totally screened by an intervening building shall be screened from view from
the public streets that abut the property where the loading docks and truck
berths are located.
      (2)   The developer shall provide a line-of-sight drawing with building
permit application upon request by city staff to ensure compliance with the
provisions in this division.
      (3)   Screening shall be accomplished by an opaque screening wall,
earthen berm or a combination of screening wall and earthen berm with a minimum
height of ten feet, unless the developer shall present evidence to prove that
an alternate height is sufficient due to the unique configuration of the site.
      (4)   Screening shall be of a length to screen the maximum size truck or
tractor-trailer that can be accommodated on site.
      (5)   The screening shall utilize construction materials that match the
predominant material used on the building; no wood or chain-link fences shall
be allowed.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86; Am. Ord. OR-2223-21, passed 10-11-21)
§ 155.094 GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL FENCES AND FREE STANDING WALLS.
   (A)   General provisions.
      (1)   Property owners' responsibility.
         (a)   Required screening fences and walls shall be perpetually and
adequately maintained or replaced by the owner or user of the more intensive
zoned property.
         (b)   All structurally unsound fences, when not required by this
chapter, shall be repaired, replaced or removed by the owner or user of the
property upon which the fence is located.
         (c)   The construction of a fence or wall shall not preclude the
property owners' responsibility to maintain and keep the following area free
and clear of debris and high weeds:
            1.   The area between the fence and property line or between
parallel fences; and
            2.   The area between the fence and the edge of the street.
      (2)   Front yards. No fence or free standing wall greater than 36 inches
in height shall extend into the required front yard except for decorative
fences or security fences meeting the following requirements:
         (a)   Fences 36 inches or more above the finished grade of the lot
shall not be more than 25% solid.
         (b)   The primary fencing material shall be of wrought iron, exposed
aggregate tilt wall, fired masonry, approved wood rail construction or other
material approved by the city Building Official.
      (3)   Side fence and free standing wall setbacks. No fence or wall
greater than 36 inches in height shall be located less than 15 feet from any
side property line that is adjacent to a public street unless:
         (a)   The subject lot backs up to the rear property line of another
lot, in which case no side fence setback is required.
         (b)   The subject lot backs up to an access easement or alley right-
of-way, in which case a ten-foot visibility triangle shall be required.
      (4)   Rear fence and free standing wall setbacks. Fences and walls
meeting all of the above requirements may be erected on the rear property line
except, however, lots whose rear property line abut a public street on which
one of the immediate adjacent lots maintains its required front yard, then no
fence nor wall greater than 36 inches in height shall be located within 15 feet
of the subject lot's rear property line or closer to the street right-of-way
than the front setback line of the adjacent lot, whichever is closer.
   (B)   General restrictions concerning all fences and free standing walls.
      (1)   No fence, screen, free standing wall or other visual barrier shall
be constructed or placed in such a manner as would endanger the health or
safety of the general public.
      (2)   Obstruction prohibited. No fence, screen, free standing wall or
other visual barrier shall be so located or placed that it obstructs the vision
of a motor vehicle driver approaching any street, alley or drive intersection.
A visual barrier shall be deemed as any fence, wall hedge, shrubbery, etc.,
higher than 36 inches above ground level at the property line, except single
trees having single trunks, which are pruned to a height of seven feet above
ground level.
      (3)   Twenty-five foot visibility triangle required. No fence, screen
wall or visual barrier shall be located or placed where it obstructs the vision
of motor vehicle drivers approaching any street intersection. At all street
intersections clear vision shall be maintained across the lot for a distance of
25 feet back from the property corner along both streets.
      (4)   The side of the fence with exposed posts or rails shall be oriented
away from view from the adjacent property and public streets.
      (5)   After December 10, 2012, all new wood privacy fences and the
replacement or repair of existing wood privacy fences shall comply with the
following requirements:
         (a)   A permit must be obtained prior to the construction of a new
wood privacy fence of five feet in height or greater.
         (b)   Fence planks or panels must be at least inch in thickness.
         (c)   Fence planks or panels must have at least one inch gap between
the ground and the wood to prevent rotting and decay.
         (d)   All vertical posts shall be two and inch minimum outside
diameter standard pipe gauge galvanized steel.
         (e)   Vertical posts shall be spaced eight feet on center or less and
set into concrete post footings. The minimum depth of the concrete post
footings shall be 24 inches for fences that are six feet in height and 36
inches for fences that are eight feet in height.
         (f)   Vertical slats shall be nailed or screwed to horizontal bracing
stringers running from vertical post to post. The size of the stringers shall
be no less than one-and-a-half by three-and-a-half inches. One stringer will be
required for every two feet in height. Fences that are six feet in height shall
have three horizontal stringers. Fences that are eight feet in height shall
have four horizontal stringers.
         (g)    All materials shall be securely fastened (i.e. vertical boards
to horizontal stringers, stringers to vertical posts) and be free from rot,
rust, vandalism and other sources of decay.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7562.png]
 
         (h)   Fence should be designed such that it does not cause a drainage
problem.
         (i)   A wood fence erected for the purpose of screening the perimeter
of a subdivision as
required by the subdivision control ordinance shall be governed by the
subdivision control ordinance.
         (j)   The replacement or repair of an existing wood privacy fence that
is less than 50% of the total linear footage of fencing on the property shall
be exempt from the above requirements in division (B)(5) of this section,
except that a permit shall be required for any fence construction greater than
six feet in height.
      (6)   Barbed wire prohibited. Fences constructed of barbed wire and walls
topped with broken glass or similar material shall be prohibited, except that:
         (a)   A security fence not less than six feet in height may be topped
with barbed wire when located on property zoned for non-residential purposes;
         (b)   A barbed wire fence may be erected or maintained on property
that held livestock on January 1, 2004, and will continue to hold livestock in
the future. The property owner shall have the burden of proof that livestock
existed on site on January 1, 2004; and
         (c)   A barbed wire fence may be erected or maintained on any property
in excess of 20 acres that held livestock or was otherwise under agricultural
use on January 1, 2004, and will continue to hold livestock or otherwise
continue in agricultural use in the future. The property owner shall have the
burden of proof that livestock existed on the site or that another agricultural
use was in effect on the site on January 1, 2004. For purposes of this
division, "agricultural use" shall mean that the property owner has and
maintains an agricultural exemption on the property granted by Tarrant
Appraisal District.
      (7)   Electrical fences prohibited. No fence shall be electrically
charged in any form or fashion.
      (8)   Eight foot maximum height. No fence in a residential district shall
exceed eight feet in height above ground level at the fence line. However,
fences that are erected on top of retaining walls shall not exceed six feet in
height as measured from the bottom of the fence to the top of the fence.
      (9)   Public property. No fence, guy wire, brace or any post of such
fence shall be constructed upon or caused to protrude over property that the
city or the general public has dominion and control over, owns or has an
easement over, under, around or through, except upon utility easements which
are permitted to be fenced.
      (10)   Swimming pools fencing. All swimming pools shall, at all times, be
completely surrounded by a fence, wall or barrier not less than four feet in
height with no openings, holes or gaps that will allow a sphere four inches in
diameter to pass through. Gate openings directly into such enclosure shall be
equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices capable of keeping such
gates securely closed at all times when not in use; said latching devices to be
no less than three feet above grade. The door of any dwelling that is forming
part of the enclosure need not be equipped with self-closing and self-latching
devices.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.095 RESIDENTIAL PROXIMITY STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose. To protect the property value and lifestyle of citizens
living in the proximity of non-residential developments without placing undue
hardship on developers of non-residential developments.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   The provisions of divisions (C) through (H) of this section shall
apply to any development in an OP, C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1 or I-2 zoning
classification when abutting any property in a residential zoning
classification or a PR zoning classification that is occupied by a residential
use.
      (2)   The provisions of divisions (G) and (H) of this section shall apply
to any development in an OP, C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1 or I-2 zoning classification
when located along a street with a 50 or 60 foot right-of-way across from
residential lots or tracts that front on such street.
      (3)   The provisions of divisions (C)(2) and (D) of this section shall
apply to any residential development in a residential zoning classification or
a PR zoning classification when abutting any property in an OP, C-1, C-2, C-3,
I-1 or I-2 zoning classification as specified hereinafter; however, they shall
not apply to residential developments that were preliminary or final platted or
that were submitted for preliminary or final plat approval before the adoption
of such provisions.
      (4)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to development on
any property owned and used by the city, the Mansfield Independent School
District and any church regardless of zoning provided that it complies with the
requirements in divisions (E) and (F) of this section.
      (5)   Permitted uses that are in existence at the time of adoption of the
provisions of this section shall be governed by the nonconforming use
regulations of this chapter. Any expansion or addition to such existing uses
shall conform to the provisions of this section.
      (6)   The requirements in the provisions of this section shall not be
administratively deferred or waived by city staff. Any person who wishes to
seek a special exception or variance may follow the provisions in § 155.082 and
§ 155.113.
      (7)   It is the intent of this section to treat property in a PR zoning
classification that is occupied by a residential use the same as it is in a
single-family residential zoning classification. Therefore, all provisions of
this section that apply to property or development in a single-family
residential zoning classification shall also apply to property or development
in a PR zoning classification that is occupied by a residential use.
   (C)   Setback and height regulations.
      (1)   Non-residential use.
         (a)   Structures in an I-1 or I-2 zoning classification shall setback
a minimum of 40 feet from the boundary of any abutting property in a
residential zoning classification. The same setback requirement shall apply to
all outside storage, loading docks, truck berths, and routine parking or
storage of tractor-trailers, and vehicles that are rated to have a carrying
capacity over one ton.
         (b)   Structures in an OP, C-1, C-2 or C-3 zoning classification shall
comply with the minimum setback from the boundary of any abutting property in a
residential zoning classification as depicted in the table below in conjunction
with the specifications in both the "Maximum Height" and "No. of Stories"
columns.
 
Zoning    Min. Setback (ft.) Max. Ht. (ft.) No. of Stories
OP & C-1  20                 20             1
OP & C-1  35                 35             2 or less
C-2 & C-3 52.5               35             1
C-2 & C-3 60                 40             2 or less
C-2 & C-3 67.5               45             3 or less
C-2 & C-3 75                 50             1 or more
 
      (2)   Residential use.
         (a)   Residential lots in a residential zoning classification or a PR
zoning classification that abut properties in an OP, C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1 or I-
2 zoning classification shall provide a 40 foot minimum setback for the
principle residential building along the lot lines that abut the boundary of
such non-residentially zoned property.
         (b)   In order to accommodate the 40 foot minimum building setback,
the minimum residential lot depth shall be increased by the difference between
40 feet and the minimum rear setback required by the residential or PR zoning
district where the lot is located; or the minimum residential lot width shall
be increased by the difference between 40 feet and the minimum side setback
required by the residential or PR zoning district where the lot is located,
whichever is applicable.
   (D)   Noise.
      (1)   Non-residential uses shall not generate any loud noise of such
intensity as to create a nuisance or detract from the use or enjoyment of the
abutting residential uses. The provisions in this division do not apply to
properties in the I-2, Heavy Industrial zoning classification.
      (2)   Outdoor speakers shall be directed away from any abutting property
in a residential zoning classification.
   (E)   Setback for trash containers and refuse or recycling storage areas.
Trash containers and storage areas for refuse or materials awaiting disposal or
recycling shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the boundary of any
abutting property in a residential zoning classification.
   (F)   Lighting. All lighting of a non-residential use must be shielded or
pointed away from any abutting property in a residential zoning classification
so there shall be no direct illumination across the common boundary with the
property in the residential zoning classification. This restriction shall not
apply to special events not exceeding 72 hours or the lighting of a sports
facility that belongs to the city or the Mansfield Independent School District.
   (G)   Driveway access. No non-residential driveway access shall be permitted
onto a street with a 50 or 60 foot right-of-way across from residential lots or
tracts that front on that street unless no other reasonable access is available
as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission during a plan review at the
developer's request. This restriction shall not apply if the street is shown in
the city's most recent Thoroughfare Plan to have a right-of-way of 70 feet or
larger.
   (H)   Signage. Wall or free-standing signs that are located along a street
with a 50 or 60 foot right-of-way shall not be electrically or artificially
illuminated when located across from residential lots or tracts that front that
street. This restriction shall not apply if the street is shown in the city's
most recent Thoroughfare Plan to have a right-of-way of 70 feet or larger.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.096 OPEN STORAGE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. To encourage the most appropriate use of the land and to
conserve and protect the value of adjacent land and buildings; regulations are
prescribed for the location and screening of open storage of materials,
commodities and vehicles of all types in the various districts in accordance
with the following standards:
   (B)   In all PR, residential and mobile home districts, no open storage or
display outside a building of materials or commodities for sale at wholesale or
retail or for storage purposes shall be permitted, nor shall any motor vehicle
or machinery storage other than that which is incidental to the use of a
premises as herein provided or permitted nor shall any truck or commercial
vehicle storage be permitted, except that one panel delivery or pick-up truck
not exceeding one ton capacity may be stored by the owner of a premises when
such vehicle storage is incidental to the main use of such premises.
   (C)   No open storage or display outside a building of materials and
commodities or any other objects shall be permitted in the C-1 District. In the
C-2 District, the open storage or display of items intended for direct retail
sales or rental shall be permitted under the following restrictions:
      (1)   The area used for open display shall not be greater than 10% of the
gross floor area of the establishment having such display.
      (2)   If the open display is located in the parking lot, the number of
spaces available for parking shall not be less than that required by §
155.091.
   (D)   No open storage or display of any object, vehicle, boat, material or
equipment shall be allowed on public right-of-ways or designated private or
public recreational areas. Any aforementioned objects, vehicle, boat, material
or equipment parked or located upon any public right-of-way, or designated
private or public recreational areas for a period longer than 72 hours shall be
classified as storage and be subject to removal by the city without prior
notice at the owner's expense.
   (E)   Open storage or display in the C-3, I-1 and I-2 Districts shall be
placed on a gravel, asphalt or concrete surface or other surface approved by
the Director of Planning and not on natural ground unless it is located more
than 30 feet from any street right-of-way or screened by an eight foot opaque
fence. Such surface shall be maintained in good condition and free of weeds or
debris.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.097 OPEN AIR VENDING.
   Within any commercial or industrial district, open air vending, as that term
is herein defined, shall be allowed upon obtaining a certificate of occupancy
for such vending from the Building Official.
   (A)   The Building Official shall issue such certificate of occupancy only
if he finds:
      (1)   That such vending will not endanger the health, safety or general
welfare of the public and specifically in this regard, that said vending will
not unreasonably increase congestion upon the public roadways in and about said
vending location so as to endanger the safety of drivers and pedestrians; and
      (2)   That the vendor applicant shall be in compliance with all
ordinances and laws, including provisions within this chapter, applicable to
retail commercial activity, and have obtained all other necessary permits.
      (3)   That the vendor applicant shall be in compliance with all
conditions imposed by the Building Official upon said commercial activity
necessary for the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, open air vending shall be defined as
the sale of any merchandise or goods from a fixed location upon privately owned
property not within any permanent building or structure designed for the sale
of such goods. The term "open air vending" shall specifically include the sale
of merchandise or goods from "stands", "stalls", and all other sales not within
a permanent structure. The term "sale" is herein defined as the actual transfer
of goods or merchandise. The term open air vending, however, shall not include
activity of itinerant vendors who continuously move about from place to place,
and who do not occupy any particular parcel of private property as a permanent
or stationary place for the conduct of their business. This term does include
seasonal vending operations such as "Snow Cones" and "Ice Cream" stands, etc.
   (C)   No open air vending shall be allowed to be located within any public
right-of-way or city parks, or connected with public utilities unless
specifically approved by the City Council.
   (D)   No open air vending shall be allowed to be located within any property
zoned in a PR, A, Residential or OP District or within the required setbacks of
any other zoning districts.
   (E)   No open air vending shall be allowed in or from an unenclosed space or
area.
   (F)   Parked vehicles shall not be used as a base of operation for any open
air vending.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.098 NON-CONFORMING USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Intent.
      (1)   Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments
thereto, there exists lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and
characteristics of use which were lawful before this chapter was enacted,
amended or otherwise made applicable to such lots, structures or uses, but
which do not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
It is the intent of this chapter to permit such nonconforming uses to continue,
under regulations herein contained, until the same are removed, but not to
encourage their survival.
      (2)   It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconforming uses
shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for
adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
      (3)   Nonconforming uses are hereby declared to be incompatible with the
permitted uses in the districts involved.
      (4)   For use in this section, a building shall be interpreted the same
as structure and vise versa.
   (B)   Nonconforming uses regulated. Except as herein provided, no
nonconforming use of land or buildings shall be enlarged, changed, altered or
repaired except in conformity with the regulations contained in this chapter.
   (C)   Nonconforming status. Any use or structure which does not conform with
the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located shall be deemed a
lawful nonconforming use or structure when:
      (1)   Such use or structure was in existence and lawfully operating at
the time of passage of this chapter and has since been in regular and
continuous use;
      (2)   Such use or structure is a lawful use at the time of the adoption
of any amendment to this chapter but by such amendment is placed in a district
wherein such use is not otherwise permitted; or
      (3)   Such use or structure was in existence at the time of annexation to
the city and has since been in regular and continuous use.
   (D)   Continuing lawful non-conforming use of property and existence of
structures.
      (1)   The lawful use of land or lawful existence of buildings or
structures at the time of the passage of this chapter, although such do not
conform to the provisions hereof, may be continued; but if said nonconforming
use or building is discontinued or abandoned, any future use of said premises
shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Discontinuance of a lawful non-conforming use shall consist of the
intent of the user or owner to discontinue a nonconforming use and the actual
act of discontinuance. Abandonment of a lawful nonconforming building shall
consist of the actual intent to abandon by the user or owner an actual act of
abandonment.
      (3)   A lawful non-conforming use or building, when discontinued or
abandoned, shall not be resumed. The following shall constitute prima facie
evidence of discontinuance or abandonment.
         (a)   Non-conforming uses. When land used for a lawful non-conforming
use shall cease to be used in such manner for a period of six months.
         (b)   Non-conforming buildings. When a building or other structure
designed or used for a lawful nonconforming use shall cease to be used in such
manner for a period of six months.
   (E)   Changing non-conforming uses or buildings.
      (1)   A lawful non-conforming use may be changed to another non-
conforming use of the same or more restrictive zoning district classification,
provided, that when a non-conforming use is changed to a non-conforming use of
a more restrictive classification, it shall not later be reverted to the former
less restrictive classification.
      (2)   No lawful non-conforming use shall be changed to another non-
conforming use which requires more off-street parking facilities or off-street
loading space than the original non- conforming use unless additional off-
street parking facilities and loading space is provided so as to comply with
the requirements of § 155.091.
      (3)   A conforming building shall not be changed to a use which would
result in the building becoming nonconforming.
   (F)   Extension of non-conforming uses or buildings.
      (1)   A lawful non-conforming building or structure may be enlarged or
added to provided that the enlargement or addition, when considered
independently of the original building or structure, complies with all
applicable regulations of this chapter.
      (2)   Expansion, enlargement or intensification of a lawful non-
conforming use shall not be permitted unless such expansion, enlargement or
intensification, when considered independently of the lawful non-conforming
use, complies with all applicable regulations of this chapter.
      (3)   A building or structure occupied or used by a lawful non-conforming
use shall not be enlarged, extended or structurally altered unless the use
occupying or using such enlargement, extension or alteration, when considered
independently of the lawful non-conforming use, complies with all applicable
regulations of this chapter.
      (4)   Repairs and maintenance work on a lawful non-conforming building or
on a conforming building occupied by a lawful non-conforming use may be made,
provided that no structural alterations shall be made except as required by law
to preserve such building in a structural sound condition and provided that
there is no increase whatsoever in the degree or extent of the previously
existing nonconformity.
      (5)   No lawful non-conforming use within a building may be extended to
occupy any land outside the building.
   (G)   Termination of non-conforming uses and buildings. The right to operate
a legal nonconforming use or building shall cease and such use shall be
terminated under any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   When such use or building is abandoned, as hereinabove provided in
division (D) of this section.
      (2)   When any provision of this chapter or any other ordinance, or
Federal or State statute is violated with respect to a nonconforming use or
nonconforming building.
      (3)   When a lawful non-conforming use, building or structure is damaged
by fire, explosion, act of God or other calamity to the extent that the cost of
the reconstruction or repair exceeds 50% of the replacement cost of the
structure; except in the following circumstances: (a) the original property
owner who has been living in a lawful nonconforming mobile home or lawful
nonconforming HUD-Code manufactured home, which has been used for residential
purposes, may rebuild or re-establish such lawful nonconforming use with a HUD-
Code manufactured home within six months of the destruction of the home; and
(b) a lawful non-conforming dwelling unit, which does not meet the minimum
floor area requirement of the PR or residential district where it is located,
may be rebuilt or replaced by a dwelling unit of equal or larger size, provided
that a special exception is granted by the Board of Adjustment as stipulated in
§
155.082.
      (4)   When the right to maintain or operate a lawful nonconforming use or
nonconforming structure has been terminated by the Board of Adjustments as
provided in § 155.113.
      (5)   Whenever a lawful nonconforming use or building has been changed to
conforming, such use or building shall not thereafter be changed back to
nonconforming.
      (6)   Nothing in this chapter shall be taken to prevent the restoration
of a building destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God, a public enemy or other
calamity to the extent that the cost of the reconstruction or repair does not
exceed 50% of the replacement cost of the structure, nor the continued
occupancy or use of such building or part thereof which existed at the time of
such partial destruction.
   (H)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Existing land uses or structures, that do not conform with the
required yard setbacks due to land or right-of-way acquisition by a public
agency with the power of eminent domain, shall be exempted from the provisions
of division (G)(3) of this section, provided that any reconstruction or
replacement does not cause a greater extent of nonconformance to the setback
requirements than the pre-existing nonconforming uses or structures and is not
in conflict with the real estate interest of any public agency. The expansion,
enlargement or intensification of a preexisting nonconforming use during
reconstruction or replacement shall not qualify for the exemption and shall
continue to be regulated by the provisions of division (F) of this section.
      (2)   Any carport in existence on December 15, 1996, which is non-
conforming as to front, side or rear setback restrictions or any carport
receiving a building permit between November 25, 1996, and December 15, 1996,
and not located within five feet of the city right-of-way, shall be heretofore
a legal non-conforming use, subject to all provisions of this section.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.099 SPECIAL CONDITIONS.
   (A)   General. The following sections describe the special conditions under
which certain uses are permitted in a zoning district when reference is made to
one or more of said sections in the ordinance. A building permit or certificate
of occupancy shall not be issued for any permitted use with "Special
Conditions" until all of the required conditions have been met.
   (B)   Special conditions by use.
      (1)   Zero lot line dwellings. Zero lot line dwellings shall meet each of
the following structural restrictions:
         (a)   No window, door or any kind of opening shall be allowed in the
zero lot line wall.
         (b)   A three foot overhang easement shall be secured from owner of
property adjacent to the zero lot line wall in the event that the eave projects
beyond the zero lot line into the adjacent property.
         (c)   A ten foot maintenance easement shall be secured from owner of
property adjacent to the zero lot line wall.
         (d)   A minimum of ten foot building separation between zero lot line
dwellings.
         (e)   A minimum of ten foot building separation shall be provided
between any zero lot line dwelling and abutting single, two-family, or multiple
family dwellings.
         (f)   No zero lot line dwellings are allowed to be located on a lot
line that abuts a public right-of-way or private alley.
      (2)   Townhome, multi-family dwelling or apartment.
         (a)   All structures shall have a minimum roof pitch of 4/12.
         (b)   Dumpster setback. All dumpsters shall set back at least 50 feet
from any abutting Single-family Residential Districts.
         (c)   No private recreation facilities for multi-family residential
developments shall be located within landscape buffer yards, street landscape
setback or any required landscaped areas.
         (d)   No boats, motor homes, trailers, recreational vehicles, motor
homes, towed trailers or similar vehicular equipment shall be parked or stored
on the property of any multi-family residential development. In case of an
apartment or other rental housing development, this requirement shall be
incorporated into the rental contract.
         (e)   Lighting requirements. Sufficient lighting shall be installed by
the developer at all driveway entrances from public streets, driveway
intersections, parking lots and throughout the multi-family residential
development per the Illumination Engineering Society's standards on illuminance
levels for safety.
         (f)   Pavement specifications. All parking areas and driving lanes
shall be constructed with five inches of concrete pavement on a scarified and
compacted subgrade. All dumpster pads and loading area in front of dumpsters
shall be constructed with six inches of concrete pavement on a scarified and
compacted subgrade. The concrete pavement shall be reinforced with inch steel
bars spaced 24 inches on center each way or six by six, #6 gauge welded wire
fabric. An approved paving fiber may be substituted for the reinforcing steel.
Chairs shall be used to support reinforcement.
         (g)   Access. Principal access to multi-family residential
developments shall be restricted to minor collector or larger streets. The
primary connection from such access to major collectors or larger streets shall
not pass through any street that is bordered on both sides by one of the
Single-family Residential Districts or a combination of those districts.
         (h)   No single structure shall exceed 300 feet in length.
      (3)   Manufacturing housing or camping trailer. A manufactured home or
camping trailer shall be permitted only in a manufactured home rental community
or a manufactured home subdivision or an approved campground or recreational
vehicle park.
      (4)   Hotel and motels.
         (a)   To be classified as a hotel or motel, an establishment must meet
each of the following requirements:
            1.   The establishment shall contain a minimum of 20 individual
guest rooms or units and an office.
            2.   The establishment shall furnish customary hotel service,
including but not limited to laundry service, linen service, telephone, maid
service, use of and up-keep of furniture.
            3.   The establishment shall maintain a register of guests,
however, no guest shall be registered for more than 30 consecutive days.
            4.   Guest rooms shall not be used in any form or manner as a
permanent residence.
         (b)   Hotels or motels shall provide interior access to guestrooms.
The use of exterior corridors on hotels or motels on any exterior facade of the
building shall be prohibited. Exterior access to guestrooms shall only be
permitted for rooms facing a courtyard that is enclosed on four sides by the
hotel or motel building.
         (c)   Outdoor recreational facilities at hotels and motels such as
swimming pools, sports courts and playgrounds shall be located behind the
building, or if located on the side of the building shall not be forward of the
front building elevation that is closest to the street. The facility must be
screened from view of public rights-of-way by fencing, landscaping, or a
combination of these. Wood or chain link fencing shall not be permitted.
      (5)   Residential accessory buildings.
         (a)   An accessory building may be attached or semi-attached to, or
detached from the main residential building. Permitted uses or buildings
accessory to a single or two-family dwelling, apartment house or farm shall
include, but are not limited to the following:
            1.   Single or two-family dwelling. A private garage for automobile
storage, tool house, lath or greenhouse as a hobby (no business), home work
shop, children's playhouse, storage house or garden shelter, but not involving
the conduct of a business.
            2.   Apartment. Private recreational facilities as defined and
regulated under division (B)(7) below, employee's washroom, a manager's
apartment and office, and laundry. The manager's apartment may be used as an
office, but such facility shall be included in computations of lot area
requirements. The laundry room may be used for clothes washing and drying
facilities for the exclusive use of the tenants and no exterior advertising of
such uses may be permitted.
            3.   Farm. A barn, poultry house, stable, machinery shed, granary
or other buildings used for the storage or housing of usual products and
animals raised or maintained on a farm.
         (b)   An accessory building for the purpose of maintaining property or
livestock may be erected prior to the construction of a principle building or
use in a PR or residential district provided that it meets the requirements
below. Notwithstanding any other requirements in this chapter, an accessory
building for the purposes stated hereinabove may be erected prior to the
property being included in an approved plat. Further, an accessory building may
be erected on property zoned for non-residential purposes, provided that such
property contains more than 50 acres. When used in the divisions here-in-below,
the term "property" shall mean an area or tract(s) of land contained in one
recorded deed on file in the Deed Record Office of the county in which the
property is located.
            1.   A minimum of three acres of land shall be required.
            2.   The accessory building must setback a minimum of 75 feet from
all property lines and 150 feet from any adjacent residential structure.
Accessory building used for horses or other animals must conform with the
requirements set forth in divisions (B)(14)(d), (e), (f), (g), (h) and (i)
below.
            3.   The size of the accessory building shall be no larger than
1,500 square feet.
            4.   The accessory building shall be removed from the property
within 24 months from the time that 50% or more of the property is included in
an approved final plat, unless the accessory building complies with all
applicable regulations in this chapter and serves a principle building or use
occupying the same lot or premises as the accessory building.
         (c)   An attached or semi-attached accessory building shall be made
structurally a part of and: (1) have a common wall with the main residential
building; or (2) have a continuous roof assembly and common attic with the main
residential building. Attached or semi-attached accessory buildings shall
comply with the setback, height, lot coverage, masonry construction and all
other provisions of this chapter applicable to the main residential building.
Attached or semi-attached accessory buildings shall not be subject to divisions
(d) through (p) below.
         (d)   An accessory building that is not attached to the main residence
by a common wall or continuous roof assembly with a common attic shall be
considered a detached accessory building and shall comply with the regulations
set forth in the following divisions.
         (e)   One detached garage may be built with the main residential
building as part of the original building permit for the main residential
building under the following regulations:
            1.   The detached garage shall be located at least 50 feet behind
the front facade of the main residential building that is closest to the
street, at least five feet from the side property line, seven and one-half feet
from the rear property line and must not encroach upon any pre-established
building lines or easements.
            2.   The detached garage shall not be higher than 20 feet or the
main residential building, whichever is less.
            3.   The combined square footage of the detached garage and the
main residential building shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage for the
district in which the property is located.
            4.   The detached garage shall be constructed of the predominant
building material (i.e., brick, stone, siding, etc.) used on the main
residential building.
            5.   Any additional detached garages built with the main
residential building or detached garages that are built after the issuance of
the building permit for the main residential building shall be subject to the
provisions set forth in divisions (f) through (p) below.
            6.   On property where a detached garage was constructed at the
same time as the main residential building, other accessory buildings or
structures shall be permitted, subject to the regulations set forth in
divisions (f) through (p) below.
         (f)   Accessory buildings or structures for properties in the A, PR,
SF and 2F Districts shall not exceed the maximum square footage as depicted in
the following table:
 
Area of the Residential Property     Max. Total Sq. Ft. for All Accessory
                                     Buildings or Structures
Less than 8,400 sq. ft.              300 sq. ft.
Between 8,400 sq. ft. and 19,999 sq. 750 sq. ft.
ft.
20,000 sq. ft. or greater            1,500 sq. ft. or 4% of the total area of
                                     the lot, whichever is greater
 
         (g)   The maximum square footage limits shown hereinabove shall be
cumulative of all accessory buildings or structures for each lot.
         (h)   Accessory buildings or structures for duplexes and townhomes in
the MF-1 and MF-2 districts shall conform to the standards established in
divisions (B)(5)(f) and (j).
         (i)   Accessory buildings or structures for multi-family apartments or
dwellings in MF-1 and MF-2 Districts shall comply with the area, height and
setback standards for the principal buildings in such districts.
         (j)   Accessory buildings or structures shall comply with the minimum
setbacks from the property line as depicted in the table below in conjunction
with the height of the accessory building or structure. The height of accessory
buildings or structures shall be measured from the ground to the highest point
of the building or structure.
 
Max. Accessory Building Height Minimum Setbacks
                               Rear Yard Side Yard
8' or less                     5'        5'
9' to 10'                      7'        7'
11' to 24'                     9'        9'
 
         (k)   Accessory buildings or structures may be located in the side
yard provided that they meet the minimum height/setback requirements described
in division (B)(5)(j) of this section and that they are at least 75 feet from
the front property line or behind the rear facade of the main residential
building that is furthest from the street.
         (l)   On double frontage lots, accessory buildings or structures may
be located within the 25 feet rear yard setback provided that they meet the
minimum height/setback requirements described in division (B)(5)(j) of this
section.
         (m)   On corner lots that back up to the rear yard of another lot,
accessory buildings or structures may be located within the exterior side
street setback provided that they meet the minimum height/setback requirements
described in division (B)(5)(j) of this section. No accessory building or
structure shall be permitted within the exterior side street setback of a lot
that backs up to the side yard of another lot that faces the side street.
         (n)   A minimum distance of five feet shall be required from enclosed
accessory buildings or structures to the main residential building or to other
buildings or structures on the property. No minimum separation shall be
required for unenclosed (structures with no walls) accessory buildings or
structures or those with an area of 200 square feet or less.
         (o)   The combined floor area of accessory building(s) or structure(s)
and accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 2,500 square feet. In no case
shall the combined area of the primary residence, the accessory building or
stucture and the accessory dwelling unit exceed the maximum percentage of lot
coverage allowed for the residential zoning district in which the structures
are to be located. All accessory dwelling units shall comply with the
provisions set forth in §
155.099(B)(35) of the Mansfield Zoning Ordinance. Accessory buildings or
structures that do not require a permit for location in any residential zoning
district shall be exempt from this requirement.
         (p)   The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception to allow
an increase in the maximum area or height, or a reduction of the minimum
setback requirements for accessory buildings or structures, subject to the
conditions established in §
155.082(E)(6).
      (6)   Home occupation. A home occupation is permitted when the occupation
or activity conducted within a dwelling unit is clearly incidental and
subordinate to the use of the premises for dwelling purposes and provided that:
         (a)   No retail business of any sort is involved.
         (b)   No stock in trade is kept nor commodities sold except those made
or used on the premises.
         (c)   Only members of the family residing on the premises are
employed.
         (d)   No internal or external alterations, special construction or
features are involved.
         (e)   There is no advertising of any type on premise and no other
display or storage of materials or exterior identification of the home
occupation or variation from the residential character of the main building or
any accessory buildings.
         (f)   No equipment is used which creates offensive noises, vibrations,
sound, smoke or dust, odors, heat, glare, x-ray, or electrical disturbance to
radio or television. In particular, a home occupation includes the following
and similar uses: artist's studio, dressmaking and millinery; limited
professional practice provided no clients or customers are permitted on the
premises (such as lawyer, engineer, architect or accountant); music teaching
limited to not more than two pupils at one time; the keeping of up to four
children under the age of 16 years at any one time apart from their parents,
guardians or custodians for regular periods of time for compensation, provided
that the total number of children under the age of 16 years on the premises at
any one time, including those kept without compensation and those who reside on
the premises, shall not exceed eight.
         (g)   Repair of automobiles for a fee shall not be permitted as a home
occupation.
      (7)   Private recreation facility. Private recreation facilities in
residential districts shall, for multi-family residential developments,
subdivisions, or homeowners associations, be restricted to use by the occupants
of the residence and their guests, or by members of a club or homeowner's
association and their guests, and shall include but not be limited to such uses
as swimming pools, open game fields, common green areas or open space,
basketball, shuffleboard, racquet ball, croquet, and tennis courts, and meeting
or locker rooms. Activity areas shall be fenced and screened from abutting
properties. Dispensing of food and beverages shall be permitted on the premises
only for the benefit of users of the recreation facility and not for the
general public. Off-street parking shall be required on the basis of one
parking space for each 4,000 square feet of area devoted to recreational use
with a minimum of four spaces.
      (8)   Identification. Accessible parking spaces shall be designed as
reserved for the handicapped through conforming to the standards and
specification referred to in Tex. Transp. Code § 681.009(b).
      (9)   Swimming pool. All public, private and commercial pools including
those permitted as private recreation facilities shall conform to the following
provisions:
         (a)   If located in any residential zoning district, the pool shall be
intended and used solely for the enjoyment of the occupants of the principal
use of the property on which it is located and their guests.
         (b)   A swimming pool may be located anywhere on a premise except in
the required front yard, provided that the water's edge of the swimming pool
shall not be located closer than five feet to any side property line or five
feet to any rear property line, or within any easement. Swimming pool pump and
filter installations shall not be located within the front yard or any public
easement and shall be screened from adjacent property and public streets.
         (c)   The swimming pool shall be enclosed by a wall or fence as set
forth in §
155.092.
      (10)   Private utility shop or storage. Shall not be permitted to be used
for commercial or business purposes, whether full time or part time, and not
including the storage of junk or hazardous materials, equipment or vehicles not
customarily associated with a residence.
      (11)   TV dish antenna. Permitted only if located in the rear of a main
building on the same lot and only if conforming with all yard requirements as
provided for accessory buildings in §
155.055(C).
      (12)   Private stable. All private stables shall conform to the
requirements as set forth for commercial stable in divisions (14)(c), (d), (e),
(f), (g), (h) and (i) below. If the private stable is located on a lot or tract
of land with less than three acres, a specific use permit shall be obtained by
the property owner in accordance to the provisions of §
155.080 prior to the construction of the stable.
      (13)   Stable, riding club. All stables owned by a riding club shall
conform to requirements as set forth for commercial stables in divisions (14)
(c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h) and (i) below.
      (14)   Commercial stable. All commercial stables shall conform to the
following requirements:
         (a)   No commercial stable shall be permitted if its existence would
be incompatible with surrounding residential land uses and zoning.
         (b)   The minimum lot size area shall be 200,000 square feet.
         (c)   If any horses (including horses, ponies, mules, donkeys and
other animals used for riding) are kept outside of any building, the maximum
number of horses permitted shall be in accordance with the following schedule:
 
Number of Horses      Minimum Area
1                     15,000 sq. ft. (1/3 acre)
2                     21,780 sq. ft. (1/2 acre)
3                     1 acre
each additional horse 1/2 acre
 
         A minimum of 800 square feet of space shall be provided for each horse
kept within a corral or any outside animal retainment area.
         (d)   If all horses (and other riding animals) are kept inside a
building, the maximum number of horses permitted shall be limited to the
building capacity to house, show, and ride said horses. A minimum area of 100
square feet shall be provided for each horse kept under roof.
         (e)   Stables, corrals, animal enclosure and retainment structures,
feed, and bedding shall be located 75 feet from any lot line and 150 feet from
any residential structure in order to minimize odor and nuisance problems. Open
pasture may extend to the lot line.
         (f)   Adequate and secure fencing shall be provided around all animal
retainment areas to prevent unwanted trespassing onto adjacent properties. All
fencing must be a minimum of five feet high and of sufficient strength to
retain animals and maintained in good condition. All gates must be kept closed
at all times.
         (g)   A vegetative strip at least 50 feet wide shall be maintained
between any corral, animal retainment structure, and any surface water or well
in order to minimize runoff, prevent erosion, and promote quick nitrogen
absorption.
         (h)   In an area with a slope of 5% or more, corrals and animal
retainment structures shall be 150 feet from a well and 200 feet from any
natural drainage, unless the water is upgrade or there is adequate diking as
determined by the Building Inspector.
         (i)   Premises must be maintained in such a manner as not to create a
health nuisance. Corrals and stables shall be maintained in clean, sanitary
condition at all times, and sprayed periodically to prevent the breeding of
flies and insects. Refuse and manure must be collected daily, and placed in fly
and rat proof containers and disposed of weekly.
         (j)   Parking stalls required are one stall per every two horses (or
other riding animals) based on the number of horse stalls or maximum horses
allowed on the property, plus one per every employee on the largest shift.
         (k)   Special events such as fat stock shows, exhibitions, and
contests shall only be permitted when a temporary use permit has been granted
and are subject to the requirements of §
155.081(B)(1)(b).
      (15)   Airport landing field and heliport.
         (a)   Any proposed airport or heliport shall comply with regulations
of the Federal Aviation Administration or other authority qualified by law to
established airport or air-traffic regulations.
         (b)   The approach zone to the airport or heliport shall be so
situated as to minimize any interference and negative impact upon existing and
future use of adjacent properties and to insure the safety of aircraft in
landing and taking off and the safety of persons occupying or using the area
within the approach zone and the security of property thereon. An approach
zone, once designated during the establishment of the airport or heliport,
shall not be changed in the future unless approved by the City Council.
         (c)   Off-street parking required: one space for every plane space
within the hangers plus one space for every tie-down space plus one for every
two employees.
         (d)   Building setbacks: any building, hanger, or other structure
shall be at least 100 feet from any street or lot line.
         (e)   All repairs of airplanes and machinery shall be done inside
hangers. No servicing or fueling facilities shall be included as part of a
heliport. A proposed airport or heliport shall comply with any other
restrictions imposed by the City Council for the safety and welfare of the
general public.
      (16)   Commercial parking lot or structure. Facilities for servicing of
automobiles may be included in commercial parking lots or structures provided
that such facilities are primarily an internal function for use only by
automobiles occupying the structure and creates no special problems of ingress
and egress.
      (17)   Car wash. No car wash, whether full or self service shall be
permitted if its existence generates obnoxious conditions perceptible at the
abutting property lines of the tract on which the facility is located.
      (18)   Auto repair garages, paint and body shops, tire changing and
patching shops. Automobile repairing, painting, glass, upholstering, auto tire
body and fender work shall be performed only under the following conditions:
         (a)   All body and fender repairing shall be done within a completely
enclosed building or room with stationary windows, doors or other openings that
may be opened only at intervals necessary for ingress and egress;
         (b)   No spray painting may be done except in a building or room
specially designed for that purpose;
         (c)   All other auto repairing, glass, upholstering, and tire work
shall be conducted within a building enclosed on at least three sides.
         (d)   All temporary storage of vehicles awaiting dismantling or repair
and outside storage of materials or products for finishing, fabrication, and
disposal, shall be completely screened from the public's view by a six foot
high opaque fence.
      (19)   Reserved for future use.
      (20)   Farm, ranch or orchard. A minimum lot area of three acres or more
shall be required for farm, ranch or orchard use. Stables, corrals, pens,
barns, buildings and other structures used for the enclosure or retainment of
farm animals shall conform to requirements as set forth in divisions (14)(e),
(f), (g), (h) and (i) above.
      (21)   Establishments that sell alcoholic beverages. All establishments
that sell alcoholic beverages shall conform to the following provisions:
         (a)   The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be permissible only after
obtaining the appropriate licenses and/or permits in accordance with the
applicable State of Texas regulations.
         (b)   When applying for a Mixed Beverage Permit from the State of
Texas, a restaurant that holds a food and beverage certificate and private club
permit from the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission prior to September 10, 2005
is exempt from the requirements in divisions (c) and (d) below provided that
the restaurant has not been closed for business for more than six months
preceding the application.
         (c)   No sale of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted by any
establishment which is located within 300 feet of a church, public or private
school or public hospital. The measurement of the distance between a place of
business where alcoholic beverages are sold and a church or public hospital
shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to
front door, and in direct line across intersections. The measurement of the
distance between a place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and
public or private schools shall be in a direct line from the property line of
the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, and
in a direct line across intersections.
         (d)   No sale of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted by any
establishment which is located within 300 feet of a day-care center or child-
care facility, as defined by § 42.002, Texas Human Resources Code. The
measurement of the distance between a place of business where alcoholic
beverages are sold and a day-care center or child-care facility shall be in a
direct line from the property line of the day-care center or child-care
facility to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line
across intersections. In accordance with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, the
minimum distance requirement shall not apply if:
            1.   The establishment holds a food and beverage certificate from
the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission;
            2.   The establishment and a day-care center or a child-care
facility are located on different stories of a multistory building;
            3.   The establishment and a day-care center and a child-care
facility are located in separate buildings and either the establishment or the
day-care center or child-care facility is located on the second story or higher
of a multistory building;
            4.   The establishment is adjacent to a foster group home, foster
family home, family home, agency group home, or agency home as those terms are
defined by § 42.002 of the Texas Human Resources Code; or
            5.   The establishment sells alcoholic beverages for off-premise
consumption in accordance with the applicable State of Texas regulations.
         (e)   Establishments that sell alcohol beverages under a mixed
beverage late hours permit issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission
may sell alcoholic beverages on Sundays between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 2:00
a.m. and on any other day between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. in
accordance with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.
         (f)   In accordance with §
155.012, any establishment which derives more than 75% of its gross revenues
from the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be defined as a bar.
      (22)   Retail and service establishments not elsewhere listed. Any retail
sales or service establishment which is not listed in §
155.054(B) may be permitted in the designated districts, except in the OP, C-
1 and C-2 Districts, all inventory, equipment and items for sale are displayed
entirely within an enclosed building; and further provided that such use is not
noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust, gas fumes, noise
or vibration and that no type of manufacturing or treatment shall be permitted
on any premises in the OP, C-1 and C-2 Districts other than the manufacture of
products clearly incidental to the conduct of a retail business on the
premises.
      (23)   Temporary batch plant. The Director of Public Works may issue a
permit for a temporary batch plant provided that the plant is located at least
300 feet away from any park, school, child care center, or residential
structure and that the plant shall not be located on the same property more
than 120 days. The operator of a temporary batch plant must apply to the Board
of Adjustment for a special exception under §
155.082 if the plant is to be located closer than 300 feet to any park, school,
child care center or residential structure, or if the plant will be located on
the same property more than 120 days.
         All temporary batch plants, whether allowed by permit or by special
exception, shall conform to the following requirements:
         (a)   The stationary equipment of a temporary batch plant shall not be
located closer than 100 feet to the nearest property line.
         (b)   The hours of operation of a temporary batch plant shall be
restricted to Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., and Saturdays,
9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Hauling aggregate (sand and gravel) to or from the site
on Saturdays shall be prohibited.
         (c)   The site on which the temporary batch plant is located shall be
returned to its original condition within 30 days following the termination of
the plant operations.
         (d)   No more than one temporary batch plant shall be permitted on the
same property within a period of 18 consecutive months.
         (e)   A temporary batch plant shall be located on property of the
construction site or abutting the construction site or project.
         (f)   Concrete or asphalt from a temporary batch plant shall not be
trucked over to any other construction site other than the site of the project
for which the plant was approved.
         (g)   A temporary batch plant shall comply with all standards of and
must receive a permit from the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. A
plant shall meet all current city ordinances pertaining to storm water, dust or
other environmental standards.
      (24)   Offices. Office development in the OP, Office Park District, shall
be subject to the following additional supplemental conditions:
         (a)   Impervious surface coverage consisting of all buildings and
structures and all paved or impervious surfaces shall not exceed 90% of the
total lot area.
         (b)   Store front, show window, or display window effects shall not be
permitted and there shall be no display from windows or doors and no storage of
merchandise in the building or on the premises except in quantities customarily
found in professional or business offices and the associated retail and service
type business.
         (c)   Permitted retail and service type uses in the OP district shall
be conducted for the sole convenience of the occupants of the associated office
building and there shall be no entrance to any such place of business except
from the inside of the building.
      (25)   Industries not elsewhere listed. Industrial uses in the I-1, Light
Industrial District shall include only those operations which are not offensive
by reason of the creation of a hazard or emission of detectable dust, odor,
glare, noise, smoke, gas, fumes or vibration beyond the bounding property lines
of the lot or tract upon which the use is located. It is the intent of the I-1,
Light Industrial District that the processing of raw material, to be used by
another industrial operation, not be permitted. Manufacturing or industrial
operations not specifically listed in the Permitted Use Table are intended to
be located in the I-2, Heavy Industrial District unless such operations meet
the special conditions set forth above for the I-1, Light Industrial District.
Said conditions shall apply to both listed and unlisted uses permitted in the
I-1 District. The installation of abatement devices for control of dust, odor,
noise, etc. may be necessary in certain instances.
      (26)   New and used car sales lot. No combined new and used car sales lot
shall have more than 50% of the vehicle units for sale made up of used cars.
      (27)   Warehouses. All mini-warehouses located in the C-3 District shall
setback a minimum of 100 feet from the front lot line. No outside storage or
display of merchandise, vehicles, equipment or objects are permitted in the C-
2 District except as provided in §
155.096(C).
      (28)   Building material and lumber sales, nursery garden center.
Notwithstanding the restrictions of §
155.096(C), outside storage of materials, supplies, products and containers
customarily associated with building materials, lumber sales and plant
nurseries are permitted in the C-2 and C-3 Districts provided such storage area
is visually screened from the street by a six foot high solid fence, and
provided that all building materials and lumber shall be placed on pallets or
neatly packaged and consist of no used items; and provided that all plant or
landscaping materials be balled or burlaped or neatly contained in pots and/or
buckets.
      (29)   In the C-3, Commercial-Manufacturing District, no trailer, truck
or recreational vehicle available for rent shall exceed the size of a single
rear axle vehicle. Trailers available for rent in said Districts shall be
limited to a single wheel, dual axle, bumper pull type maximum.
      (30)   Adult entertainment establishment. Adult entertainment
establishments shall conform to all applicable regulations in the Mansfield
Code of Ordinances as now existing or as hereafter amended.
      (31)   Reserved for future use.
      (32)   Quarters for an on-site manager or caretaker of a mini-warehouse
facility. Residential quarters for mini-warehouse facilities shall conform to
the following requirements:
         (a)   One residential unit shall be permitted as an accessory use for
each mini-warehouse facility.
         (b)   Occupancy of the residential unit shall be limited to the on-
site manager or caretaker of the mini-warehouse facility and immediate family
of the occupant.
         (c)   The residential unit shall not be leased or rented.
         (d)   The residential unit shall be located inside the office or
attached to the office by a common wall.
         (e)   The residential unit shall be limited to 1,000 square feet of
floor area.
         (f)   A minimum of two parking spaces, enclosed in a garage or
unenclosed, shall be provided for the residential unit, exclusive of the
required parking for the mini-warehouse office.
      (33)   Food carts. Food carts shall conform to the following
requirements:
         (a)   For the purposes of this section, a food cart is defined as a
non self-propelled, vehicle mounted food service establishment designed to be
readily movable. A food cart may be used only for packaged or unpackaged non-
potentially hazardous food and hot dog-like products including bratwurst. A
food cart business shall not include a grill, smoker or a cart where food is
prepared over an open flame.
         (b)   For the purposes of this section, the health authority is that
authority designated in
Chapter 94 of this code.
         (c)   All food cart operators are required to obtain an annual food
service permit from the health authority.
         (d)   No food cart shall operate within the City of Mansfield unless
the owner or operator of the cart first obtains a business license from the
city. An application for a business license will not be processed unless
accompanied by a copy of the food service permit issued by the health authority
and a letter from the property owner stating that the food cart is permitted to
operate on the property.
         (e)   If any unwrapped foods are prepared, stored, displayed, or
served on the food cart, a three-compartment sink and hand sink with soap and
disposable towels shall be required on the food cart.
         (f)   Carts requiring sinks must be equipped with a potable water
system that is under pressure or gravity feed and be capable of providing hot
and cold water at a minimum rate of one-half gallon per minute. The system must
be of an adequate capacity, as determined by the health authority, for food
preparation, utensil cleaning and hand washing. The water inlet must be located
so it will not be contaminated by waste discharge, road dust, oil, grease and
similar materials. The water outlet must be capped at all times except during
time of service. Liquid waste must be stored in a retention tank that is at
least 15% larger than the water supply tank. Liquid waste may only be disposed
of in an approved sanitary sewer. Discharge of wastewater on the ground or into
a storm sewer is prohibited.
         (g)   Mechanical refrigeration and hot food storage must be provided
for the maintenance of all potentially hazardous foods. All potentially
hazardous food must be kept at 41°F or below or at 140°F or above. The use of
ice, dry ice, and Sterno as a means of maintaining proper food temperatures is
not approved unless written permission is given by the health authority.
Coolers that are smooth, durable, and easily cleanable may be used for the
storage of soft drinks. The use of styrofoam is prohibited.
         (h)   All food products must come from sources approved by the health
authority. All prepackaged foods must be properly labeled. Home-prepared foods
of any kind are prohibited.
         (i)   All finishes on the food cart must be smooth, durable, non-
absorbent, and easily cleanable.
         (j)   All food and any items coming in contact with food are to be
stored above the ground and protected from contamination. The use of open
condiments is prohibited. Condiments must be dispensed from individual packets
or from a closed dispenser such as a squeeze container.
         (k)   Wiping cloths must be stored in an approved sanitizer at
appropriate strength when not in actual use.
         (l)   A covered trash receptacle must be provided for the public's use
and removed from the premises when the food cart is not present.
         (m)   Public restrooms must be easily accessible to employees of the
food cart.
         (n)   Every portion of a food cart must be entirely covered by a
building overhang or a canopy or umbrella that must be removed from the
premises when the food cart is not present.
         (o)   The following items must be kept on site and used as necessary:
            1.   A calibrated product thermometer scale 0°F to 220°F;
            2.   Test strips for the type of sanitizer used; and
            3.   Food grade gloves.
         (p)   Each employee of the food cart and the owner must obtain all
appropriate cards, permits, licenses or certificates regarding food handling
from the health authority prior to the issuance of a food service permit.
         (q)   All food carts must operate from a commissary approved by the
health authority. The food cart operator must submit to the health authority a
letter from the owner of the commissary giving permission to use that
establishment as a commissary. All food carts must report at least once per day
to the commissary for supplies, clean up of the food cart and any other
activities related to the operation of the food cart, such as the use of a
three-compartment sink for washing large items. When not in use the food cart
must be stored at the commissary in a covered area protected from the weather.
         (r)   The owner or operator of a food cart must submit to the health
authority such plans, drawings, specifications and other information that fully
describe the food cart as the health authority may require.
         (s)   Any food cart that operates with propane must be located at
least ten feet from the building and at least 20 feet from any opening into the
building. Additionally, a minimum of one two and one-half pound fire
extinguisher must be located within 20 feet of the food cart.
         (t)   Electrical cords may not extend more than six feet beyond the
food cart, and must be installed and secured to prevent safety hazards.
         (u)   A food cart shall only be permitted on property with an existing
retail shopping center that has at least one anchor tenant with a minimum floor
area of 50,000 square feet. The food cart must be located on the same lot
occupied by said anchor tenant.
         (v)   Only one food cart shall be permitted per retail shopping
center.
         (w)   A food cart shall not be allowed in any required parking space
of the retail shopping center.
      (34)   Gas well drilling and production and line compressors. Gas wells,
drilling and production of gas, and line compressors facilities shall conform
to the regulations set forth in §
155.102.
      (35)   (a)   Intent. The intent of these provisions for accessory
dwelling units (ADUs) is:
            1.   To enable and to encourage increased land use efficiency.
            2.   To enable and to encourage a measure of attainable housing.
            3.   To enable and to encourage lifelong neighborhoods.
            4.   To increase the supply of housing options without diminishing
the aesthetic and the quality of life in existing and future neighborhoods.
         (b)   General.
            1.   Accessory dwelling units are permitted where specified in §
155.054, Permitted Uses and are permitted as accessory units where specified in
§
155.072, D, Downtown District, and in §
155.073, S, South Mansfield Form-based Development District.
            2.   Accessory dwelling units may only be provided in the following
locations:
               a.   Within the principal dwelling unit;
               b.   Above a free-standing garage; or
               c.   As an independent, free-standing accessory building or
outbuilding.
            3.   Accessory dwelling units are limited to a maximum habitable
area of 1,000 square feet or a maximum of 75% of the habitable area of the
principal dwelling unit, whichever is greater. The habitable area of each
accessory dwelling unit shall be calculated as enclosed space, excluding
garages and other roofed structures such as patios and porches.
               a.   The habitable area of an accessory dwelling unit shall be
no greater than the habitable area of the principal dwelling unit on the same
lot.
            4.   Accessory dwelling units shall provide an entry independent of
the principal dwelling unit, that is accessible from a sidewalk or from a rear
alley.
            5.   One walkway, between four and five feet in width, that is
paved with brick, concrete, or stone, shall be provided and shall directly
connect the entry of the accessory dwelling unit to all required parking.
            6.   Accessory dwelling units are not permitted to be platted or
sold separately from the principal dwelling unit.
            7.   All trash containers and recycling containers shall be
visually screened from the public right-of-way.
         (c)   Setbacks.
            1.   Accessory dwelling units within the principal dwelling unit
are subject to the setback requirements of the zoning district in which the
principal dwelling unit is located.
            2.   All accessory dwelling units that are separate from the
principal dwelling unit shall be setback from the boundaries of their lots as
follows:
               a.   Front: 50 feet minimum.
               b.   Side street: five feet minimum.
               c.   Side yard: five feet minimum (7.5 feet minimum if two
stories).
               d.   Rear yard: five feet minimum (ten feet minimum if two
stories).
               e.   Rear alley: 15 feet minimum from the rear alley centerline.
               f.   Accessory dwelling units may not encroach into any
easement.
         (d)   Height. Accessory dwelling units are limited to two stories in
height.
         (e)   Density.
            1.   Accessory dwelling units shall not be counted in density
calculations.
            2.   Accessory dwelling units are limited to one unit per lot in
all zoning districts where permitted.
         (f)   Massing. Accessory dwelling units shall only be constructed as
follows (
Figures 1 and
2 below):
            1.   As a garage conversion (a converted former garage);
            2.   As a home addition (an accessory dwelling unit that shares at
least one wall with the principal dwelling unit);
            3.   As a home conversion (a converted area of the principal
dwelling unit, with its own kitchen and bathroom);
            4.   As a new independent structure that is separated from the
principal dwelling unit and often placed in the backyard; or
            5.   As a garage addition (a new accessory dwelling unit that
shares at least one wall with the garage and units may be built above the
garage).
         (g)   Utilities.
            1.   An accessory dwelling unit may or may not share utility
connections with a principal dwelling unit.
            2.   All new utility connections may only be permitted subject to
the review and the approval of the Director of Engineering Services.
            3.   All new utility connections shall be placed underground.
            4.   All new data / telecommunications lines shall be placed
underground.
         (h)   Additional standards.
            1.   Accessory dwelling units shall match the color and material of
the principal dwelling unit on the same lot.
            2.   For accessory dwelling units not within the principal dwelling
unit (i.e., that are detached), roofs shall be shed with a minimum pitch of 4:
12 and shall have a roof style complementary to the architectural style of the
principal dwelling unit.
            3.   For attached accessory dwelling units, roofs shall match the
roof style of the principal residential unit or principal building.
            4.   For attached accessory dwelling units, the unit shall be
designed to have its entry to face away from the principal pedestrian entrance
into the principal dwelling unit.
            5.   Exterior stairs and fire escapes shall not be visible from the
public right-of-way or from any required open space or civic space.
            6.   Architectural features including, but not limited to,
balconies, patios, and porches, shall not be calculated and considered to be
part of the maximum habitable area of the accessory dwelling unit.
            7.   Where visible from the public right-of-way or any required
open space or civic space, all openings for doors and windows shall match the
proportions and orientations for the same on the principal dwelling unit.
            8.   In no circumstance shall the aggregate habitable area of a
principal dwelling unit and accessory dwelling unit(s) exceed the maximum lot
coverage of the zoning district in which the property is located.
            9.   Each accessory dwelling unit shall require one parking space
in addition to the required parking for the principal dwelling unit.
         (i)   Adjustments. The Director of Planning shall be authorized to
make minor adjustments so that minor deviations may be resolved
administratively. Minor adjustments shall be limited to dimensional adjustments
that do not constitute a decrease of more than 20% for setbacks; locating an
accessory dwelling unit in front yards, provided that it complies with the
minimum front yard setback requirements for that zoning district; and building
design (i.e., architectural design of the accessory dwelling unit).
         (j)   Appeals. Any property owner denied a permit for constructing an
accessory dwelling unit under the provisions of this section may appeal to the
City Council.
   Figure 1. Accessory dwelling unit massing.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9265.jpg]
   Figure 2. Examples of accessory dwelling units (a garage addition and an
independent structure).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9267.jpg]
   Figure 3- A. Example of an accessory dwelling unit.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9269.jpg]
   Example 3-B. Example of an accessory dwelling unit.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9271.jpg]
   Example 3-C. Example of an accessory dwelling unit.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9273.jpg]
      (36)   Eating places with drive-through service. In addition to the
conditions specified in §
155.080(F) and (G), eating places with drive-through service shall be subject
to the following supplemental conditions:
         (a)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
            1.   CROSS ACCESS shall mean a service drive providing vehicular
access between two or more contiguous sites so that drivers need not enter the
public street system.
            2.   STACKING LANE shall mean an area of stacking spaces and
driving lane provided for vehicles waiting for drive-through service that is
physically separated from other traffic and pedestrian circulation on the site.
            3.   STACKING SPACE shall mean an area within a stacking lane for
vehicles waiting to order and/or finish a drive-through transaction.
         (b)   Two points of access to the property shall be provided to aid in
traffic circulation.
         (c)   Shared access with adjacent lots should be established wherever
feasible. Shared access should be provided by a driveway connecting two or more
contiguous lots to the public street system.
         (d)   Cross access should be provided across the width of the property
to adjacent lots. An access easement must be established wherever cross access
is provided.
         (e)   The stacking lane(s) shall not be parallel to a public street
when there is not a building or a row of parking spaces between the stacking
lane(s) and the street.
         (f)   The stacking lane(s) should be designed to prevent circulation
congestion on the property and on adjacent public streets. The design should
minimize conflicts between pedestrian and vehicular traffic and should not
impede access in or out of parking spaces.
         (g)   The stacking lane(s) for vehicles waiting for drive-in service
shall be clearly delineated from traffic aisles, other stacking lanes and
parking areas with striping, curbing, landscaping or alternative paving.
         (h)   The stacking lane(s) shall be integrated with the on-site
circulation pattern and shall not enter or exit directly into a public street.
         (i)   For a stacking lane next to a curb, landscaping or property
line, a by-pass or exit lane shall be provided to allow vehicles to leave the
stacking lane.
         (j)   The stacking lane(s) should accommodate at least five stacking
spaces before the order board and four stacking spaces between the order board
and the transaction window.
         (k)   The intersection of a stacking lane and walk-in customer access
shall be clearly delineated with a crosswalk with alternative paving, and/or
striping.
         (l)   Each stacking lane shall have a minimum width of ten feet along
straight segments and a minimum width of 12 feet along curve segments.
         (m)   The stacking lane, menu or order board and speaker shall be
located a minimum of 100 feet from the property line of residential zoning
district.
         (n)   When a stacking lane(s) is not screened by the restaurant
building, additional screening shall be provided by planting shrubs along the
entire lot line that is parallel or close to parallel to the stacking lane. The
shrubs must be planted at three feet on center and have a minimum height of
three feet at the time of planting.
         (o)   A landscape buffer with a minimum width of 20 feet shall be
provided along the side lot lines of the property. The buffer must have one
tree planted for each 25 linear feet or portion thereof.
         (p)   Exposed machinery and areas for storage, service and disposal
shall be screened from adjacent lots and public streets using the same
predominant construction materials on the building.
         (q)   The design of proposed buildings and additions should
complement, whenever feasible, the roof line, roof pitch, arrangement of
openings, color, exterior materials, proportion and scale of existing non-
residential buildings in the vicinity.
         (r)   An eating place with drive-through service shall not be
permitted on property within the boundaries of Historic Mansfield TIRZ No. 2 as
established in Ordinance No. OR-1861-12 unless it is approved by the City
Council as a Planned Development District.
         (s)   An eating place with drive-through service should comply with
the driveway design and spacing requirements and other application requirements
in the City of Mansfield Roadway Design Manual.
         (t)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the Planning and
Zoning Commission may recommend and the City Council may approve such
modifications, changes or alternatives to the above conditions as they deem
appropriate.
      (37)   Solar panel systems shall conform to the following requirements:
         (a)   Solar panel systems shall meet all applicable codes and
ordinances and shall be installed only after issuance of a building permit.
         (b)   Roof-mounted solar panel systems shall comply with the
following:
            1.   Solar panel systems shall be permitted on the roof of a
building provided that the panels are not located on a front or side roof slope
facing any public street or a rear roof slope facing a street with four or more
lanes as shown in the Thoroughfare Plan.
            2.   Solar panel systems shall have a top edge that is parallel to
the roof ridge and shall conform to the slope of the roof.
            3.   Solar panel systems may be located on any roof slope of an
accessory building or structure, such as a patio cover or detached garage,
subject to the regulations in this division (b)2. and 5.
            4.   Solar panel systems mounted on flat roofs shall not exceed the
maximum height permitted within the zoning district and shall be screened in
accordance with §
155.093(A).
            5.   Solar panel systems shall be positioned on the roof so as not
to extend above or beyond the edge of any ridge, hip, valley or eave.
         (c)   Ground-mounted solar panel systems shall comply with the
following:
            1.   A ground-mounted solar panel system is not permitted as the
primary use of a property.
            2.   On residential property, ground-mounted solar panel systems
shall comply with the maximum square footage and minimum setback requirements
for residential accessory buildings and structures. On non-residential
property, ground-mounted solar panel systems shall comply with the minimum
setback requirements for non-residential buildings and structures and shall not
be located within any required bufferyard or parking space.
            3.   Ground-mounted solar panel systems shall not be located
between a property line abutting a street and the building.
            4.   Masonry and architectural requirements shall not apply to
ground-mounted solar panel systems.
            5.   Ground-mounted solar panel systems on residential property
shall be screened from view of the street or adjacent properties by an opaque
screening fence. Except in the I-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts, ground-mounted
solar panel systems on non-residential property shall be screened from view of
the street and adjacent properties by a screening wall constructed of materials
that match the predominant material used on the building.
            6.   The maximum height of ground mounted solar panel systems shall
not exceed the height of the required opaque fence and in no case shall exceed
eight feet.
            7.   Long lengths of conduit and wiring associated with the
system's connection to the primary electrical panel shall be placed
underground.
         (d)   Supporting equipment for solar panel systems, including power
conditioning equipment such as batteries for electricity storage and stand-by
gasoline electric generators shall be located behind the building and shall be
screened by an opaque screening device, except that wall-mounted inverters may
be located next to the electric meter.
         (e)   Solar panel systems shall be installed in conformance with all
applicable city codes and ordinances, including the 2015 International Fire
Code and future amendment thereof.
         (f)   On residential lots or tracts of two acres or larger, roof-or
ground-mounted solar panel systems may face a public street provided that the
solar panel system is located at least 300 feet from any street right-of-way
line. An opaque fence shall not be required to screen ground-mounted solar
panel systems meeting this provision.
         (g)   Solar panel systems incorporated into building materials such as
roof shingles or tiles, windows, siding, or other architectural features
integral to a building's design and are reasonably indistinguishable from
traditional building materials may be installed on any roof or facade of the
building. The eligibility of a solar panel system under this division shall be
subject to the determination of the Director of Planning.
         (h)   The City Council may approve an alternate location than
specified in this section for a roof-mounted or ground-mounted solar panel
system at one meeting after holding a public hearing. Written notice of the
hearing shall be sent to owners of real property, as they appear on the last
approved tax roll, situated within 200 feet of the exterior boundary of the
property on which the solar panel system is requested at least ten days prior
to the date of the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall also be published in
the official newspaper of the City of Mansfield at least ten days prior to the
date of the hearing.
      (38)   Body art and piercing studio. Body art and piercing studios shall
conform to the following provisions:
         (a)   A body art and piercing studio may not be located within 1000
feet of a single-family residential zoning classification or single-family
residential use; a church; a licensed day- care center; a public or private
elementary or secondary school; or another body art and piercing studio.
         (b)   For the purposes of this division (38), the measurement shall be
made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
from the nearest portion of the building or tenant space occupied by a body art
and piercing studio to:
            1.   The nearest property line of the premises of a church,
licensed day- care center, public or private elementary or secondary school, or
single-family residential zoning classification or single-family residential
use; and
            2.   The nearest portion of a building or tenant space occupied by
another body art and piercing studio.
         (c)   A body art and piercing studio operating lawfully prior to
October 26, 2020, may continue as a lawful non-conforming use without Planned
Development District zoning; provided, however, that said non-conforming use
shall automatically terminate upon 1) closure of a body art and piercing
studio; 2) a change in name or ownership of a body art and piercing studio; or
3) a change in use of the building or tenant space previously occupied by a
body art and piercing studio.
      (39)   Tobacco products store. Tobacco products stores shall conform to
the following provisions:
         (a)   Distance. No tobacco products store shall be located within
1,000 linear feet of another tobacco products store; within 500 linear feet of
the right-of-way of U.S. Highway 287, U.S. Business Highway 287, State Highway
360, Farm-to-Market Road 157, Farm-to-Market Road 1187, Farm-to-Market Road
917, Main Street, Debbie Lane, Broad Street, Country Club Drive, Heritage
Parkway, Matlock Road, or Lone Star Road; within 500 linear feet of any zoning
designation that allows residential uses, places of worship, hospitals, daycare
centers, or public or private schools or colleges by right; or within 500
linear feet of parks and recreational facilities.
         (b)   Measurement. For purposes of this section, measurement shall be
made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects:
            1.   From the nearest portion of the property line of the premises
where the existing business is located to the nearest portion of the property
line of the premises where the new business is proposed; or
            2.   From the nearest portion of the right-of-way line of U.S.
Highway 287, U.S. Business Highway 287, State Highway 360, Farm-to-Market Road
157, Farm-to-Market Road 1187, Farm-to-Market Road 917, Main Street, Debbie
Lane, Broad Street, Country Club Drive, Heritage Parkway, Matlock Road or Lone
Star Road to the property line of the premises where the new business is
proposed; or
            3.   From the nearest portion of any zoning designation permitting
residential uses, places of worship, hospitals, daycare centers, public or
private schools or colleges by right or parks and recreational facilities to
the property line of the premises where the new business is proposed.
         (c)   Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy the business
owner shall register with the State of Texas and file all required information
about the business with the Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts.
      (40)   Donation box.
         (a)   General. Donation boxes are only permitted in the 2F, MF-1, MF-
2, O-P, C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1, and I-2 Zoning Districts as an accessory use as
shown in §
155.054(B), "Permitted Use Table," Table D. Donation boxes shall be restricted
to locations that are in the rear yard or side yards only; no donation box
shall be located between any building and a street.
         (b)   For purposes of this division (B)(40), OPEN SPACES shall mean
"open space, common" as defined in §
155.012 and PASSIVE SPACE shall mean as referenced in §
155.092(L)(2) of this chapter.
         (c)   The placement of donation boxes shall comply with the following:
            1.   Quantity. No parcel of land shall be permitted to have more
than one donation box unless the parcel of land has more than 300 feet of road
frontage. For the purposes of these provisions relating to donation boxes, a
development containing an inter-related mix of uses on multiple platted lots
under unified design and/or ownership shall be considered one contiguous lot.
Notwithstanding, anything provided for herein, no two donation boxes shall be
less that 300 feet apart.
            2.   Distance. No donation box shall be located within 75 linear
feet of any parcel of land zoned as A and SF District; no donation box shall be
located within 300 linear feet of the right-of-way of U.S. Highway 287, U.S.
Business Highway 287, and State Highway 360 (Toll Road 360); and no donation
box shall be located within 250 linear feet of any public parks and
recreational facilities.
            3.   Measurement. For purposes of this section, measurement shall
be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects:
               A.   From the proposed location of the donation box to the
nearest portion of any lot presently zoned as A or SF District; or
               B.   From the nearest portion of the right-of-way of U.S.
Highway 287, U.S. Business Highway 287, and State Highway 360 (Toll Road 360)
to the proposed location of the donation box.
            4.   Donation boxes shall be placed on a paved surface, separate
and independent of all required parking spaces, aisles, and loading dock and
service areas.
            5.   Donation boxes shall not be located within any required
landscaping or designated open space or passive or civic spaces.
            6.   Donation boxes shall be located in a maimer to facilitate
pickup of donated items by the operator or collection agency.
            7.   Each donation box shall bear the name and a contact telephone
number of the operator of the donation box who benefits from the collected
materials on a sign. Said sign shall not exceed two square feet in area, and
only one sign shall be permitted on each side of the donation box.
            8.   Donation boxes shall be located a minimum distance of 25 feet
away from the intersection of two or more fire lanes and/or drive aisles, with
the distance measured from the intersecting center lines of the fire lanes and/
or drive aisles.
            9.   No donation bin, container or drop box shall exceed a capacity
of 175 cubic feet and 72 inches in height, as measured from finished grade to
the height point of the roof.
            10.   No donation box shall be placed upon any parcel of land
without the prior written approval of the property owner, property owner's
designated agent, property manager, or property's lawful occupant. Upon
request, the owner of the donation box shall produce, within two business days,
a copy of such approval to the Director of Regulatory Compliance or his or her
designee.
            11.   Except where otherwise required, donation boxes shall be
painted or stained with a neutral or earthtone color scheme. High-intensity
colors, metallic colors, black, fluorescent, or neon colors shall be
prohibited.
            12.   Donation boxes shall be free of debris, graffiti, litter,
refuse, rust, et cetera at all times.
            13.   Donation boxes shall be safely designed in a manner that
prevents such structures from tipping over or permitting people to enter.
      (41)   Package store.
         (a)   All package stores shall be licensed by the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Commission.
         (b)   All package stores shall require the adoption of a PD, Planned
Development.
         (c)   The minimum floor area for a package store shall be 25,000
square feet. Any request to deviate from the minimum floor area shall be
subject to approval of the City Council as set forth in this division.
         (d)   In order to control the proliferation of grouped similar land
uses and to prevent proximity to protected land uses, distance to existing
surrounding land uses can be used to determine the appropriateness of a PD,
Planned Development application for a “package store”. Protected land uses
shall be similar to those uses protected and outlined by the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Commission and division (B)(21) of this section.
         (e)   No sale of beer, liquor, wine and/or other alcoholic spirits at
a package store shall be permitted through a drive-through facility; a pick-up
window; or a walk-up window. All sales of beer, liquor, wine and/or other
alcoholic spirits shall occur within the interior of the package store.
         (f)   A package store shall have separate entrances for deliveries and
customers. The entrance for deliveries shall be restricted to locations to the
rear or the side of the establishment.
         (g)   The PD, Planned Development approved under this provision for a
package store shall automatically expire upon: (i) the closure of the package
store; or (ii) a change the ownership of the package store.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86; Am. Ord. OR-2193-20, passed 10-26-20; Am. Ord. OR-
2208-21, passed 5-24-21; Am. Ord. OR-2217-21, passed 9-13-21; Am. Ord. OR-2256-
22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. OR-2288-23, passed 1-23-23; Am. Ord. OR-2323-23,
passed 10-9-23; Am. Ord. OR-2324-23, passed 10-9-23; Am. Ord. OR-2346-24,
passed 2-12-24; Am. Ord. OR-2358-24, passed 4-22-24; Am. Ord. OR-2387-24,
passed 10-14-24; Am. Ord. OR-2396-24, passed 12-9-24)
§ 155.100 INDUSTRALIZED HOUSING AND BUILDING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General provisions. In compliance to Article 5221f-1, Vernon's Texas
Civil Statutes, all local requirements and regulations relating to land use,
zoning, building setback, site planning and development, subdivision control,
landscaping and architectural requirements, erection and installation shall be
uniformly applied to industrialized housing and building without distinctions
as to whether the housing or buildings are manufactured or are constructed on-
site.
   (B)   Construction and installation requirements. For each installation and
related on-site construction of industrialized housing or building within its
corporate limits, the City of Mansfield specifically requires:
      (1)   That a compete set of design plans and specifications bearing the
stamp of the Texas Industrialized Building Code Council be submitted to the
city for review for compliance with the mandatory state codes.
      (2)   That all applicable local permits and licenses and fees be obtained
before any construction begins on a building site.
      (3)   That all modules or modular components within an industrialized
housing or building bear an approved decal or insignia under rules of the Texas
Department of Labor and Standards reflecting that they have been inspected at
the manufacturing plant or facility.
      (4)   That the industrialized housing or building be placed on an
approved permanent foundation.
      (5)   That the Building Official be notified for inspection of all
foundation and other on-site construction, and installation of modules or
modular components on the permanent foundation to assure compliance with
approved designs, plans and specifications.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.101 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. Wireless telecommunications facilities used in transmitting
and receiving signal energy are essential and promote the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the city. The purpose of this section is to
govern the placement of these facilities to:
      (1)   Assure that their location and use do not compromise the aesthetic
quality of the community;
      (2)   Encourage operators of antenna facilities and antennas to locate
them in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal;
      (3)   Encourage co-location on both new and existing antenna facilities;
      (4)   Encourage operators of antenna facilities and antennas to configure
them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact through careful design,
landscape screening, and innovative stealth techniques;
      (5)   Enhance the ability of antenna facilities and antennas to provide
services to the community effectively and efficiently; and
      (6)   Promote the aesthetic quality of the city as a significant aspect
of the health, safety, and general welfare of the community.
   (B)   Definitions. In this section the following definitions apply:
      (1)   Amateur radio antenna. A radio communication antenna used by a
person holding an amateur station license from the Federal Communications
Commission.
      (2)   Antenna. A device used in communications, which transmits or
receives radio signals.
      (3)   Antenna, building attached. Antenna attached to an existing
structure in two general forms: (1) roof-mounted, in which antennas are placed
on the roofs of buildings; or (2) building-mounted, in which antennas are
placed on the sides of buildings. These antennas can also be mounted on
structures such as water tanks, billboards, church steeples, electrical
transmission towers, etc.
      (4)   Antenna facility. Any structure, monopole, tower, or lattice tower
used to support antennas.
      (5)   Co-location. The act of locating wireless communications equipment
for more than one use on a single antenna facility.
      (6)   Equipment storage building. An unmanned, single story equipment
building used to house radio transmitters and related equipment.
      (7)   Monopole. A self-supporting antenna facility composed of a single
spire used to support communications equipment or other visible items.
      (8)   Satellite receive-only antenna. An antenna that enables the receipt
of television signals transmitted directly from satellites to be viewed on a
television monitor. Such antennas are commonly known as a satellite dish,
television receive-only antenna, dish antenna, parabolic antenna, or satellite
earth station antenna.
      (9)   Stealth facility. An antenna facility that is virtually transparent
or invisible to the surrounding neighborhood. Stealth facilities may include
totally enclosed antennas, wireless facilities that replicate or duplicate the
construction of common structures such as flagpoles, and camouflaged wireless
facilities that are constructed to blend into the surrounding environment.
      (10)   Tower, lattice. A self-supporting tower having three or four
support legs with cross-bracing and the capacity to hold a number and a variety
of antennas.
      (11)   TV antenna. An antenna that enables the receipt of television
signals transmitted from broadcast stations.
   (C)   General regulations. The following regulations apply to all antenna
facilities and antennas located within any district:
      (1)   Equipment and storage building. An equipment storage building
associated with an antenna facility or an antenna shall be screened and
landscaped as described in other sections of this chapter, or be incorporated
into the stealth treatment so that it is consistent and complementary with the
existing structures and uses on the premises.
      (2)   Driveway surfaces. All driveways accessing any antenna facility
site or equipment storage site shall be constructed of concrete.
      (3)   Lights. No outdoor lighting shall be allowed on antennas located on
residentially zoned property except lights or lighting that is by required by
the Federal Aviation Administration or the Federal Communications Commission.
      (4)   Limitations. Antenna facilities are limited to stealth facilities
and monopoles except where other facilities are allowed by this section.
      (5)   Antenna facility capacity. An antenna facility shall not have more
than the number and size of antennas attached to it than are allowed by the
antenna facility manufacturer's designs and specifications for maximum wind
load requirements.
      (6)   Monopoles. No guy wires are permitted with the use of monopoles.
      (7)   Prohibited in easements. Antenna facilities constructed solely for
the purpose of supporting antennas shall not be placed in an easement.
      (8)   Construction standards. A building permit must be obtained prior to
the construction or installation of a tower, antenna, or mast. An antenna
facility must be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations or
under the seal of a registered professional engineer of the State of Texas.
      (9)   Use and repair. Antenna facilities and antennas not in use shall be
removed within 30 days following notice given by the Building Official. Antenna
facilities or antennas in need of repair as determined by the Building
Official, shall be removed or brought into compliance within 30 days following
notice given by the Building Official. This notice requirement shall not
preclude immediate action by the Building Official if public safety requires
it.
      (10)   Contained on property. No part of an antenna facility, antennas,
or other attachment may extend beyond the property lines of the lot on which
the antenna or antenna facility is located.
      (11)   Special exception requirement. A special exception is required
from the Zoning Board of Adjustment for an antenna or antenna facility which
will not comply with any requirement of this section. See division (J).
   (D)   Amateur radio and TV antennas. Amateur radio and TV antennas are
permitted as accessory uses in the A, SF-5AC/24, SF-12/22, SF-9.6/20, SF-8.4/
18, SF-8.4/16, SF-7.5/18, SF-7.5/16, SF-7.5/12, SF-6/12, 2F, MF-1, MF-2 or MH
or PR zoning districts. Amateur radio and TV antennas must comply with the
following regulations:
      (1)   Antenna facility type. The antenna facility may be either building
attached, a monopole, tower, or a lattice tower.
      (2)   Number of facilities per lot. Only one antenna facility exceeding
35 feet in height is permitted on each lot.
      (3)   Height limitations. An antenna facility, exclusive of the height of
any antenna or mast, shall not exceed 35 feet in height; except, that an
antenna facility shall be permitted additional height at the ratio of one added
foot in height for each additional foot of setback beyond the minimum setback
required of an accessory building in the zoning district regulations to a
maximum height of 65 feet in a residential district. A special exception is
required for additional height.
      (4)   Height limit for building mounted antenna. An antenna shall not
extend more than eight-feet above a building on which it is mounted.
      (5)   Setbacks. The following minimum setbacks apply:
         (a)   Antennas and antenna facilities shall not be permitted in front
or side yards. Guy wires are not permitted in front yards;
         (b)   Guy wires are permitted in required side and rear yards; and
         (c)   Setback for antenna facilities shall be the same as is required
for accessory buildings in residential districts.
      (6)   Separation. There shall be no minimum or maximum separation
requirements for antenna facilities from other structures on the same lot of
record.
      (7)   Lights. No outdoor lighting above 20 feet shall be allowed on
antenna facilities located on residentially zoned property, and no lights so
located shall be directed off one's property, except lights or lighting that is
required by the Federal Aviation Administration or the Federal Communications
Commission.
   (E)   Satellite receive-only antennas generally. A satellite receive only
antenna is permitted as an accessory use under the following conditions:
      (1)   The satellite receive-only antenna is not greater than one meter in
diameter: all zoning districts.
      (2)   The satellite receive-only antenna is one meter or greater in
diameter, but not greater than two meters in diameter: all nonresidential
zoning districts.
   (F)   Satellite receive-only antennas greater than one meter in diameter in
residential districts and greater than two meters in diameter in non-
residential districts are permitted as accessory uses if they comply with the
following regulations:
      (1)   Number of antennas per lot. Only one satellite receive-only antenna
per lot of record.
      (2)   Height: not exceeding ten feet in height.
      (3)   Set backs:
         (a)   Front and side yards. Not permitted.
         (b)   Rear yard. Minimum setback as required for accessory buildings
in residential districts and as for all buildings in nonresidential districts.
      (4)   Separation. No minimum or maximum separation requirements for
satellite receive-only antennas from other structures on the same lot of
record.
      (5)   Screening. Satellite receive-only antennas that are mounted on the
ground shall be screened from view from adjoining properties by solid fencing
or evergreen plants to a height of a least six feet. A satellite receive-only
antenna located within a fence surrounding the yard in which the satellite
receive-only antenna is located shall be considered to be screened.
   (G)   Placement of antenna facilities (other than amateur radio, TV, and
satellite receive-only antennas) within land use thresholds. For the purpose of
determining the appropriate locations for the placement of antenna facilities
other than amateur radio, TV, and satellite receive-only antennas, the city is
divided into land use threshold areas that require different regulations
pertaining to height, location, and type of antenna facility. These land use
thresholds are defined as follows:
      (1)   Interior Industrial "II". Property within the I-1 and I-2 zoning
districts that is located more than 1,000 feet away from any other zoning
district.
      (2)   Exterior Industrial "EI". Property within the I-1 and I-2 zoning
districts, that is located within 1,000 feet of any other zoning district.
      (3)   Full Commercial "FC". Property within the OP, C-1, C-2, or C-
3 zoning districts, which is located more than 600 feet from an A, SF-5AC/24,
SF-12/22, SF-9.6/20, SF-8.4/18, SF-8.4/16, SF-7.5/18, SF-7.5/16, SF-7.5/12, SF-
6/12, 2F, MF-1, MF-2, MH or PR zoning district.
      (4)   Undeveloped Residential "UR". Property within the A, SF-5AC/24, SF-
12/22, SF-9.6/20, SF-8.4/18, SF-8.4/16, SF-7.5/18, SF-7.5/16, SF-7.5/12, SF-6/
12, 2F, MF-1, MF-2, MH or PR zoning districts, that:
         (a)   Is not a part of a recorded subdivision; or
         (b)   Is a part of a recorded subdivision but has not had a building
permit issued for a residential structure; and
         (c)   Is not located within the calculated limits of the "DR"
threshold.
      (5)   Edge Commercial "EC". Property within the OP, C-1, C-2, or C-
3 zoning districts, which is located within 600 feet of an A, SF-5AC/24, SF-12/
22, SF-9.6/20, SF-8.4/18, SF-8.4/16, SF-7.5/18, SF-7.5/16, SF-7.5/12, SF-6/12,
2F, MF-1, MF-2, MH or PR zoning district.
      (6)   Wireless corridors "WC". Property within, and 75 feet either side
of, the right-of-way of a freeway or a major or minor arterial roadway, as
indicated on the city's thoroughfare plan.
      (7)   Developed residential "DR". Property within the A, SF-5AC/24, SF-
12/22, SF-9.6/20, SF-8.4/18, SF-8.4/16, SF-7.5/18, SF-7.5/16, SF-7.5/12, SF-6/
12, 2F, MF-1, MF-2, MH or PR zoning districts, which:
         (a)   Is a recorded subdivision that has had at least one building
permit for a residential structure; or
         (b)   Is within the exterior surfaces of an existing primary
residential structure; or
         (c)   Is within 600 feet of areas described by divisions (7)(a) and
(b) above.
      (8)   Scenic /Limited "SL". Property that has been defined as a scenic/
limited area, the boundary of which has been delineated on the zoning map.
   (H)    Antenna facility impact levels. For the purpose of determining
appropriate locations for antenna facilities, the city recognizes differing
levels of impact for antenna facilities depending upon physical location,
aesthetics, and land uses compatibility. These antenna facility impact levels
are defined as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7582.png]
 
      (1)   90 foot monopole. A monopole no greater than 90 feet in height. The
antenna equipment may not extend more than five feet above the highest point on
the monopole.
      (2)   60 foot monopole. A monopole no greater than 60 feet in height. The
antenna equipment may not extend more than five feet above the highest point on
the monopole.
      (3)   35 foot monopole. A monopole no greater than 35 feet in height. The
antenna equipment may not extend more than five feet above the highest point on
the monopole.
      (4)   Level 4 stealth facility. The antenna on a Level 4 stealth facility
is located on an existing structure (other than an antenna facility) including,
but not limited to, a building, water tower, utility tower, steeple, or light
pole. The antenna is not screened nor hidden. For the purpose of this level, a
pole or tower may be recons tructed to structurally hold the antenna but shall
not be any higher than the original structure that it is replacing.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7580.png]
 
      (5)   Level 3 stealth facility. The antenna on a Level 3 stealth facility
is located on an existing structure (other than an antenna facility) including,
but not limited to, a building, water tower, utility tower, steeple, or light
pole. The antenna may be aesthetically painted, constructed, or applied with
material so that it is incorporated into the pattern, style, and material of
the structure to effectively render the antenna unnoticeable. A new structure
may be constructed to hold or house the antenna or equipment; however, the
structure must be consistent with the overall architectural features of the
primary buildings.
      (6)   Level 2 stealth facility. The antenna on a Level 2 stealth facility
is attached to the structure in such a manner that if it is seen it appears
unrecognizable as an antenna, and the structure in which or on which the
antenna is attached is an integral part of an overall development.
      (7)   Level 1 stealth facility. The antenna on a Level 1 stealth facility
is attached to the structure in such a manner that the antenna is completely
unseen and the structure in which or on which the antenna is attached is an
integral part of an overall development.
   (I)   Antenna facility siting matrix. Antenna facilities shall be located in
accordance with the following siting matrix. This matrix provides for areas
where antenna facilities may be located as permitted uses, areas where they may
be located with a special exception, and areas where they are prohibited.
      (1)   Additional height. Permitted monopoles shown as 90 ft., 60 ft., and
35 ft. in the Antenna Facility Siting Matrix may be increased in height up to
20 feet, if the antenna facility is constructed to accommodate co-location. Co-
location must include area requirements for ground storage buildings,
driveways, screening, and any other accommodation that is required for the
successful operation of a multiple-user antenna facility site. The extension of
height may only occur twice to a maximum 40 additi onal feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b13c220b8b2ee403ae464ff68a5772808c1d9b7e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7586.png]
 
   (J)     Special exception. When a special exception is required by this
section for the location of an antenna facility or an antenna, the property
owner must submit an application to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
      (1)    Application. To properly evaluate an application to locate an
antenna facility or an antenna that requires a special exception, the following
information must be provided by the applicant:
         (a)   Describe the nature of the antenna site. Indicate whether the
proposed structure is a monopole or mounted to a self-supporting structure.
Indicate the proposed height.
         (b)   Provide photos or drawings of all equipment, structures, and
antennas.
         (c)   Describe why the antenna or tower is necessary at the particular
location.
         (d)   State the name(s) of the telecommunications providers or other
users of the antenna or tower and describe the use to be made by each user.
         (e)   Indicate if this antenna or tower site is to be connected to
other sites; and if so, describe how it will be connected and who will be the
back haul provider.
         (f)   The applicant must address whether it has made an effort to co-
locate the facilities proposed for this antenna facility on existing antenna
facilities in the same general area. Identify the location of these existing
sites, and describe in detail these efforts and explain in detail why these
existing sites were not feasible. Attach all studies or tests performed which
demonstrate why the existing sites will not provide sufficient signal coverage.
Provide written documentation from existing sites' owners and/or operators
which confirm the statements provided. Indicated whether the existing sites
allow/ promote co-location and, if not, describe why not.
         (g)   Indicate whether co-location will be allowed to other
telecommunications providers at the requested site. If they are not allowed,
state every reason and the basis of each reason.
         (h)   If the requested location is in a residential district the
applicant must address whether it has made an effort to locate the facility in
a nonresidential district. Identify the location of these nonresidential
district sites, describe in detail these efforts, and explain in detail why
these nonresidential sites were not feasible. Attach all studies or tests
performed which demonstrate why the nonresidential sites will not provide
sufficient signal coverage. Provide written documentation from nonresidential
district sites' owners or operators which confirm the statements provided.
         (i)   Indicate the proposed provider's current coverage area for the
city. Attach maps showing the areas the proposed provider's existing antenna
currently covers, the areas the applicant's existing sites and the requested
site would cover.
         (j)   Describe the applicant's master antenna facilities plan for the
city. Attach maps and other related documentation. Provide information
indicating each phase of the plan.
         (k)   Describe the applicant's plan to minimize the number of antenna
facilities needed to cover the city.
      (2)   Consideration of application.  In considering whether to grant a
special exception, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consider the following:
         (a)   The effect on the value of the surrounding property;
         (b)   The potential for interference with the enjoyment or the use of
surrounding properties;
         (c)   Aesthetics;
         (d)   The proposed height of the antenna facility;
         (e)   The zoning district and the adjoining zoning districts of the
property for which the special exception is sought; and
         (f)   The unique conditions that govern reasonable reception on any
given lot.
      (3)   The Zoning Board of Adjustment will approve a requested application
subject to the finding that co-location of this facility with a nearby existing
antenna facility is technically not feasible and subject to the following
conditions:
         (a)   Applicant will permit co-location of others at the site;
         (b)   Applicant will construct and configure its antenna facility and
other equipment to accommodate other providers;
         (c)   Applicant will identify its backhaul provider connecting antenna
sites; and
         (d)   Applicant will give notice to the city identifying any provider
who co-locates to the site and identify its backhaul provider.
   (K)   Written report upon denial of request. The Board of Adjustment shall
document in writing any denial of a request to place, construct, or modify an
antenna facility. This documentation shall be supported by substantial evidence
within the written record.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86; Am. Ord. OR-2223-21, passed 10-11-21)
§ 155.102 GAS WELL DRILLING AND PRODUCTION.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the definitions set
forth in §
114.02 shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. All technical industry words or phrases related to the drilling and
production of gas wells not specifically defined shall have the meanings
customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the gas industry.
   (B)   Specific use permit required. The drilling and production of gas
within the city shall only be permitted by specific use permit in accordance
with §
155.080. A site plan is required with the specific use permit application and
must include all information required by §
155.080(D) and the following additional information:
      (1)   The total number of wells to be drilled.
      (2)   The location of the drill site and a layout of the site showing all
related facilities, including, but not limited to, drilling rig, pipe rack,
water and sanitary sewer facilities, electrical supply, camper/office trailers,
reserve pit, and fracturing pits.
      (3)   The location of the operation site and a layout of the site showing
all related facilities, including but not limited to wellheads, separators,
dehydrators, tank batteries, compressors, and metering stations.
      (4)   Size, location and purpose of any shared facilities, including, but
not limited to, centralized tank batteries or fracturing pits for multiple
wells or drill sites.
      (5)   The design, location, and arrangement of all access roads.
      (6)   A map of the public streets to be used by truck traffic to the
drill site.
      (7)   The location of any floodplain, drainage or flowage easement.
      (8)   A tree survey if required by the Landscape Administrator for
compliance with the city's Natural Resources Management Ordinance.
      (9)   A pipeline routing map indicating the location and size of all
existing and planned pipelines within both the territorial and extraterritorial
limits of the city intended to serve the well or wells identified in the above-
referenced site plan. If approved by the City Council, the submitted pipeline
routing map shall be made a condition of the specific use oermit. Proposed
revisions or modification to an approved pipeline routing map shall be
processed in accordance with the provisions of §
155.080(J).
      (10)   A video, provided in DVD format only, documenting existing
conditions of the city streets within one mile of the drill site or line
compressor facility that will be used by truck traffic to the site, plus a DVD
video or still photographs taken from the well(s) in four directions depicting
the existing conditions of the property being used for the drill site or line
compressor.
      (11)   Time limits.
         (a)   A specific use permit issued under this section shall expire as
to each drill site, operation site or line compressor facility authorized by
the specific use permit, and a new specific use permit shall be required
approving each unused drill site, operation site or line compressor facility if
two years have elapsed since the approval of the specific use permit and at the
time of the proposed use an unused drill site, operation site or line
compressor facility would no longer comply with the setback limitations set
forth in division (E) of this section.
         (b)   The authorization for gas well drilling and production
activities under a specific use permit issued under this section shall be valid
for a period of five years from the date of issuance and shall expire for any
surface activity, including, but not limited to, the drilling, fracturing and
completion of wells or the installation of new equipment, that is not completed
within said five year period, unless an extension of time is approved by the
City Council in accordance with the following procedure:
            1.   An operator of an existing drill site or operation site
seeking an extension of time shall submit an application for a new specific use
permit in accordance with §
155.080, including a site plan and any other required documentation.
            2.   Before the City Council takes any action on the application,
the Planning and Zoning Commission must submit its recommendation and report to
the City Council, and public hearings before both the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the City Council must be held and public notice must be given in
accordance with § 155.115(C).
            3.   Written consent for a distance setback specified in division
(E) of this section shall not be required for an existing drill site or
operation site, provided that there are no changes, other than the extension of
time, being proposed from the preceding specific use permit. If changes are
proposed, that in the opinion of the City Manager or his or her designee, would
change the character of the site and increase its impact on surrounding
properties, the Manager or his representative shall advise the Mayor and
Council that the staff is recommending that the renewal request comply with
requirements of division (E) of this section. An applicant may appeal such
decision to the City Council.
            4.   The City Council may grant additional extensions of time, not
to exceed five years in duration per request. Additional extensions of time may
be sought subject to the limitations set forth in this section, provided that
the application is made not sooner than the four year anniversary and prior to
the five year anniversary of the new specific use permit.
            5.   Notwithstanding the foregoing division 4., the operator of an
existing drill site or operation site shall be entitled to make an application
for an extension of time regardless of the expiration of the preceding specific
use permit, provided that the application is made prior to April 28, 2016. Any
application received after April 28, 2016, shall conform to division 4. above.
            6.   If the application for the new specific use permit is approved
by the City Council, the operator shall conduct all gas well drilling and
production activities in compliance with the regulations in
Chapter 114 of this code and all other applicable city ordinances, and any
amendments thereof.
         (c)   A specific use permit issued for the activities regulated by
this section shall not be subject to expiration pursuant to §
155.080(H).
         (d)   An approved specific use permit shall expire for each drill site
operation site or line compressor facility that is used and then abandoned. A
drill site, operation site, or line compressor facility that is used will be
deemed abandoned once the use thereafter ceases for at least 12 consecutive
months. Intent to abandon shall be irrelevant.
   (C)   Line compressors.
      (1)   A specific use permit is required for the establishment and
operation of a line compressor and its related facilities and equipment whether
in conjunction with a gas well or as an independent operation, in accordance
with §
155.080.
      (2)   A site plan is required with the specific use permit application
and must include all applicable information required by §
155.080(C). The site plan must identify the location of the proposed line
compressor and provide a layout of the site showing all related facilities and
equipment. If the compressor is established separately from a drill site or
operation site, a video documenting the existing conditions where the
compressor is to be located shall also be required.
   (D)   Efficient use of surface. It is the intent of this section to
encourage efficient surface land use by requiring compact and centrally located
gas well development that minimizes the total amount of surface area needed for
gas well facilities and avoids the creation of unusable strips and parcels. In
order to implement this requirement, each operator shall, to the extent
permitted by Railroad Commission spacing rules, strive to locate new drill
sites in close proximity to pre-established drill and/or operation sites, if
located within 600 feet of the proposed new site. This requirement shall apply
regardless of whether the pre-established drill and/or operation sites are
owned or managed by a different operator.
   (E)   Required setback.
      (1)   No drill site or line compressor facility shall be permitted within
600 feet of the boundary of any preliminary or final platted residential
subdivision, except under one of the following conditions:
         (a)   A drill site or line compressor facility shall be permitted as
close as 300 feet to any boundary line of a platted subdivision if all affected
property owners within 600 feet of the drill site or line compressor facility
consent in writing; or
         (b)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a drill site or line compressor
facility may be located on a lot within the boundaries of a preliminary or
final platted residential subdivision with the written consent of the property
owner, provided the drill site or line compressor facility is located at least
300 feet from the boundary of any final platted residential lot within the
subdivision and the required distances set forth in divisions (2) and (3) below
are adhered to in accordance with their terms.
         (c)   For the purpose of division (a) above, "affected property owner"
shall mean the owner of property that is both within 600 feet of the proposed
drill site or line compressor facility and located within the boundary of a
preliminary or final platted residential subdivision.
      (2)   No drill site or line compressor facility shall be permitted within
600 feet of the boundary line of a property with a residential structure (if
located on an unplatted tract), public building, institution, public or private
school, day care center, or commercial building, except under one of the
following conditions:
         (a)   A drill site or line compressor facility shall be permitted as
close as 300 feet to any boundary line of a property described in division (2)
above if all affected property owners within 600 feet of the drill site or line
compressor facility consent in writing; or
         (b)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a drill site or line compressor
facility may be located on a property containing a residential structure (if
located on an unplatted tract), public building, institution, public or private
school, day care center, or commercial building with the written consent of the
property owner and the required distances set forth in divisions (E)(1) and (3)
are adhered to in accordance with their terms.
         (c)   For the purpose of division (a) above, "affected property owner"
shall mean the owner of property that is both within 600 feet of the proposed
drill site or line compressor facility and contains a building or structure
described in division (2) above.
      (3)   No drill site or line compressor facility shall be permitted within
1,000 feet from any hospital, nursing home, or the city's Law Enforcement
Center. For the purposes of this section, "nursing home" means a place for the
care of individuals who, because of injury, incapacity, age or infirmity are
generally non-ambulatory and require twenty-four hour supervised personal and/
or medical care.
      (4)   No well or line compressor may be located within 100 feet of a
railroad right-of-way.
      (5)   In addition to obtaining written permission from property owners in
accordance with divisions (E)(1)(a) or (E)(2)(a) above, a gas well operator
shall give written notice, in a form acceptable to the city, to the tenants or
lessees of any residential protected use or the owner of a residential
structure such as a manufactured home on a rental property within 600 feet of
the proposed drill site for which the operator is making an application for a
specific use permit. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and by first class U.S. mail. The operator shall provide
copies of the return receipts and an affidavit certifying that notice has been
sent to the above-referenced tenants or lessees.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
ADMINISTRATION, AMENDMENTS AND ENFORCEMENTS
§ 155.110 ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Enforcement. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and
enforced by the city. Each application for a building permit shall be
accompanied by a site plan in triplicate drawn to scale, showing the actual
dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size, shape, and location of the
building and/or structure to be erected, and such other information as may be
necessary to provide for the enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   Violations and penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or entity that
violates or assists in the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall build or
alter any building or use in violation of any plan or permit submitted and
approved hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall
be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (C)   Civil remedies. In order to enforce the provisions of this chapter,
the City Attorney is authorized to institute any civil action in the
appropriate court upon the prior approval of the City Manager.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.111 ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS AND UTILITY SERVICE.
   (A)   No building permit for the construction of a building or structure
upon any tract, parcel or premise shall be issued, and public utilities shall
not be extended or connected to a building or structure unless the lot, tract,
parcel or premise is part of a plat of record properly approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission or a lot of record. However, nothing herein shall require
a plat to be approved and filed as a prerequisite to construction where such
construction occurs in an area zoned in a PR, A or Single-family Residential
District for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   Adding to an existing building or structure; or
      (2)   Altering an existing building or structure; or
      (3)   Adding an accessory building or structure; or
      (4)   Restoring any building or structure previously destroyed by fire,
explosion or any other casualty or act of God where the extent of the
destruction is not more than 50% of its reasonable market value.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.112 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY AND COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No existing building or structure shall be changed in use, and no
building or structure erected, enlarged or structurally altered after the
effective date of this chapter, unless a Certificate of Occupancy and
Compliance shall first have been issued by the Building Official of the city
certifying that the building and the proposed use of the building and premises
comply with all building and fire codes, and any other applicable codes and
ordinances.
   (B)   A certificate of occupancy and compliance shall be applied for
coincident with the application for a building permit and will be issued within
ten working days after the completion of the erection, alteration or conversion
of such building or land provided such construction or change has been made in
complete conformity to the provisions of this chapter. All existing or
hereafter created nonconforming uses shall obtain certificates of occupancy
within 18 months of the effective date of this chapter. A certificate of
occupancy shall be considered evidence of the legal existence of a lawful
nonconforming use as contrasted to an illegal use and violation of this
chapter.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.113 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   Membership, appointment and term of office. There shall be a Board of
Adjustments composed of five regular members and up to three alternate members
who serve in the absence of one or more regular members. The members of the
Board shall be residents and real property taxpayers in the city, appointed by
the City Council for a term of two years or until their successors are
appointed. Four members of the Board shall be so appointed each odd-numbered
year and four members shall be appointed each even-numbered year. The City
Council may remove a Board member for cause, as found by the City Council, on a
written charge after a public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term of any member whose position becomes vacant for any cause in the
same manner as the original appointment was made. Members of the Board shall
serve without compensation.
   (B)   Proceedings. The Board of Adjustments shall adopt rules to govern its
proceedings provided, however, that such rules are not inconsistent with this
chapter or statutes of the State of Texas. Meetings of the Board shall be held
at the call of the Chairman or at such other times as the Board may determine.
The Chairman, or in his absence, the Acting Chairman, may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open to
the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of
each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicate such
fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions,
all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be
a public record.
   (C)   Appeal process.
      (1)   Appeals to the Board can be taken by any person aggrieved by an
officer, department, or board or bureau of the municipality affected by any
decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 15
days after the decision has been rendered by the administrative officer, by
filing with the Officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board, a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the
appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken.
      (2)   At a public hearing relative to any appeal or variance, any
interested party may appear in person or by agent of attorney. The burden of
proof shall be on the applicant to establish the necessary facts to warrant
favorable action of the Board of Adjustments on any appeal.
   (D)   Stay of proceeding. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal
is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustments, after the notice of appeal
shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise, than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the Board or by a court of record on
application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due
cause shown.
   (E)   General powers. The Board shall have the following powers.
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in
any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative
official in the enforcement of this chapter. The Board must find the following
in order to grant an appeal:
         (a)   That there is a reasonable difference of interpretation as to
the specific intent of the zoning regulations or zoning map.
         (b)   That the resulting interpretation will not grant a special
privilege to one property inconsistent with other properties or uses similarly
situated.
         (c)   The decision of the Board must be such as will be in the best
interest of the community and consistent with the spirit and interest of this
chapter.
      (2)   To initiate, on its motion or otherwise, action to bring about the
vacation and demolition of a nonconforming structure which is deemed to be
obsolete, dilapidated or substandard or the discontinuance of a non-conforming
use under any plan whereby full value of the structure or use can be amortized
within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the general
character of the neighborhood and the necessity for all property to conform to
the regulations of this chapter.
      (3)   To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the
terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where,
owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of said
law will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the
ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done. The term "variance"
shall mean a deviation from the literal provisions of the zoning ordinance
which is granted by the Board when strict conformity to the zoning ordinance
would cause an unnecessary hardship because of circumstances unique to the
property on which the variance is granted. Except as otherwise prohibited under
division (F) hereto, the Board is empowered to authorize a variance from a
requirement of the zoning ordinance when the Board finds that all of the
following conditions have been met:
         (a)   That the granting of the variance will not be contrary to the
public interest; and
         (b)   That literal enforcement of the ordinance will result in
unnecessary hardship because of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape,
topography or other extraordinary or exceptional physical situation or physical
condition unique to the specific piece of property in question. "Unnecessary
hardship" shall mean physical hardship relating to the property itself as
distinguished from a hardship relating to convenience, financial considerations
or caprice, and the hardship must not result from the applicant or property
owner's own actions; and
         (c)   That by granting the variance, the spirit of the ordinance will
be observed and substantial justice will be done. The applicant shall have the
burden of proving to the Board that the foregoing conditions have been met.
      (4)   To authorize special exceptions as specified in §
155.082.
   (F)   Use variance prohibited. No variance shall be granted to permit a use
in a zoning district in which that use is prohibited, or a use which is
explicitly prohibited by this chapter.
   (G)   Additional conditions. The Board is empowered to impose upon any
variance any condition reasonably necessary to protect the public interest and
community welfare.
   (H)   Revocation or modification. A variance or special exception may be
revoked or modified for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   That the variance or special exception was obtained or extended by
fraud or deception.
      (2)   That one or more of the conditions imposed by the Board in granting
such variance or special exception has not been complied with or has been
violated.
      (3)   That the variance or special exception although granted in
accordance with all requirements hereof, has caused a nuisance or is otherwise
detrimental to public health, safety and welfare.
      (4)   An action to revoke or modify a previously granted variance or
special exception may be initiated by order of the Board, or the person who
obtained the variance or special exception.
      (5)   The Board of Adjustments shall hear a request for the revocation or
modification of a variance or special exception in accordance with the same
notification and hearing procedures established for the original variances or
special exception.
   (I)   Notification and public hearing process. Any request for an appeal,
variance or special exception shall require a public hearing before the Board.
Notice of said public hearing shall be published at least one time in a
newspaper of the City of Mansfield, at least ten days prior to the date of the
hearing. A written notice of the hearing shall be sent to owners of property
situated within 200 feet of the exterior boundary of the property with respect
to which such appeal or variance is requested at least ten (10) days prior to
the date of the hearing. It shall be sufficient that such written notice is
addressed to the owner appearing on the last approved tax roll of the city and
addressed to such owner at the address stated on said roll. If no owner is
stated on the tax roll or no address appears thereon, the written notice to
such property owner shall not be required. An application fee as set forth in
the fee schedule ordinance shall be paid to the city in advance of the hearing
except as indicated in §
155.082. No refund shall be made under any circumstances except in the event
the application is withdrawn prior to the mailing of the required written
notification or publication in the official newspaper, the fee shall be
refunded.
   (J)   Action of the Board. The concurring vote of four members of the Board
shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination
of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on
any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such ordinance, or to
effect any variation in such ordinance.
   (K)   Appeal from decision of Board. Any person aggrieved by any decision of
the Board of Adjustment, or any officer, department or other board or
commission of the city or of the City Council, may appeal the decision or
action of the Board of Adjustments by filing a petition for same in a court of
competent jurisdiction, setting forth that such decision is illegal in whole or
in part, and specifying the grounds for the alleged illegality. Such petition
shall be filed with the court within ten days from the day the Board renders
its decisions, and not thereafter. The time period set forth herein shall be
deemed jurisdictional.
   (L)   Reapplication. No application for a variance or appeal which has been
denied shall be again filed earlier than one year from the date of original
denial unless other property in the immediate vicinity has, within the said one
year period, been changed or acted on by the Board of Adjustments or City
Council as to alter the facts and conditions on which the previous Board action
was based. Such change of circumstances shall permit the rehearing of an appeal
by the Board of Adjustments prior to the expiration of the one year period, but
such conditions shall in no wise have any force in law to compel the Board of
Adjustments, after a hearing, to grant a subsequent appeal. Such subsequent
appeal shall be considered entirely on its merits and the peculiar and specific
conditions related to the property on which the appeal is brought.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.114 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Membership, appointment and term of office. There shall be a Planning
and Zoning Commission composed of seven members, who shall be residents and
real property taxpayers in the City of Mansfield. The members of the Commission
shall be appointed by the City Council for two year terms or until their
successors are appointed. Three members of the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall be so appointed each odd-numbered year and four members shall be
appointed each even-numbered year. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired
term of any member whose position becomes vacant for any cause in the same
manner as the original appointment was made. The City Council may remove a
Commissioner for cause set forth in writing. Members of the Commission shall
serve without compensation.
   (B)   Proceedings. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the power
to adopt its own rules, regulations or bylaws to govern its proceedings;
provided that such rules shall not be inconsistent with the ordinances of the
city or the laws of the State of Texas. All meetings of the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall be open to the public. A majority of the members of the
Planning and Zoning Commission entitled to vote shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business.
   (C)   Powers and duties. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the
following powers and duties:
      (1)   To make studies and project plans for the improvement of the city,
with a view toward its future development and extension, and to recommend to
the City Council all matters for the development and advancement of the city's
facilities, layout and appearance, and to perform all duties imposed upon the
city Planning and Zoning Commission by the Statutes of the State.
      (2)   To make plans and maps of the whole or any portion of the city and
of land outside the city located within one mile of the city which, in the
opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, bears a relation to the planning
of the city, and to make changes in, additions to and extensions of such plans
or maps when it deems same advisable.
      (3)   To assist all other municipal and governmental agencies, and
especially the City Council, in formulating and executing proper plans of
municipal development.
      (4)   To plan and recommend the location, plan, and extent of city
alleyways, viaducts, bridges, subways, parkways, parks, playgrounds, airports,
automobile parking places and other public properties, and public utilities,
including bus terminals, railroads, railroad depots, and terminals, whether
publicly or privately owned, for water, lights, sanitation, sewerage disposal,
drainage, flood control, communication, marketing, and shipping facilities,
power and other purposes, and for the removal, relocation, widening, extension,
narrowing, vacation, abandonment or change of use of any of the foregoing
public places, works, buildings, facilities, or utilities.
      (5)   To select and recommend to the City Council routes of streets,
avenues and boulevards, and particularly to investigate and recommend the
opening, widening, or abandonment of streets, avenues, boulevards, and alleys
or the changing thereof to conform with the city's system, present and future,
of boulevards, streets, avenues, alleyways, parks and parkways.
      (6)   To investigate, consider and report to the City Council upon the
layout or platting of new subdivisions of the city or of property situated
within one mile of the city limits, and to approve all plans, plats, or replats
of additions within the city limits, or within one mile of the city limits.
      (7)   To recommend to the City Council for adoption and promulgation
rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing plats and subdivision of
land within the corporate limits of the city to promote the health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the community, and the safe, orderly and
healthful development of such community.
      (8)   To recommend plans to the City Council for improving, developing,
expanding, bayous and streams, river front and yacht basins in or adjoining the
city, and to cooperate with the City Council and other agencies of the city in
devising, establishing, locating, improving, selecting, expanding and
maintaining the public parks, parkways, playgrounds and places for public
recreation.
      (9)   To aid and assist the City Council by recommending plans for the
development of civic centers.
      (10)   To recommend the boundaries of the various districts or zones, to
recommend appropriate regulations to be enforced therein, to make their
preliminary report as to such zoning districts and regulations and to hold a
public hearing or public hearings on the same before submitting a final report,
and to submit a final report to the City Council and to perform all other
duties and exercise all other powers conferred upon it by the statutes of the
State of Texas.
      (11)   To suggest plans for clearing the city of slums and blighted
areas.
   (D)   Cooperation by other department heads and officials. All department
heads and officials of the city shall be available to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for advice and consultation, and they shall cooperate with and
render such services for the Department of Planning as shall come within the
scope of the duties of such department heads and officials. All such department
heads and officials shall attend meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission
upon the request of the Planning and Zoning Commission or its duly authorized
official or officials and upon prior approval of the City Manager.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.115 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Authority to amend. The City Council may, from time to time, on its
own motion, or on petition of an interested property owner or owners:
      (1)   Amend, supplement, or change by ordinance the zoning classification
of any property or the regulations herein established or issue or revoke
specific use permits; or
      (2)   Issue or revoke specific use permits, following the receipt of a
report from the Planning and Zoning Commission on any application for a
specific use permit, the Council may:
         (a)   Authorize the issuance of the permit.
         (b)   Attach conditions relating to use limits, duration of the
permit, time of operation, or other appropriate conditions to the proposed
permit and then authorize its issuance.
         (c)   If the Council approves a specific use permit that authorizes
specialized construction of improvements that may only be utilized under the
terms of the specific use permit, the Council will not consider revocation of
the permit unless evidence is presented showing that the property owner/
operator is in direct and knowing violation of a specific performance condition
attached to the specific use permit when issued.
         (d)   The Council may consider the revocation of any specific use
permit if after a properly noticed hearing in which any interested party has an
opportunity to present evidence and be heard, the Council makes a determination
that a performance condition attached to the original permit has been violated
by the owner/operator of the permitted activity, or if the original permit was
issued with an expressly stated condition that the permit was for a limited
period of time and was subject to periodic review to determine impact on
adjoining properties or activities. If a permit is issued for a limited
duration, the applicant undertakes the permitted activity with the knowledge
that the permit may be revoked or not renewed by future Council action.
         (e)   Specific use permits issued for a limited time duration may be
extended for additional increments of time following a properly noticed
hearing.
         (f)   All specific use permits shall be approved, conditioned,
modified or revoked following a public hearing in a single meeting action of
the City Council. Specific use permits do not constitute a change in zoning
and, therefore, do not proceed through a three reading ordinance amendment
requirement as would be required for a change in zoning classification.
   (B)   Recommendation by Planning and Zoning Commission. Before taking any
action on any proposed amendment, supplements, change or a specific use permit,
the City Council shall submit the same to the Planning and Zoning Commission
for its recommendation and report. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
hold a public hearing before submitting its recommendation and report to the
City Council.
   (C)   Public hearing and notification requirements. No regulation,
restriction or zoning district classification of any property shall be amended,
supplemented or changed and no specific use permit approved or revoked until
after public hearings in relation thereto are held by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and City Council, at which parties in interest and citizens shall
have an opportunity to be heard. Written notice of all public hearings before
the Planning and Zoning Commission on proposed changes in zoning district
classification or specific use permits shall be sent to owners of real property
lying within 200 feet of the property on which the change in classification or
specific use permit is proposed, such notice to be given, not less than ten
days before the date set for hearing, to all such owners who have rendered
their said property for city taxes as the ownership appears on the last
approved city tax roll. Such notice may be served by depositing the same,
properly addressed and postage paid, with the United States Postal Service. At
least 15 days notice shall be published in an official paper, or a paper of
general circulation in the City of Mansfield before the City Council public
hearing.
   (D)   Application fee. Any person, firm or corporation applying for a change
in this chapter or the zoning district classification of any property or a
specific use permit shall be required to pay an application processing fee as
set forth in the Mansfield fee schedule ordinance. No part of this fee shall be
refundable unless the application is withdrawn prior to the mailing of the
required written notification or publication in a newspaper. The limitation in
reference to giving of notice is to protect owners of nearby properties against
insincere applicants simply using the city's notice procedure to test public
reaction. No harm is done in terms of public image if case is withdrawn prior
to giving of public notice.
   (E)   Limitation of re-applications. No application for a change in zoning
districts or specific use permit shall be heard for a particular parcel of
property if within 12 months prior to the date of said application either a
zoning case was denied by the City Council or a zoning case was withdrawn after
the giving of public notice, and such application currently under consideration
includes property which was all or a part of the previously denied or withdrawn
case, and the application currently under consideration is for the same or a
more intense zoning district than provided, however, on receipt of written
request by the original applicant stating how conditions have changed
substantially in the community since prior consideration of his proposal so as
to justify an earlier review of this matter, the City Council may waive the
mandatory delay period and authorize the acceptance of a new application. The
term "more intense zoning district" shall mean one that generally permits uses
of higher intensity, progressing from the first district listed in §
155.021 as the least intense to the I-2, Heavy Industrial District as the most
intense, in the order listed in §
155.021.
   (F)   Postponement of public hearings at applicant's request. An applicant
for a zoning change or specific use permit may request a postponement of a
scheduled public hearing on such zoning request not less than ten days,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, prior to such scheduled public
hearing. In the event that any publication or notification has been made by the
city of the public hearing prior to such request for postponement, such
applicant shall include, with his request, payment to the City of Mansfield of
such fee for such postponement as may be set by the Planning and Zoning
Commission or City Council.
   (G)   Zoning districts not available for application. The city will not
accept any application for zoning change to the SF-5AC/24, SF-8.4/16, SF-7.5/
16, SF-7.5/12 or SF-6/12 District.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.116 HISTORIC LANDMARK COMMISSION.
   (A)   Membership, appointment and term of office. There shall be a Historic
Landmark Commission composed of seven regular members and one alternate member
who serves in the absence of a regular member. The members of the Commission
shall be residents and real property taxpayers in the City of Mansfield,
appointed by the City Council for two year terms or until their successors are
appointed. Four members of the Commission shall be so appointed each odd-
numbered year and four members shall be appointed each even-numbered year.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose position
becomes vacant for any cause in the same manner as the original appointment was
made. Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
   (B)   Organization. The Historic Landmark Commission shall hold an
organizational meeting within 30 days of appointment in October of each year
and shall elect a Chairman and Vice-Chairman from among its members before
proceeding to any other matters of business. The Planning and Development
Director of the City of Mansfield, or her (his) designated representative,
shall be the Secretary of the Board. The Planning and Development Director
shall provide technical assistance to the Historic Landmark Commission. The
Planning and Development Director or his designee shall serve as Local Historic
Preservation officer. The Historic Landmark Commission shall meet regularly and
shall designate the time and place of its meetings. It shall adopt its own
rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings in accordance with the
State Statutes and the zoning ordinance and the Charter of the City of
Mansfield. Newly appointed members shall be installed at the first regular
meeting after their appointment.
   (C)   Meetings and quorum. Three members of the Historic Landmark Commission
shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business; however, three
affirmative votes shall be required to decide any issue before the Historic
Landmark Commission. The members shall regularly attend meetings and public
hearings of the Historic Landmark Commission and shall serve without
compensation, except for reimbursement for authorized expenses attendant to the
performance of their duties.
   (D)   Powers and duties. The Historic Landmark Commission shall thoroughly
familiarize itself with the buildings, land, areas and districts within the
city which may be eligible for designation as historic landmarks and shall
prepare an Historic Landmark Preservation Plan hereinafter referred to as the
"Preservation Plan," which shall:
      (1)   Identify and catalog buildings, land, areas, and districts of
historical, architectural, archaeological or cultural value, along with
statements of fact which verify their significance;
      (2)   Identify criteria to be used in determining whether to grant or
deny Certificates of Approval for proposed alterations to the exterior of a
designated historic landmark;
      (3)   Identify guidelines to be used in determination of whether to grant
or deny Certificates of Approval for proposed alterations to the exterior of a
designated historic landmark;
      (4)   Formulate a program for private and public action which will state
the role of various agencies in the city for preservation of historic
landmarks;
      (5)   Suggest sources of funds for preservation and restoration
activities and for acquisitions, to include federal, state, municipal, private
and foundation sources; and
      (6)   Recommend incentives for preservation.
   (E)   The preservation plan shall be presented to the City Planning and
Zoning Commission.
   (F)   The Historic Landmark Commission shall recommend to the City Planning
and Zoning Commission that certain buildings, land areas, and districts in the
city be designated as historic landmarks. Each recommendation shall include:
      (1)   Those premises, lots, or tracts to be designated;
      (2)   Any additional uses to be permitted in the specific "H" Historic
Landmark Overlay District; and
      (3)   Specific criteria for the required preservation of the exteriors of
the premises within the designated sub-district.
   (G)   If the Historic Landmark Commission finds that certain buildings,
land, areas or districts cannot be preserved without acquisition, the
Commission shall recommend to the City Planning and Zoning Commission that the
fee or a lesser interest in the property be acquired by gift, or purchase,
using funds available for preservation or restoration.
   (H)   Where there are conditions under which the required preservation of an
historic landmark would cause undue hardship to the owner or owners, use
changes may be recommended by the Commission. Such changes shall be in keeping
with the spirit and intent of §
155.069.
   (I)   Periodically the Commission shall review the status of designated
Historic Landmark Overlay Districts and include in the Commission's minutes a
report of such review.
   (J)   The designation of a Historic Landmark Overlay District may be amended
or removed using the procedure provided in §
155.069(L).
(Ord. 671, passed 4-15-86)
§ 155.117 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Uses prohibited by other ordinances. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed as repealing any existing ordinance of the City of Mansfield
regulating nuisances or permitting uses which are not prohibited by this
chapter.
   (B)   Deed restriction. No provision or application of this chapter shall be
construed as affecting in any manner the rights of individual property owners
to privately enforce deed restrictions upon the use of any property zoned under
the terms of this chapter if such restrictions are of higher or more
restrictive classification than the provisions contained herein.
   (C)   Conflicting provisions. Whenever a conflict arises among any
provisions of this chapter, the most restrictive requirement shall apply.
   (D)   Completion of building.
      (1)   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction or designated use of a building actually under construction at the
time of the passage of this chapter and which entire building shall be
completed within one year from the date of the passage of this chapter.
      (2)   In the event construction drawings have been submitted for a
building permit prior to the effective date of this chapter showing development
proposed under terms of the prior ordinance, the Building Official may grant a
permit for the development and construction based on the requirements of the
previous ordinance and set a reasonable time limit for the completion of such
development.
   (E)   Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce
any of the provisions of this code, or whenever the Building Official or his
authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe there exists in any
building or upon any premises a violation of this code, the Building Official
or his authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all
reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the
Building Official by this code, provided that if such building or premises be
occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if
such building or premises are unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable
effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the
building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused or if no owner
or other person having charge or control of the building or premises can be
located, the Building Official or his authorized representative shall have
recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
(Ord. 674, passed 4-15-86)
CHAPTER 156: PARK LAND DEDICATION AND DEVELOPMENT FEE
Section
   
156.01   Short title
   
156.02   Purpose and applicability
   
156.03   Park land dedication
   
156.04   Park land dedication acceptance criteria
   
156.05   Cash in lieu of land
   
156.06   Park development fee
   
156.07   Credit against park land dedication and park development fee
   
156.08   Park development fund and right to refund
   
156.09   Approval and appeal process
   
156.10   Non-residential developments
   
156.11   Review
   
156.12   Definitions
Cross-reference:
   For provisions concerning Parks and Recreation, see
Ch. 96
§ 156.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the Park Land Dedication and
Development Fee Chapter.
(Ord. 1421, passed 4-14-03; Am. Ord. OR-2227-21, passed 11-8-21)
§ 156.02 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter is adopted to provide adequate recreational areas and
amenities in the form of neighborhood parks as a function of subdivision
development in the city and to make the park land dedication and park
development fee requirements an integral part of the review and approval of
residential developments, whether the developments consist of new construction
on previously vacant land or rebuilding and redeveloping existing residential
areas.
   (B)   New developments or redevelopments that involve only the replacement
or reconstruction of pre-existing dwelling units shall be exempt from the
provisions of this chapter, provided that the developments do not increase the
density of the preexisting dwelling units or involve a replat of the property.
   (C)   Neighborhood parks are those parks that provide a variety of outdoor,
recreational facilities and within convenient distances from a majority of the
residences to be served by such parks, the standards for which are set forth in
the Parks Master Plan.
   (D)   The park quadrants established by the Department and shown in the
Parks Master Plan, and as attached in Exhibit “A” to Ord. OR-2227-21, shall be
prima facie evidence that any park located therein is within a convenient
distance from the majority of residences to be served thereby. The cost of the
neighborhood parks should be borne by the ultimate residential property owners
who, by reason of the proximity of their property to such parks, shall be the
primary beneficiaries of such parks.
   (E)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the corporate limits as
well as to the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city as a portion of the
subdivision regulation process.
   (F)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to properties that are
included in a valid preliminary or final plat application that was submitted
before the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 1421, passed 4-14-03; Am. Ord. OR-2227-21, passed 11-8-21)
§ 156.03 PARK LAND DEDICATION.
   (A)   The city has adopted by City Council action the Parks Master Plan,
which provides planning policy and guidance for the development of a municipal
park and recreation system for the city. The plan has assessed the need for
park land and park improvements to serve the citizens of Mansfield. The plan
has carefully assessed the impact on the park and recreation system created by
each new development and has established a dedication and/or cost requirement
based upon individual dwelling units. The plan constitutes an individualized
fact based determination of the impact of new living units on the park and
recreation system and establishes an exaction system designed to ensure that
new living units bear their proportional share of the cost of providing park
and recreation related services. Park land dedication requirements and park
development fee assessments are based upon the mathematical formulas and
allocations set forth within the plan. A summary table of the dedication and
cost requirements is set forth in a park land dedication table attached hereto
and incorporated herein for all purposes as Exhibit "B", and as hereafter
amended from time to time by City Council.
   (B)   When developing residential properties, the owner or developer shall
be responsible for a fee simple dedication of park land for each proposed
dwelling unit in an amount established by the park land dedication table
referenced in §
156.03(A).
   (C)   Any proposed plat submitted to the city for approval shall show the
area required to be dedicated under this section. In the event a plat is not
required, the dedication of land required under this section shall be conveyed
to the city through a warranty deed and approved by the city as to form and
substance prior to the issuance of a building permit.
   (D)   Each corner of the park land dedication shall have an iron rod or pin
set in accordance with other lot corners in the subdivision. In the absence of
a plat, the location of iron rods or pins set for corners shall be identified
on a recordable land survey completed by a land surveyor registered in the
State of Texas, provided to the city by the developer, and approved by the city
as to form and substance.
   (E)   The owner or developer shall meet with the Director of Parks and
Recreation or his/her designee (hereinafter referred to the “Director”) to
ensure compliance with the requirements in this section prior to platting. An
application for plat approval shall not be accepted unless it is accompanied by
written review comments from the Director.
   (F)   The City Council and the Mansfield Park Facilities Development
Corporation generally consider that development of an area less than five acres
for neighborhood park purposes may be inefficient for public maintenance.
Therefore, if fewer than five acres are proposed as park land dedication, the
Director shall have the option to:
      (1)   Accept the land dedication;
      (2)   Require the developer to pay the applicable cash in lieu of land
amount as provided in §
156.05 below; or
      (3)   Reject the land dedication and grant credit for a private park as
provided in §
156.07.
   (G)   The Director, prior to plat submittal, will define the optimum
location of the required park land dedication based upon the proposed park
being located adjacent to current or future park land and based on the Parks
Master Plan. If there is not an opportunity for the proposed park land
dedication to be adjacent to current or future park land, then the Director and
Developer will work together to define an optimum location for the park land
dedication. If an optimum location cannot be determined, then the Director
shall accept the cash in lieu of land option as outlined in §
156.05.
   (H)   In the case of a multi-phase development, if the developer dedicates
all the park land required by this chapter in the first or early phase(s) of
the development, no additional park land dedication will be required in later
phases unless additional lots that are not shown in the original preliminary
plat are included in the later phases of the development.
   (I)   Unless approved by the Director, no construction materials shall be
disposed of or deposited within the dedicated park land by the developer or its
contractors, subcontractors, employees, or agents at any time while the
subdivision is being built. If materials are deposited or disposed of within
the park, the developer shall remove such materials within 72 hours of written
notice by the city. If the developer fails to remove the materials after
notice, the city may do so at the developer's expense and no building permits
shall be issued for the subdivision(s) until that debt is paid to the city by
the developer.
(Ord. 1421, passed 4-14-03; Am. Ord. OR-2227-21, passed 11-8-21; Am. Ord. OR-
2333-23, passed 12-11-23; Am. Ord. OR-2420-25, passed 9-8-25)
§ 156.04 PARK LAND DEDICATION ACCEPTANCE CRITERIA.
   (A)   Land dedicated for a park or recreational area shall be of such size,
dimensions, topography, and general character as is reasonably required by the
city for the type of use necessary to meet the demand and need of future
residents. Recreational needs for which land is dedicated must include
multipurpose trails, open space buffer areas, active recreation for team or
individual sports, playgrounds with unitary rubber surfacing, picnic areas with
grills, pavilions and similar uses. Swimming pools or aquatic facilities do not
meet the criteria for neighborhood parks.
   (B)   Rare, unique, endangered, historic or other significant natural areas
will be given a high priority for dedication pursuant to this chapter. Areas
that provide an opportunity for linkages between parks or that preserve the
natural character of the surrounding environment may be required by the city to
be included in the park land dedication.
   (C)   The city shall not accept land dedication pursuant to this chapter if
it is subject to one or more of the following disqualifications unless
individually and expressly approved by the Director:
      (1)   Land within floodplain and floodway designated areas, based upon
100-year floodplains as defined by the Mansfield Master Drainage Plans, unless
such land dedication contains an open area as part of the total park land
dedication property that is topographically suitable for the installation of
the park amenities as defined in §
156.04(A) and (B) for neighborhood parks. In cases where floodplain land or
property is proposed to be conveyed to satisfy the parkland requirements, a
credit may be given upon the following ratio: two acres of floodplain shall
equal one acre of non-floodplain land;
      (2)   Park land dedication sites which do not have ready access to public
streets;
      (3)   Park land dedication sites abutted by private properties on more
than two-thirds of the total boundary dimension of such site; or
      (4)   Areas encumbered by overhead utility lines or easements of any type
which might limit the opportunity for park and recreation development.
   (D)   The city will not accept park land dedication sites encumbered by
hazardous and or municipal waste materials or dump sites.
   (E)   If a developer proposes to dedicate land for park development purposes
pursuant to the terms, conditions and requirements of this chapter, he or she
shall permit the Director to make an onsite inspection of the property for the
purposes of determining site suitability and identification of any visual
hazards or impediments to park development and use. If the property owner has
any form of environmental assessment on the tract, a copy of that assessment
shall be provided to the Director. The Director may initiate and/or require the
developer to initiate specific environmental studies or assessments if the
visual inspection of the site gives rise to the belief that an environmental
problem may exist on the site. The Director may require the employment of those
consultants necessary to evaluate any environmental issues relating to the site
provided that the Director makes such determination in good faith. If an
environmental hazard is identified on the site, the developer must either
remove the hazard prior to its acceptance into the park and recreation system
of the city or pay the fee in §
156.05.
   (F)   The intention of this chapter is not to discourage the creation of
parks and amenities in subdivisions that will be maintained by homeowners’
associations.
(Ord. 1421, passed 4-14-03; Am. Ord. OR-2227-21, passed 11-8-21)
§ 156.05 CASH IN LIEU OF LAND.
   (A)   An owner or developer responsible for park land dedication under this
chapter may be required, at the Director's option, to meet the dedication
requirements in whole or in part by a cash payment in lieu of land in the
amount set forth below. Such payment in lieu of land dedication shall be made
prior to filing the plat for record or prior to the issuance of a building
permit where a plat is not required. All funds collected pursuant to this
section shall be used solely for the acquisition or leasing of park land in the
park quadrant in which the subdivision or development is located.
   (B)   In instances where land is required to be dedicated, the Director
shall have the right to reject the park land dedication and require a cash
payment in lieu of land in the amount set forth below, if the Director
determines that:
      (1)   The park land dedication site is such a small area that it is
inefficient to maintain;
      (2)   Sufficient park area is already in the public domain for the park
quadrant where the proposed development is located, and the recreation needs of
the citizens will be better served by expanding or improving existing parks in
said park quadrant; or
      (3)   The development project is located within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city and the Director determines that maintaining the park
land will be financially impractical.
   (C)   The city may from time to time acquire land for parks in or near an
area of actual or potential development. If the city does acquire park land in
a park quadrant, the city may require subsequent dedications within the
quadrant to be cash payments in lieu of dedication only in order to reimburse
the city for the costs of acquisition.
   (D)   The cash payment in lieu of land dedication shall be met by the
payment of a fee set from time to time by city ordinance sufficient to acquire
neighborhood park land. The cash payment shall be computed on the basis of the
fee per dwelling unit as set forth in the park land dedication table referenced
in §
156.03(A).
   (E)   A cash payment in lieu of land dedication, as set forth in this
section, does not relieve the owner or developer of the obligation to pay the
park development fee set forth in §
156.06. The cash payment in lieu of land dedication is in addition to the
required park development fee.
(Ord. 1421, passed 4-14-03; Am. Ord. OR-2227-21, passed 11-8-21; Am. Ord. OR-
2333-23, passed 12-11-33; Am. Ord. OR-2420-25, passed 9-8-25)
§ 156.06 PARK DEVELOPMENT FEE.
   (A)   In addition to the required dedication of land, as set forth above and
based upon the study referenced in § 156.03(A), the developer or his or her
successor shall pay a park development fee to the city as a condition to
building permit issuance. However, for developments in the extraterritorial
jurisdiction that are not subject to building permit requirement, the developer
shall pay the park development fee prior to the recording of the final plat at
the county. The park development fee shall be set from time to time by city
ordinance and shall be sufficient to provide for the development of amenities
and improvements on dedicated neighborhood park land in the park quadrant in
which the subdivision or development is located. The park development fee shall
be calculated on the basis of the fee per dwelling unit as set forth in the
park land dedication table referenced in §
156.03(A).
   (B)   In lieu of payment of the required park development fee, the
developer, with written approval of the Director prior to initiation of work,
may have the option to construct the neighborhood park and improvements. All
public park improvements shall meet the minimum requirements set forth in the
Parks Master Plan or amendment thereof. All development plans and
specifications for the construction of said park improvements shall meet the
minimum design and construction standards as provided by the Department, be
sealed by a landscape architect registered in the State of Texas and be
reviewed and approved by the Director prior to construction. The developer
shall financially guarantee the construction of such park improvements by
providing performance and payment bonds, an irrevocable letter of credit, or
other similar security that is deemed acceptable by the Director prior to the
recording of the plat for the subdivision. Performance and payment bonds shall
name the city as dual obligee and shall cover 100% of the estimated
construction cost of such park improvements as shown in a construction contract
executed by the developer. The developer shall be required to provide a two
year maintenance bond that is equal in amount to 100% of the construction cost
of said park improvements and a manufacturers letter stating the main play
structure and safety surface was installed in accordance with the manufacturers
installation requirements. The developer shall also provide a copy of the
application and subsequent inspection report prepared by the Texas Department
of Licensing and Regulation or their contracted reviewer for compliance with
the Architectural Barriers Act, codified as Article 9102, Texas Civil Statutes.
All park improvements must be inspected by the city while construction is in
progress. Once the park improvements are constructed, and after the Director
has accepted such improvements, the developer shall deed and convey such
improvements to the city and clear of any lien or other encumbrances.
(Ord. 1421, passed 4-14-03; Am. Ord. OR-2227-21, passed 11-8-21; Am. Ord. OR-
2333-23, passed 12-11-23; Am. Ord. OR-2420-25, passed 9-8-25)
§ 156.07 CREDIT AGAINST PARK LAND DEDICATION AND PARK DEVELOPMENT FEE.
   (A)   The developer of a subdivision may receive a credit against the park
land dedication and park development fee requirements if the subdivision
includes a private park or recreational facility. The amount of land in such
private park or recreational facility shall count towards meeting the park land
dedication requirement imposed on the developer, provided that the land meets
the park land dedication acceptance criteria in §
156.04 above.
   (B)   The Director shall grant a maximum credit of 100% of the total
dedication requirement for publicly accessible private park land provided
within the subdivision or development generating the dedication requirement
that meets the requirements of this division.
      (1)   To be eligible for credit, publicly accessible private park land
must:
         (a)   Be made accessible to the public on an instrument approved by
the City Attorney;
         (b)   Be of a size approved by the Director to appropriately meet the
needs of the development;
         (c)   Provide landscaping and recreational amenities approved by the
Director; and
         (d)   Be open to the public during all times it is accessible to the
residents of the development.
      (2)   Equipment in a private park must comply with city standards
applicable to the type of equipment.
      (3)   A publicly accessible private park land instrument must:
         (a)   Contain a legal description of the development and the publicly
accessible private park land;
         (b)   Be signed by all owners and lienholders of the development
property and is binding to online holders by a subordination clause;
         (c)   Be approved by the Director;
         (d)   Be approved as to form by the City Attorney;
         (e)   Create a covenant running with the land;
         (f)   Provide that the owners of the property development are
responsible for all general park maintenance at a level consistent with minimum
city park and recreation standards;
         (g)   Provide necessary easements for access to the publicly
accessible private park land;
         (h)   Give the city the right, but not the obligation, to take any
action needed to make necessary repairs or improvements within the publicly
accessible private park land, and to place a lien on all lots within the
development until the city has received full compensation for that action;
         (i)   Provide that the owners of property in the development agree to
defend and indemnify the city, and to hold the city harmless from and against
all claims or liabilities arising out of or in connection with publicly
accessible private park land or publicly accessible private park land
instrument;
         (j)   Provide that it is governed by the laws of the State of Texas;
and
         (k)   Provide that it may only be amended or terminated:
            1.   With the consent of all the owners and lienholders of property
in the development;
            2.   Upon the dedication of any park land or payment of a fee-in-
lieu necessary to meet the requirements of this section; and
            3.   After approval as to form by the City Attorney, and approval
by the Director.
   (C)   A maximum credit of 50% of the total requirement will be given for
non-publicly accessible private park land provided within the subdivision or
development generating the dedication requirement that meets the requirement of
this division. Private park land eligible for credit must:
      (1)   Be of a size approved by the Director to appropriately meet the
needs of the development;
      (2)   Be maintained at a level consistent with minimum city park and
recreation maintenance standards;
      (3)   Provide landscaping and recreational amenities approved by the
Director;
      (4)   Have equipment that complies with city standards applicable to the
type of equipment; and
      (5)   Not be an interior common area.
   (D)   The developer may receive a proportional credit, as determined by the
Director, based on actual out-of-pocket dollar costs that the developer
incurred for the improvement of the private park or recreational facility. The
actual out-of-pocket dollar costs must be evidenced by documentation approved
by the Director. The proportional credit amount, as determined by the Director,
shall count toward meeting the total park development fee imposed on the
developer. The park development fee assessed against a development pursuant to
this chapter is for the specific purpose of developing the acreage that would
be developed for park purposes under this chapter. Each acre of park land will
be developed with amenities by the park development fee charged against the
development. A developer will be given credit for the amenities they install on
their site but the credit will be capped by the maximum amount of the fee that
would be charged for the land area they are actually using. A developer may not
over commit amenity improvements on a specific tract thereby eliminating the
availability of park development fees remaining to be used on the balance of
the land projected for dedication by the development for park purposes. Park
land development fee credits will be provided as follows:
      (1)   Credit may be provided on a dollar for dollar basis for capital
improvements on adjacent park land if the capital improvements:
         (a)   Meet minimum park and recreation standards;
         (b)   Are appropriate for the park land and fall in an area where the
level of service is not currently being met; and
         (c)   Are accepted by the Director.
      (2)   Credit may be provided on a dollar for dollar basis for capital
improvements on publicly accessible private park land if the capital
improvements:
         (a)   Meet minimum park and recreation standards;
         (b)   Are appropriate for the park land and fall in an area where the
level of service is not currently being met; and
         (c)   Are accepted by the Director.
      (3)   A maximum credit of 50% of the total requirement may be provided
for capital improvements on non-publicly accessible private park land if the
capital improvements:
         (a)   Meet minimum park and recreation standards;
         (b)   Are appropriate for the park land and fall in an area where the
level of service is not currently being met; and
         (c)   Are accepted by the Director.
   (E)   Credits requested pursuant to this chapter will only be given for
amenities that meet the minimum design and construction standards as set forth
by the Department.
   (F)   A developer of a subdivision who dedicates more than the required park
land requirements for that specific subdivision may receive credits for future
park land dedication requirements for other subdivision developments that he
may undertake at a future date in the same quadrant.
   (G)   A developer of a subdivision may dedicate park land that is not within
the boundaries of his or her development and receive park land dedication
credits for that subdivision. The proposed park land dedication must be
approved by the Director prior to the filing of the preliminary plat. The
proposed park land dedication property must be in the same quadrant as the
proposed subdivision, within a reasonable distance of existing or developing
residential neighborhoods and meet the park land dedication criteria outlined
in §
156.04.
(Ord. 1421, passed 4-14-03; Am. Ord. OR-2227-21, passed 11-8-21)
§ 156.08 PARK DEVELOPMENT FUND AND RIGHT TO REFUND.
   (A)   All funds collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the
city’s Park Development Fund and used solely for the acquisition or leasing of
park land and the development, improvement, or upgrades of new and existing
parks. All expenditures shall be administered in accordance with the current
purchasing requirements of the city and the Mansfield Park Facilities
Development Corporation. Funds shall not be used for the operation and
maintenance of parks.
   (B)   The city shall account for all sums paid into the Park Development
Fund. Any monies paid into said fund must be expended by the city within ten
years from the date that all the land for a neighborhood park for the
subdivision has been acquired and when the subdivision(s) adjacent to that park
land has been 75% built out. If not so expended within the ten-year period, the
then current owners of the property shall, on the last day of such period, be
entitled to a refund of the remaining fees. Said owners must submit to the city
a written request for the refund within one year of the date of entitlement or
the right to receive the refund will be deemed waived and the funds shall
remain as property of the city and be used for the general purpose of park land
acquisition, design and development as expressed in this chapter.
(Ord. 1421, passed 4-14-03; Am. Ord. OR-2227-21, passed 11-8-21)
2022 S-25
§ 156.09 APPROVAL AND APPEAL PROCESS.
   (A)   The Director shall be responsible for the review and approval of all
park land dedication and park development fees submitted in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Any decision made by the Director may be appealed to the Mansfield
Park Facilities Development Corporation.
   (C)   The Director may defer the approval of park land dedication or park
development fees to the Mansfield Park Facilities Development Corporation for
any reason.
   (D)   Any decision made by the Mansfield Park Facilities Development
Corporation may be appealed to the City Council except for subdivision platting
issues that the Planning and Zoning Commission has authority over.
(Ord. 1421, passed 4-14-03; Am. Ord. OR-2227-21, passed 11-8-21)
§ 156.10 NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS.
   These requirements shall apply to all non-residential developments in the
city:
   (A)   In instances where land is required for trail construction in
accordance with the city’s Trails Master Plan, the city shall have the right to
require the land dedication for approval on the final plat, or to refuse same.
   (B)   The city shall have the right to require construction of the trail in
accordance with the city’s Trails Master Plan standards for trail construction.
In instances where a sidewalk and hike/bike trail are in the same location, the
hike/bike trail shall replace the sidewalk. If the applicant/developer
constructs the hike and bike trail, the hike and bike trail layout and
construction plans must be reviewed and approved by the Director prior to
approval and release of the construction documents by the city. The hike and
bike trail construction must be accepted by the Director and be completed in
conjunction with all other public improvements/infrastructure approved by the
city for release of the building permit. All improvements or construction on or
within the dedicated land to be installed by the applicant/developer shall be
completed in accordance with the approved construction plans. Where retaining
walls are constructed adjacent to existing or future hike and bike trails and/
or hike and bike trail rights-of-way, the developer/builder shall construct the
retaining wall with a subdrain system behind the wall and under the trail and/
or trail rights-of-way to prevent concentrated weep hole drainage. No
concentrated run-off (swales or drainage structure outfalls) will be allowed to
cross over the hike and bike trail rights-of-way. Finished projects shall be
maintainable and acceptable as determined by the city.
(Ord. OR-2227-21, passed 11-8-21)
§ 156.11 REVIEW.
   The Director shall review the dedication, cash in lieu, and park development
fee requirements every two years from the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. OR-2227-21, passed 11-8-21)
§ 156.12 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. Any temporary or permanent structure having a roof or other
covering, and designed, built or intended for the shelter or enclosure or
partial enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any
kind. Where independent units with separate entrances are divided by
appropriate fire separations, each unit shall be deemed a building.
   BUILDING PERMIT. The permit required for new residential or non-residential
construction and/or additions to buildings pursuant to the Code of the City of
Mansfield.
   CITY. The City of Mansfield, Texas.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of Mansfield, Texas.
   DEPARTMENT. The city Department of Parks and Recreation.
   DEVELOPER. The owner of land proposed for subdivision or development or an
authorized representative of the owner. A subdivider is a developer.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any activity that requires the submission of a plat or plan for
development, or the securing of a permit, or any manmade change to real estate,
including, but not limited to, construction of a building or structure, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or storage
of equipment or materials. The subdivision of land is development.
   DIRECTOR. The superior official of the Parks and Recreation Department, or
its successor agency, for the City of Mansfield or his or her authorized
representative.
   DWELLING UNIT. A building or portion of a building which is arranged,
occupied or intended to be occupied as living quarters and includes facilities
for food preparation and sleeping (includes structures for single-family
residences, multi-family, senior living, and senior assisted living
facilities).
   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area inundated by the base flood.
   FLOODWAY or REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a watercourse and the
adjacent floodplain that must be reserved to convey the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than a designated height.
   LEVEL OF SERVICE. The standards and guidelines that define service areas
based on population and are used to support investment decisions related to
parks, facilities and amenities.
   LOT. A designated parcel tract or area of land established by a plat to be
separately owned, used, developed or built upon.
   NEIGHBORHOOD PARK. A park of approximately five to ten acres accessible to
residents who live within a half-mile radius of the park. Neighborhood parks
should be designed to service a specific neighborhood area and may include the
following: multipurpose trails, open space buffer areas, active recreation for
team or individual sports, playgrounds with unitary rubber safety surfacing,
picnic areas with grills, pavilions and similar uses. (Refer to the Park,
Recreation, Open Space and Trails Master Plan for a more detailed description,
recreation activity menu and an example of a typical neighborhood based park).
   NON-RESIDENTIAL. A use other than residential including, but not limited to,
commercial, industrial, office, retail, institutional and a religious
institution.
   OPEN SPACE. Areas remaining free of buildings, structures or other
improvements.
   PARK DEVELOPMENT FEE. A fee assessed to an applicant to offset the pro-rata
costs for the development of amenities and improvements as a result of the new
residential development.
   PARKS MASTER PLAN. The official adopted Parks, Recreation, Open Space and
Trails Master Plan for the City of Mansfield and amendments thereto, including
policies or development strategies in the city’s Comprehensive Plan.
   PLAT. A map, plan or drawing of a subdivision established and provided for
in the city’s Subdivision Ordinance. A plat may be a preliminary plat, final
plat, replat, amending plat, minor plat, plat vacation, or other plat.
   PROPERTY. A legally described parcel of land capable of development pursuant
to applicable city ordinances and regulations.
   OWNER. A person who has a fee simple ownership in land, or a person acting
on behalf of or through authority granted by the owner.
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. The development of any property for a dwelling or
dwellings, other than motels, hotels, shelter used temporarily for transients,
or other similar uses.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of a tract situated within the city or the city's
extraterritorial jurisdiction into two or more parts for the purpose of sale,
lease or development. A division of a tract includes a division regardless of
whether it is made by using a metes and bounds description in a deed of
conveyance or a contract for a deed, by using a contract of sale or other
executory contract to convey, or by using any other method, shall include a
replat and a one-lot plat. A division of land into parts greater than five
acres, where each part has access and no public improvement is being dedicated,
shall not constitute the subdivision of land.
   TRAILS MASTER PLAN. The long-range plan that guides the creation of a
network of trails, sidewalks, and bike routes that connect the entire city.
(Ord. OR-2227-21, passed 11-8-21)
CHAPTER 157: VACANT BUILDINGS
Section
   
157.01   Purpose; scope
   
157.02   Definitions
   
157.03   Applicability and administration
   
157.04   Registration required
   
157.05   Property manager or agent
   
157.06   Standard of care for vacant property
   
157.07   Registration and inspection fees
   
157.08   Fee waivers
 
   
157.99   Penalty
§ 157.01 PURPOSE; SCOPE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard life or limb, health,
property and public welfare by regulating and monitoring the status of vacant
buildings within the jurisdiction.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all commercial and
industrial vacant buildings within Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone (TIRZ) No.
2, generally located in downtown Mansfield, except as otherwise stated herein.
This chapter shall not apply to vacant buildings that:
      (1)   Have a valid open building permit for construction, remodeling, or
repair;
      (2)   Are being actively marketed for sale or lease for a period of less
than six consecutive months following the date that the building became a
vacant building by a licensed real estate broker or an owner who is regularly
advertising the property for sale; or
      (3)   Are under contract for sale or lease for a period of less than six
months following the date that the building became a vacant building.
(Ord. OR-2194-20, passed 11-9-20)
§ 157.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   CITY. The City of Mansfield, Texas.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Mansfield, Texas and his/her
designees.
   LAWFUL ACTIVITY. The current use of the structure is also that which the
structure was built for or intended to be used for.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, firm, partnership or corporation having a legal
interest in the property or legal right of possession, or has been given a
legal power of attorney to act on behalf of such person.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation, hired, employed or
used by the owner.
   PROPERLY MAINTAIN. To maintain a vacant building and the property where it
is located in a clean, safe, secure, and sanitary condition and to take all
necessary actions to keep the building and property in full compliance with all
federal, state, and local laws. It shall also mean that any fire safety system
installed in the vacant building shall remain fully operational during vacancy.
   SECURED.  A condition where all accessible means of ingress and egress to
the vacant structures, including but not limited to all exterior doorways and
windows, are locked so as to prevent unauthorized entry.
   SHOPPING CENTERS. A group of commercial establishments under one-roof
planned, constructed, and managed as a total entity with customer and employee
parking provided on-site, provision for goods delivery separated from customer
access or protection from the elements, including but not limited to shopping
malls, strip malls, or other multi-tenant single roof buildings.
   STRUCTURES. That which is built or constructed.
   TEMPORARILY SECURED. A condition where all accessible means of ingress and
egress to the vacant structure, including but not limited to all exterior
doorways and windows are covered with suitable materials which have been nailed
or bolted in place to prevent unauthorized entry.
   VACANT STRUCTURE. A commercial or industrial structure that is unoccupied
and/or that all lawful activity has ceased, or reasonably appears to have
ceased for 90 or more consecutive calendar days after receiving a notice from
Code Compliance.
(Ord. OR-2194-20, passed 11-9-20)
§ 157.03 APPLICABILITY AND ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply to all commercial and industrial vacant
structures, as defined herein, which are now in existence or which may
hereafter be constructed or converted from other uses and which are within TIRZ
No. 2 of the City of Mansfield, Texas, except shopping centers with occupancy
in excess of 50% of its leasable area, and church structures and their
ancillary buildings located in non-commercial/industrial zoning districts.
   (B)   The City Manager is authorized to administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   The City Manager shall have the authority to render interpretations of
this chapter and to adopt policies and procedures to clarify the application of
its provisions, and may, at his/her sole discretion, enter into an agreement
with a registered property owner to obtain compliance with this chapter by date
certain.
(Ord. OR-2194-20, passed 11-9-20)
§ 157.04 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Upon written notice of vacancy of a structure by Code Compliance, a
property owner shall within 90 days register the property as provided by this
section. City may issue a written notice of vacancy and shall be issued to the
vacant structure property owner by means of personal service, or by first class
mail to their last known address according to the most recent tax roll, and by
posting on the property.
   (B)   Upon the issuance of notice to register a vacant structure, property
owners shall register within 90 days to the city and provide the following
information:
      (1)   The address and legal description of the property;
      (2)   The current name, physical address, mailing address, telephone
number, and email information for any owners(s) with an ownership interest in
the property. Corporations or corporate entities shall submit the same
information pertaining to their registered agent.
      (3)   The contact information for a property manager of the properties
and/or improvements located on said property, as applicable.
      (4)   Proof of liability insurance, no less than $100,000 for the
property and/or a surety bond for the value of structure if insurance cannot be
obtained. Said value shall be the appraised value as determined by the
appropriate Central Appraisal District.
      (5)   Provide a detailed timeline and plan for correcting violations,
rehabilitation, and maintenance while vacant regarding standard of care
pursuant to this chapter. The owner must, at a minimum demonstrate the property
is actively being marketed by listing the property with a licensed commercial
real estate broker or firm and installing a "For Lease" or "For Sale" sign on
the premises with current contact information.
      (6)   Provide a complete floor plan of the property for use by first
responders in the event of a fire or other catastrophic event.
   (C)   Owner shall post "No Trespass" placards on the premises.
   (D)   Vacant structure property owners shall provide written notice to Code
Compliance, including a copy of the deed or instrument of conveyance, of any
change in:
      (1)   Ownership of the property;
      (2)   Contact information for either the owner or designated property
manager. Written notice must be provided to the city no later than 30 days
after said changes have occurred.
   (E)   Continued annual registration of the property by the vacant structure
property owner is required until said structure is deemed occupied in
compliance with all relevant code requirements by the City Manager.
(Ord. OR-2194-20, passed 11-9-20)
§ 157.05 PROPERTY MANAGER OR AGENT.
   (A)   Vacant structure property owners must designate a property manager for
said properties and include the relevant contact information for the designated
manager upon registering the property with the department. Property managers
shall act as agents for the property owner for purposes of accepting legal
service, however the vacant property owner remains personally liable in
criminal prosecution for code violations.
   (B)   The property manager must be available at the number listed always in
the event of an emergency or catastrophe. For all vacant structure properties,
the name and telephone number of the property manager or agent must be posted
at the front of the building in large, legible print.
   (C)   Property manager shall own or be employed by a commercial company
located in the 16-county region of North Central Texas served by the North
Central Texas Council of Governments (NCTCOG).
(Ord. OR-2194-20, passed 11-9-20)
§ 157.06 STANDARD OF CARE FOR VACANT PROPERTY.
   (A)   An annual inspection is required to verify the standard of care. The
standard of care shall be in compliance with the appropriate city codes, but is
not limited to:
      (1)   Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not
limited to doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies,
decks and fences, shall be maintained in good condition, weather tight and in
such condition to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests. All exposed
wood or metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion, other than decay resistant
woods or surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation shall be protected
from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather
coating materials such as paint or similar surface treatment. All surfaces with
rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and
corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. All
siding, cladding and masonry joints, as well as those between the building
envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights shall be maintained
weather resistant and water tight.
      (2)   Premises identification. The property shall have address numbers
placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road
fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background.
Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be
a minimum of six inches high. All buildings shall display a vacant building
identification placard as required by the City Manager.
      (3)   Structure. All structural members and foundation shall be
maintained from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the
imposed loads.
      (4)   Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be kept in good condition
and shall be free from holes, breaks, loose or rotting materials, and graffiti.
      (5)   Roof and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and
not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent
accumulation, dampness or deterioration. Roof drains, gutters, and downspouts
shall be maintained in good repair, free from obstructions and operational.
      (6)   Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels,
applications, wall facing and similar decorative features shall be maintained
in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
      (7)   Overhangs, extensions and awnings. All overhang extensions
including, but not limited to canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, and fire
escapes shall be maintained in good repair and be property anchored and
supported as to be kept in a sound and safe condition.
      (8)   Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway,
deck porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be
maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and
capable of supporting the imposed loads.
      (9)   Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks and
similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in
good repair.
      (10)   Handrails and guards. Every exterior handrail and guard shall be
firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
      (11)   Windows, skylights and doors. Every window, storefront, skylight
and exterior door part, including but not limited to the frame, the trim,
window screens and hardware shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
All broken or missing windows shall be replaced with glass and secured in a
manner to prevent unauthorized entry. All broken or missing doors shall be
replaced with new doors which shall be secured to prevent unauthorized entry.
All glass shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. All exterior
doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained in good condition and
secured. Locks at all exterior doors, exterior attach access, windows or
exterior hatchways shall tightly secure the opening. Windows and doors shall
not be secured by plywood or other similar means mounted on the exterior except
as a temporarysecuring measure, and the same shall be removed within a period
designated by the City Manager.
      (12)   Basement hatchways and windows. Every basement hatchway shall be
maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water.
Every basement window that is operable shall be supplied with rodent shields,
storm windows or other approved protection against entry of rodents.
   (B)   The property shall be secured and maintained, both structure and
grounds, against trespasser, including maintaining all windows and doors with
locks, replacing all broken doors and windows, and securing any other opening
into the structure that are readily accessible to trespassers. In the event
that windows cannot be maintained as required herein, the owner or property
manager shall secure windows that are visible from any public rights-of-way
with rigid transparent materials such as but not limited to clear Lexan type
material. No opaque (typically plywood) boarding materials shall be used where
visible from the public rights-of-way.
   (C)   The owner shall take all reasonable steps necessary to prevent any
criminal activity from occurring on the property.
   (D)   Weather protection of all exterior surfaces shall be maintained in
good condition, including paint on exterior wood surfaces.
   (E)   Both interior and exterior areas of the property shall be kept free of
accumulations of junk, trash, debris, combustible or other materials such as
would constitute an unsafe, unsanitary or unsightly conditions or appearance.
   (F)   All vegetation and landscaping shall be maintained in good and healthy
condition and in accordance with all other requirements of city ordinances,
land use regulations or approved plans under this chapter.
   (G)   All parking and driving surfaces shall be maintained in good
condition, free of cracks, holes and vegetation, and in accordance with § 302.3
of the adopted International Property Maintenance Code and all other applicable
city ordinance requirements.
   (H)   In all applicable respects, the condition, maintenance and appearance
of vacant property shall be subject to the requirements of all applicable state
and local ordinances, standards, regulations, and abatement procedures
currently in effect. This will include any applicable city issued permits and
site plans in the replacement and repair of all elements of the exterior or the
building site.
   (I)   Owners of vacant structures shall remove all combustibles as defined
by the Fire Code.
   (J)   All repairs shall be subject to approval for adequacy by the City
Manager. All required permits and final inspections prior to and/or following
repairs shall be in accordance with applicable laws and rules.
   (K)   All vacant buildings shall be maintained in a non-blighted condition,
consistent with the requirements of this section. A vacant building in a
blighted condition shall be deemed a public nuisance under the Code of
Ordinances.
   (L)   Failure to maintain the vacant property to the standard of care
specified by the city is a violation of this chapter.
   (M)   Providing false information to the city is a violation of this
chapter.
(Ord. OR-2194-20, passed 11-9-20)
§ 157.07 REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION FEES.
   (A)   The vacant structure property owner shall have 90 days in which to
register from the date written notice is issued to the property owner.
   (B)   A registration fee charged to the owners of vacant buildings or
property under this chapter shall be $50 for the first year and $250 the second
year and beyond with an annual inspection fee of $50. Thereafter, the fee
authorized herein may be hereafter amended by resolution duly adopted by the
City Council.
   (C)   Failure to submit the registration paperwork in its entirety within
the 90 day period may result in a violation.
   (D)   Continued annual registration of the property by the vacant structure
property owner is required until said structure is deemed occupied and in
compliance with all relevant code requirements by the City Manager.
(Ord. OR-2194-20, passed 11-9-20)
§ 157.08 FEE WAIVERS.
   (A)   All fee waivers must be applied for on an annual basis and are subject
to approval by the City Manager. A fee waiver is only valid for 12 months. Fee
waivers shall be submitted in accordance with the city's most current
application process.
   (B)   For property which has been devastated by a catastrophe such as fire
or flood, the owner shall have 30 days to register from the date of the
disaster but may be exempt from the fees. This exemption is for the duration of
one year from the date of the catastrophe; thereafter all fees are due.
   (C)   Representative(s) of an owner who is deceased or is no longer legally
competent must register the property and are otherwise subject to this chapter.
The City Manager on a one-time basis may waive the annual registration fee
provided that the property is maintained in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter.
   (D)   Where the owner of the property has obtained a building permit and is
progressing in an expedient manner to prepare the premises for occupancy, the
owner must register the property and is otherwise subject to this chapter but
may be exempt from the registration fee.
(Ord. OR-2194-20, passed 11-9-20)
§ 157.99 PENALTY.
   In addition to any other enforcement remedies that the city may have under
other city ordinances or other applicable law, any person, firm or corporation
who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who
resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
not more than $2,000 for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted
to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. OR-2194-20, passed 11-9-20)
CHAPTER 158: STANDARDS, REGISTRATION, AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS FOR MULTI-
FAMILY DWELLING COMPLEXES
Section
General Provisions
   
158.001   Definitions
   
158.002   Purpose
   
158.003   Applicability and administration
Registration and Inspections
   
158.010   Certificate of occupancy required
   
158.011   Registration required for multi-family dwelling complexes and lodging
establishments
   
158.012   License fees required for multi-family dwelling complexes and lodging
establishments
   
158.013   Inspection by Regulatory Compliance Department
   
158.014   Probationary status, suspension and revocation of registration
Minimum Standards for Multi-Family Dwelling Complexes
   
158.020   Crime prevention standards
   
158.021   Lodging establishments
Enforcement
   
158.030   Criminal enforcement
   
158.031   Civil enforcement
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 158.001 DEFINITIONS.
    Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary
accepted meanings.
   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. A facility that furnishes food and shelter and
provides personal care and services pursuant Tex. Health & Safety Code Ch. 247.
   BUILDING. Any structure either temporary or permanent, having a roof or
other covering, and designed, built or intended for the shelter or enclosure or
partial enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind
or for an accessory use. Where independent units with separate entrances are
divided by absolute fire separations, each unit so separated shall be deemed a
building. This definition shall include structures wholly or partly enclosed
with an exterior wall.
   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. A building which:
      (1)   Is subordinate to and serves a principal structure or a principal
use;
      (2)   Is subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal
structure or use served;
      (3)   Is located on the same lot as the principal structure; and
      (4)   Is customarily incidental to the principal structure or use. Any
portion of a principal structure devoted or intended to be devoted to an
accessory use is not an accessory structure.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated authority charged with
the administration and enforcement of the Building Code, or the Building
Official’s authority.
   BUILDING STANDARDS REGULATIONS. The set of building regulations adopted by
the city, including, but not limited to, the International Property Maintenance
Code,
Chapter 150 of the code of ordinances, and Minimum Building Standards adopted
by the city.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A certificate issued by the city in accordance
with all applicable laws, ordinances, or codes authorizing occupancy of the
building.
   CITY. The City of Mansfield.
   COMMUNITY HOME. A community-based residential home, as defined by Tex. Human
Res. Code Ch. 123, that is operated by: a) the Department of Aging and
Disability Services; b) a community center organized under Tex. Health & Safety
Code Ch. 534, Subch. A, that provides services to persons with disabilities; c)
an entity subject to the Texas Nonprofit Corporation Law as described by Tex.
Bus. Org. Code § 1.008(d); d) an entity certified by the Department of Aging
and Disability Services as a provider under the ICF-IID medical assistance
program; or e) an assisted living facility licensed under Tex. Health & Safety
Code Ch. 247, provided that the exterior structure retains compatibility with
the surrounding residential dwellings.
   CRITICAL VIOLATION. A violation of the International Property Maintenance
Code as adopted by the city, City Charter, the city’s code of ordinances, or
other local, state or federal law that is capable of causing or contributing to
injury or illness of occupants.
   DWELLING UNIT. A building or structure designed to be or occupied as a
residence for humans.
   EQUIPMENT.  Any items used in connection with the operation of a multi-
family dwelling complex, nursing facility, assisted living facility, or lodging
establishment including but not limited to any washer, dryer, ice machine,
fans, air-conditioning units, heaters, refrigerators, or cooking units.
   EXISTING BUILDING. A building constructed in compliance with all codes at
the time of construction, or one for which a legal building permit has been
issued prior to the effective date of this chapter.
   FAMILY. Any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping
unit, in which not more than four individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage
or adoption.
   FIRE CHIEF. The Fire Chief or his or her designated representative.
   HABITABLE. The space, floor area or room in a dwelling unit used for living,
sleeping, cooking and eating but excludes bathrooms, laundry rooms, pantries,
closets and other storage space, foyers, hallways and utility rooms.
   HOSPITAL. A facility in which there are complete facilities for diagnosis,
treatment, surgery, laboratory, X-ray, nursing, and the prolonged care of bed
patients.
   HOT WATER. Water heated to a temperature of at least 110 degrees Fahrenheit
measured at the faucet outlet.
   IMPROPER. Not approved, inadequate, deteriorated, defective, insufficient,
or not in operating condition. The term does not include improvements which
conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction and which
have been adequately maintained.
   LANDLORD. The traditional meaning of owner or lessor, and additionally
includes a management company, or managing agent, including an on-site manager
or other property manager, of a multi-family dwelling complex. The term also
includes owners of hotels, motels, condominiums, bed and breakfast
establishments, inns, and extended stay lodging establishments.
   LEASE. A contract or rental agreement granting use or occupation of property
at a multi-family dwelling complex during a specified period, subject to
various terms and conditions, in exchange for a specified rent.
   LIFE SAFETY VIOLATION.  A violation of the International Property
Maintenance Code as adopted by the city, City Charter, the city’s code of
ordinances, or other applicable local, state, or federal law that represents an
imminent threat of death or injury to persons on the premises of a multi-family
dwelling.
   LODGING ESTABLISHMENT.  Any building, complex of buildings, or any other
facility in which the public may, for consideration, obtain sleeping
accommodations. The term includes hotels, motels, condominiums, bed and
breakfast establishments, inns, extended stays, apartments not occupied by
permanent residents, vacation rentals, and all other facilities where rooms or
sleeping facilities or space is furnished for consideration. The term “hotel”
does not include hospitals, sanitariums, nursing or assisted living facilities,
jails, prisons or detention centers, college dormitories or housing facilities
of the type described in Tex. Tax Code § 156.001(a) or an oilfield portable
unit, as defined by Tex. Tax Code § 152.001. For purposes of this chapter, the
term LODGING ESTABLISHMENT does not include a short-term rental or community
home. The term LODGING ESTABLISHMENT does not include a residence or portion of
a residence rented to a member of the resident’s family; a dwelling unit on a
seminary; a dwelling unit operated by a nonprofit organization; or any
government owned facility that provides lodging and similar services.
   MINIMUM BUILDING STANDARDS. The most recently adopted edition of the
International Council of Codes, National Electrical Code, and other local
amendments as adopted by the city.
   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING COMPLEX. A building or buildings containing three or
more dwelling units owned by the same person or entity or person on a single
platted lot, or if the land on which the building or buildings is not platted,
then any building or buildings that provides three or more dwelling units owned
by the same entity or person on a contiguous tract of land.
   NON-CRITICAL VIOLATION.  A violation of the International Property
Maintenance Code as adopted by the city, City Charter, city’s code of
ordinances, or other local, state, or federal law that is not considered a life
safety or critical violation.
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION. A written notice that a violation of the city code
exists.
   NURSING FACILITY. Convalescent and nursing facilities which provide services
pursuant to Tex. Health & Safety Code Ch. 242.
   OPERATING CONDITION. Equipment maintained and free of leaks, safe, sanitary
and in good working order.
   OWNER. Any person holding title to a multi-family dwelling complex,
according to the deed records in the County Clerk’s office of the county in
which the complex is situated.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any
other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This
definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities.
   PROPERTY MANAGER. A person who, for any form of consideration, has managing
control of premises.
   REGULATORY COMPLIANCE DEPARTMENT. The Regulatory Compliance Department and
its authorized representatives, acting through the City Manager or their
designated representatives.
   ROOMING/BOARDING HOUSE. A building other than a hotel or multi-family
dwelling where lodging is provided for compensation for three but not more than
12 persons, where meals may or may not be served, and where facilities for food
preparation are not provided in the individual rooms. Where meals are served,
they shall be served only to the residents of the boarding house.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL. The rental for compensation of any residence or
residential structure, or a portion of a residence or residential structure,
for the purpose of transient or guest overnight lodging accommodations for a
period of less than 30 consecutive days. SHORT-TERM RENTALS may include, but
are not limited to, single family residences, townhomes, duplexes, and other
residential dwelling units, regardless of whether the dwelling was originally
constructed or zoned as a residential dwelling. SHORT-TERM RENTALS shall not
include hotels or motels.
   ZONING ORDINANCE. The Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the city as adopted
and amended from time to time.
(Ord. OR-2225-21, passed 10-11-21; Am. Ord. OR-2232-21, passed 12-13-21; Am.
Ord. OR-2251-22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. OR-2267-22, passed 7-25-22; Am. Ord.
OR-2353-24, passed 3-25-24)
§ 158.002 PURPOSE.
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish safeguards to protect the life,
health, safety, and property of the occupants of multi-family dwelling
complexes, nursing or assisted living facilities, and lodging establishments,
and the general welfare of the public by developing procedures to enforce the
minimum building standards, and to provide equitable and practical criminal,
administrative, and civil remedies against property owners that do not maintain
a rental registration license.
(Ord. OR-2225-21, passed 10-11-21; Am. Ord. OR-2232-21, passed 12-13-21; Am.
Ord. OR-2251-22, passed 5-9-22)
§ 158.003 APPLICABILITY AND ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply to all multi-family dwelling complexes,
nursing or assisted living facilities, or lodging establishments located in the
city which are now in existence, or which may hereafter be constructed or
converted from other uses.
   (B)   The Regulatory Compliance Director and his or her authorized
representative(s) are authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and the Minimum Building Standards Code of the city’s building
standards regulations.
   (C)   The Regulatory Compliance Department shall have the authority to
render interpretations of this chapter and to adopt policies and procedures to
clarify the application of its provisions.
(Ord. OR-2225-21, passed 10-11-21; Am. Ord. OR-2232-21, passed 12-13-21; Am.
Ord. OR-2251-22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. OR-2353-24, passed 3-25-24)
REGISTRATION AND INSPECTIONS
§ 158.010 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED.
   (A)   No multi-family dwelling complex, nursing facility, assisted living
facility, or lodging establishment shall be used or occupied, and no change in
the existing occupancy classification as defined by the International Building
Code or ownership of a multi-family dwelling complex, or any portion thereof,
shall be made until the landlord has obtained a certificate of occupancy.
   (B)   The certificate of occupancy for all multi-family dwelling complexes
or lodging establishments shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
premises of the complex and shall not be removed except by the Building
Official.
(Ord. OR-2225-21, passed 10-11-21; Am. Ord. OR-2232-21, passed 12-13-21; Am.
Ord. OR-2251-22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. OR-2353-24, passed 3-25-24)
§ 158.011 REGISTRATION REQUIRED FOR MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING COMPLEXES AND LODGING
ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)    A landlord that operates a multi-family dwelling complex or lodging
establishment must register with the Regulatory Compliance Department on an
annual basis.
   (B)   The rental registration license must be current and valid in order to
rent or lease a multi-family dwelling unit in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
   (C)   The landlord of a multi-family dwelling complex or lodging
establishment which is constructed after the effective date of this chapter
shall register the multi-family dwelling complex or lodging establishment
within 30 days after the landlord receives its certificate of occupancy, and
annually thereafter.
   (D)   A new, late, or renewal registration is valid from the time payment of
the registration fee has been made and the application has been approved
through December 31 of that same year, unless the ownership of the multi-family
dwelling complex or lodging establishment changes. Upon a mid-year transfer of
ownership, the new owner must obtain a new registration, which shall be valid
from the time payment of the registration has been made and the application has
been approved through December 31 of that same year. Thereafter, registrations
shall be valid from January 1 until December 31 of the year of issuance.
   (E)   If a change of ownership of the multi-family dwelling complex or
lodging establishment occurs during the period that a registration is otherwise
valid, the landlord of the multi-family dwelling complex or lodging
establishment shall have 30 days from the date the change of ownership occurred
to file a new registration with the Regulatory Compliance Department and pay a
new registration fee. Failure to file a new registration within 30 days,
including payment of the registration fee, will constitute a violation of this
section.
   (F)   The registration shall be on a form prescribed by the Regulatory
Compliance Department, and such form shall, at a minimum, contain the following
information about the multifamily dwelling complex or lodging establishment:
      (1)   The trade name, physical address, and business address;
      (2)   The names, addresses, email addresses, and telephone numbers of the
owner, property manager, resident manager, registered agent, and all federal,
state, and local funding agencies; and the type of business entity which owns
the multi-family dwelling complex or lodging establishment;
      (3)   The names and physical addresses of designated employees or
authorized representatives who shall be assigned to respond to emergency
conditions, and a telephone number where said employees can be contacted during
any 24-hour period.
         (a)   For purposes of this division, EMERGENCY CONDITIONS shall be
defined as fires, natural disasters, floods, burst pipes, collapse hazard,
violent crime, and other similar conditions as determined by the Regulatory
Compliance Department.
         (b)   A post office box shall not suffice for the address requirements
of this division (F);
      (4)   The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of any mortgagees;
      (5)   A copy of a site plan depicting the total number of all buildings
within the complex, including a description of the use of each building and the
location of each building within the complex;
      (6)   The total number of dwelling units or guest rooms in a lodging
establishment;
      (7)   If the property is owned by a corporation, limited liability
company, partnership, limited partnership, trust or real estate investment
trust, the name and physical address of any of the following:
         (a)   For a corporation, a corporate officer;
         (b)   For a partnership, a general partner;
         (c)   For a limited liability company, the managing or administrative
member;
         (d)   For a limited partnership, a general partner;
         (e)   For a limited liability partnership, a general partner;
         (f)   For a limited liability limited partnership, a general partner;
         (g)   For a trust, a trustee;
         (h)   For a real estate investment trust, a general partner or an
officer; or
         (i)   For any other legal entity not named above, a duly authorized
agent;
      (8)   If the property is owned by a person, other than an individual, who
lives outside the State of Texas, the owner shall designate a registered agent
in the State of Texas, who will accept legal service on behalf of the owner. If
the property is owned by a person who is an individual and who lives outside
the State of Texas, the individual shall either designate a registered agent in
the State of Texas, who will accept legal service on behalf of the owner, or
provide a physical address where the owner may receive legal service. A
designation of a registered agent under this section shall include the name and
address of the agent;
      (9)   If any change in the information required by this section occurs,
the owner shall notify the Regulatory Compliance Department within 30 days of
the change, in a manner prescribed by the Regulatory Compliance Department; and
      (10)   A landlord commits an offense if the landlord knowingly operates a
multifamily dwelling complex or lodging establishment which is not currently
registered with the city under the provisions of this section.
(Ord. OR-2225-21, passed 10-11-21; Am. Ord. OR-2232-21, passed 12-13-21; Am.
Ord. OR-2251-22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. OR-2353-24, passed 3-25-24)
§ 158.012 LICENSE FEES REQUIRED FOR MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING COMPLEXES AND LODGING
ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   The landlord of a multi-family dwelling complex or lodging
establishment shall pay an annual registration fee for a rental license at a
rate per dwelling unit or guest room to offset the city’s cost of
administration, registration, and inspections, and as set forth in the
Regulatory Compliance Department fee schedule.
   (B)   Fees in general.
      (1)   Fees shall be established in the Master Fee Schedule adopted by
City Council, as amended from time to time, to include:
      (2)   A registration fee based upon the number of multi-family dwelling
units or guest rooms which shall be:
         (a)   Submitted annually with the registration form; and
         (b)   Submitted with a new registration upon a change of ownership of
the complex.
   (C)   Late fee; registration fee deadlines.
      (1)   A late fee as established in the Master Fee Schedule adopted by
City Council, as amended from time to time, shall be charged and due at the
time of payment if the annual registration fee is not paid by the due date.
      (2)   All rental registration fees are due the earlier of January 1 or
within 30 days of the date of invoice issued by the Regulatory Compliance
Department.
   (D)   An after-hours inspection fee, as established in the Master Fee
Schedule adopted by City Council, as amended from time to time, charged per
hour with a two-hour minimum paid in advance, may be charged for inspections
that occur Monday through Friday between the hours of 6:00 p.m. through 7:00
a.m., and anytime on Saturday or Sunday.
   (E)   A reinspection fee as established in the Master Fee Schedule adopted
by City Council, as amended from time to time, may be assessed for each
subsequent reinspection of the multi-family dwelling complex or lodging
establishment and for each dwelling unit in which a previously noted, but
uncorrected, violation exists.
   (F)   A reinspection fee as established in the Master Fee Schedule adopted
by City Council, as amended from time to time, for the multi-family dwelling
complex or lodging establishment and each dwelling unit or guest room inspected
shall be assessed when there is a probation, suspension or revocation
registration status.
   (G)   A reinstatement fee, as established in the Master Fee Schedule adopted
by City Council, as amended from time to time, for a multi-family dwelling
complex or lodging establishment shall be assessed when there is a suspension
or revocation registration status.
   (H)   The fee requirements described above shall not include a dwelling unit
operated by a nursing facility or assisted living facility.
(Ord. OR-2225-21, passed 10-11-21; Am. Ord. OR-2232-21, passed 12-13-21; Am.
Ord. OR-2251-22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. OR-2353-24, passed 3-25-24; Am. Ord.
OR-2393-24, passed 10-28-24)
§ 158.013 INSPECTION BY REGULATORY COMPLIANCE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Regulatory Compliance Department may conduct:
      (1)   Inspections to verify a valid certificate of occupancy;
      (2)   Inspections based on indications of code violations, including
complaints filed with the Regulatory Compliance Department except where stated
otherwise, that may result in:
         (a)   Periodic inspections; and
         (b)   Follow-up inspections.
      (3)   Inspections of the following areas of a multi-family dwelling
complex, nursing facility, assisted living facility, or lodging establishment:
         (a)   All building exteriors, including landscaping and screening
features pursuant to
Ch. 155, Zoning;
         (b)   All public areas within a multi-family dwelling complex, nursing
facility, assisted living facility, or lodging establishment;
         (c)   Unoccupied dwelling units; and
         (d)   Occupied dwelling units upon the consent of the tenant or the
landlord when subject to a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
      (4)   The Regulatory Compliance Department may inspect portions of a
multifamily dwelling complex, nursing facility, assisted living facility, or
lodging establishment as frequently as the Regulatory Compliance Department
deems necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. However, the Regulatory
Compliance Department shall schedule periodic inspections of multi-family
dwelling complexes, nursing or assisted living facilities, or lodging
establishments not less than once per calendar year.
      (5)   The landlord of a multi-family dwelling complex, nursing facility,
assisted living facility, or lodging establishment shall make all exterior
areas, interior public areas, and all vacant dwelling units of the complex
available to the Regulatory Compliance Department for inspections at all
reasonable times.
      (6)   The Regulatory Compliance Department is authorized to make follow-
up inspections of a multi-family dwelling complex, nursing facility, assisted
living facility, or lodging establishment to inspect all areas included in the
periodic inspection, as well as occupied dwelling units, in such frequency and
scope as the Regulatory Compliance Department deems necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter, and with the minimum building standards, and all
other applicable codes.
         (a)   The landlord of a multi-family dwelling complex, nursing
facility, assisted living facility, or lodging establishment shall make
available upon request documentation of the number and type of security systems
and fire alarm systems maintained on the premises and the names and telephone
numbers of the alarm companies servicing said systems that respond to alarms or
relay alarms to emergency services.
      (7)   The landlord of a multi-family dwelling complex, nursing facility,
assisted living facility, or lodging establishment shall timely correct all
violations identified in a notice of violation. The landlord must take steps to
mitigate safety threats arising from the violations immediately and must make
repairs within a reasonable period of time. Life safety violations must remain
secured from occupants until all repairs are completed.
      (8)   Whenever a periodic inspection is made for an alleged violation at
a multi-family dwelling complex, nursing facility, assisted living facility, or
lodging establishment, and a violation is found to exist, a notice of violation
will be prepared by the city. The landlord, owner, or property manager of the
property shall be provided a copy of the notice of violation, either in person
or by mail. Notice of the alleged violation(s) shall be deemed given to an
owner when a copy of the notice of violation (“notice”):
         (a)   Is delivered in person to the landlord, owner, or property
manager; or
         (b)   Two days after the copy of the notice of violation is deposited
with the U.S. Postal Service and addressed to the landlord, owner, or property
manager, with proper postage affixed. The notice of violation may establish
violation categories, which shall be corrected within a time specified in this
section. The completed notice of violation is a public document that shall be
made available for public disclosure to any person who requests it according to
law.
   (B)   A violation listed in a notice of violation issued under this section
shall be corrected in accordance with the time specified in the notice of
violation, subject to the following:
      (1)   A life safety violation shall be corrected within 24 hours of the
issuance of the notice of violation;
      (2)   A critical violation shall be corrected within 72 hours of the
issuance of the notice of violation;
      (3)   A maximum of 30 days shall be allowed for the correction of a non-
critical violation; and
      (4)   Deadlines to repair may be extended at the discretion of the
Regulatory Compliance Department. The Regulatory Compliance Department or their
designated inspector may approve a corrective action plan with benchmark
compliance dates to be achieved by the landlord to demonstrate satisfactory
progression toward compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   In addition to other authority granted by this section, the Regulatory
Compliance Department has all rights and authority granted by Tex. Code of
Criminal Procedure Art. 18.05. Inspections shall comply with all federal,
state, and local laws, regulations and ordinances.
   (D)   When considering a violation created by a tenant, the Regulatory
Compliance Department may consider the timeliness of the landlord’s response to
the violation, actions taken by the landlord to address a tenant’s activities
that may have caused the condition that was a violation, and actions taken by
the landlord, owner, or property manager to prevent or reduce similar
violations in the future.
   (E)   The Regulatory Compliance Department is authorized to publish the
results of inspections.
   (F)   A landlord commits an offense if a multi-family dwelling complex,
nursing facility, assisted living facility, or lodging establishment under this
chapter has one or more, in any combination, of the following conditions exists
on the premises:
      (1)   Inadequate sanitation;
      (2)   Lack of a bathroom or the existence of an improper bathroom;
      (3)   Lack of or an improper kitchen;
      (4)   Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures, including
a failure to install water heating facilities that are properly installed,
maintained, and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at
every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a
temperature not less than 110° Fahrenheit;
      (5)   Lack of properly installed or maintained plumbing fixtures that are
free from obstruction, leaks and defects; are installed in a safe, sanitary and
functional manner; or are capable of performing the function for which such
plumbing fixtures are designed;
      (6)   Lack of or improper required heating, cooling, mechanical
ventilation or electric facilities;
      (7)   Lack of required amounts of natural light and ventilation;
      (8)   Lack of or improper space or floor area;
      (9)   Lack of required electrical lighting;
      (10)   Dampness of habitable space;
      (11)   Infestation of insects, vermin, or rodents;
      (12)   The presence of deteriorating or unsightly landscaping or
screening features and the existence of dead trees, tree limbs, holes,
excavations, or other conditions reasonably capable of causing injury to a
person or otherwise in violation of applicable provisions found in
Chapter 99, Natural Resources Management, and
Chapter 155, Zoning; including lack of appropriate mulch or other landscaping
material approved for the preservation of existing landscaping, conservation of
water, and reduction of nuisance weeds and pests. This shall include lack of
ground cover or the presence of bare soil. Plant material shall be removed from
expansion joints and any other cracks in curbs, sidewalks, driveways, and any
other concrete or brick paver surface within the complex. Covers shall be
provided to secure in-ground meter or valve access points. Landscape or
decorative features shall not be installed or maintained in a manner which
produces a public nuisance.
      (13)   Lack of or improper connection to required sewage disposal;
      (14)   Lack of or improper garbage and rubbish storage and removal
facilities, including using garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities
for any purpose other than the sanitary storage of garbage and rubbish
completely contained in waste containers designed for such use; using
enclosures or other structures designed for the screening of such waste
containers to store any items that do not fit within the approved container; or
failing to keep enclosures clean and free of all debris or other rubbish;
      (15)   Lack of or improper grading or drainage to prevent the erosion of
soil or to prevent standing or stagnant water on the premises or within any
structure located thereon;
      (16)   Structural hazards;
      (17)   Improper foundations;
      (18)   Improper flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry
imposed loads safely or not maintained in sound condition and good repair,
where flooring includes interior walking surface coverings such as tile,
linoleum, carpet, or other coverings approved for interior use;
      (19)   Interior surfaces.
         (a)   Interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be
maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or
abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster,
broken tile, ripped or damaged linoleum, including countertops and cabinets,
decayed wood and other defective, dilapidated, or deteriorated surface
conditions shall be corrected.
         (b)   Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame
and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely
attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the
attachment hardware. Doors shall be maintained with no holes, broken coverings,
or inoperable hardware, and must be installed and secured in door jambs
designed for a door, unless the absence of a door has been consented to by the
tenant of the unit.
      (20)   Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that
split, lean, list, or buckle due to defective material, deterioration, improper
construction, or insufficient size to carry imposed loads safely;
      (21)   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling, and roof supports or other
horizontal members which sag, split or buckle due to defective material,
deterioration, improper construction, or insufficient size to carry imposed
loads with safety;
      (22)   Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle due to
defective material, deterioration, improper construction, or insufficient size
or strength to carry imposed loads safely;
      (23)   Lack of or improper required interior or exterior railings,
stairs, steps, landings, porches, decks, and balconies maintained in
structurally sound condition, in good repair, and with proper anchorage, that
are capable of supporting imposed loads and, in the case of interior or
exterior railings, are firmly fastened;
      (24)   Faulty or insufficient smoke detectors and/or carbon monoxide
detectors;
      (25)   Hazardous wiring. Any wiring except that which conformed to all
applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been
maintained in operating condition;
      (26)   Failure of mechanical equipment.
         (a)   Mechanical equipment; appliances; heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning (HVAC) appliances; fireplaces; solid fuel-burning appliances;
cooking appliances; and water heating appliances shall be properly installed
and maintained in a safe working conditions and shall be capable of performing
the intended function.
         (b)   Inspection results or equipment specifications may be required
to verify proper operations.
         (c)   Every landlord of a multi-family dwelling complex shall provide
heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68° Fahrenheit
(20° Celsius) in all habitable rooms.
      (27)   Faulty weather protection.
         (a)   Exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and
window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks, and fences, shall be
maintained in good condition;
         (b)   Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall
be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective
covering or treatment;
         (c)   Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and
surfaces repainted;
         (d)   Siding and masonry joints, as well as those between the building
envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights, shall be
maintained weather resistant and watertight;
         (e)   Metal surfaces subject to rust and corrosion shall be coated to
inhibit such rust and corrosion, and surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be
stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion;
         (f)   Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces.
Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this
requirement;
         (g)   Roofs and flashing shall be sound, tight, and free from defects
that admit rain;
         (h)   Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or
deterioration in the walls or any interior portion of the structure;
         (i)   Roof drains, gutters, and downspouts shall be maintained in good
repair, be free from obstructions, and have necessary splash boxes or other
erosion control measures; and
         (j)   Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a
public nuisance.
      (28)   Inadequate exits. Exit facilities of buildings or portions thereof
shall conform with all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws at the time of
construction. When an unsafe condition exists due to improper location of
exits, additional exits may be required to be installed;
      (29)   Improper occupancy. Any building, or portion thereof, occupied for
living, sleeping, cooking or dining purposes which was not designed or intended
to be used for such occupancies;
      (30)   Unsecured buildings. Any building that is vacant and open. A
building is open if any door, window or other opening is not securely closed to
prevent unauthorized entry; and
      (31)   Stairway identification signs. Any buildings or premises which
does not meet the following standards:
         (a)   Stairway identification signs shall be provided at each floor
landing in an interior exit stairway and ramp connecting more than three
stories designating the floor level, the terminus of the top and bottom of the
interior exit stairway and ramp and the identification of the stairway or ramp.
The signage shall also state the story of, and the direction to, the exit
discharge and the availability of roof access from the interior exit stairway
and ramp for the fire department. The sign shall be located five feet (1,524
mm) above the floor landing in a position that is readily visible when the
doors are in the open and closed positions. In addition to the stairway
identification sign, a floor-level sign in visual characters, raised characters
and braille complying with ICC Al17.1 shall be located at each floor-level
landing adjacent to the door leading from the interior exit stairway and ramp
into the corridor to identify the floor level.
         (b)   All stairway identification signage requirements shall be in
compliance with the International Fire Code § 1023.9.1, as amended.
         (c)   Where there is a conflict between the requirement of this
section, another code or referenced standard, the most restrictive shall
govern.
         (d)   Every building at a multi-family dwelling complex, nursing
facility, assisted living facility, or lodging establishment shall have the
premises identification properly installed and maintained. Each building will
position the numbers or addresses to be plainly readable from the public or
private roadway fronting such building. Immediately below each building address
or number the letters or numbers indicating the range of dwelling units within
such building. Such numbers or letters shall be of a color that contrasts with
their background and shall be a minimum of four inches in height.
         (e)   Each dwelling unit upon or near the exterior front door shall
have the dwelling unit number posted in a color that contrasts with the
background.
      (32)   Screening devices and fences. All screening devices and fences
shall be maintained in good condition. If the multi-family dwelling complex,
nursing facility, assisted living facility, or lodging establishment fails to
maintain screening devices or fences, the city shall have the right to levy an
assessment for the expense of the needed repairs. The assessment shall
constitute a lien placed upon the property against which the assessment is
made. The Director of Regulatory Compliance or their designee shall be the sole
judge of whether repairs are needed.
      (33)   Insufficient workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations,
or installations that are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of
this code and that are not executed and installed in a workmanlike manner or
installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions shall constitute
insufficient workmanship. Workmanlike repairs, work, alterations, or
installations shall meet industry standards and be true to the original scope
and design. A verified inspection report or seal of approval may be required by
the Regulatory Compliance Department to validate that repairs, work,
alterations, or installations have been completed in accordance with industry
standards and best practices to remedy an identified violation.
      (34)   Insufficient maintenance.
         (a)   Every landlord of a multi-family dwelling complex shall maintain
all equipment, systems, devices and safeguards in good working order.
         (b)   An owner, landlord, owner’s authorized agent, landlord’s
authorized agent, property manager, or occupant shall not cause any service,
facility, equipment or utility that is required by this chapter to be removed
from, shut off from, or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such
temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in
progress.
         (c)   The requirements of this chapter are not intended to provide the
basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and
devices in existing structures.
         (d)   Inspection results or equipment specifications may be required
to verify proper operating.
      (35)   Accessory structures.
         (a)   Accessory structures, including detached garages, retaining
walls, mailboxes, pergolas or gazebos, fences, walls, and monument or other
property signs shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
         (b)   Metal posts and fixtures, including HVAC condenser pads, that
are exposed to exterior weather conditions shall be protected from corrosion,
free of rust and chipped or peeling paint, maintained in good repair, and
structurally sound and reasonably level.
      (36)   Motor vehicles.
         (a)   Except as provided for in other regulations, inoperative or
unlicensed motor vehicles shall not be parked, kept, or stored on any premises,
and no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall at any time be in a state
of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or
dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an
approved spray booth.
         (b)   Division (A)(36)(a) above shall not apply to motor vehicles
undergoing major overhaul, including body work or work requiring a state of
major disassembly, disrepair, or the process of being stripped or dismantled,
provided that such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed
area designed and approved for such purposes.
      (37)   Sidewalks and driveways. Sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways,
parking spaces, tire stops, and similar devices or areas shall be kept in a
proper state of repair and maintained free from hazardous conditions. Tire
stops and similar devices shall be maintained with proper placement and shall
not be unaligned or located outside of the parking surface.
(Ord. OR-2225-21, passed 10-11-21; Am. Ord. OR-2232-21, passed 12-13-21; Am.
Ord. OR-2251-22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. OR-2267-22, passed 7-25-22; Am. Ord.
OR-2353-24, passed 3-25-24)
§ 158.014 PROBATIONARY STATUS, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Probationary status.
      (1)   In addition to any other authority granted by this section or any
other provision of the code of ordinances, the Regulatory Compliance Department
may place the registration of a multi-family dwelling complex or lodging
establishment on probationary status if:
         (a)   A landlord fails to correct a violation of the code of
ordinances or other applicable local, state, or federal statute within the time
specified in a notice of violation; or
         (b)   Any inspection reveals a repeat violation of the same provision
of the code of ordinances or other applicable local, state, or federal statute
which had been identified within the preceding 12-month period.
      (2)   The duration of the probationary status shall begin upon the
mailing of a notice by the Regulatory Compliance Department of the initiation
of the probationary status and shall continue until both of the following
conditions have been met:
         (a)   All previously identified code violations at the multi-family
dwelling complex or lodging establishment have been corrected by the landlord
and noted and approved by the Regulatory Compliance Department;
         (b)   No additional code or statutory violations are identified at the
multi-family residential complex or lodging establishment for 90 days after
correction of the last violations as approved by the Regulatory Compliance
Department.
      (3)   The Regulatory Compliance Department shall impose a reinspection
fee, as established in the Master Fee Schedule adopted by City Council, as
amended from time to time, on the landlord for each dwelling unit or guest room
inspected as long as the multi-family dwelling complex or lodging establishment
remains on probationary status.
      (4)   The city shall report to the Texas Department of Aging and
Disability Services or other applicable department any nursing facility or
assisted living facility that Regulatory Compliance Department finds:
         (a)   Is established or operating in the city without a license;
         (b)   Poses an immediate threat to the health and safety of a resident
of the nursing facility or assisted living facility; or
         (c)   Is otherwise violating a provision of Tex. Health & Safety Code
Chs. 242 or 247, as amended, or any rule, regulation, or standard governing
nursing facilities or assisted living facilities promulgated by the Texas
Department of Aging and Disability Services under Tex. Health & Safety Code
Chs. 242 or 247, as amended.
   (B)   Suspension of registration.
      (1)   In addition to other authority granted by this section or any other
provision of the Code of Mansfield, Texas, if a multi-family dwelling complex
or lodging establishment remains on probationary status and fails to complete
the requirements for removal from probationary status in division (A)(2) above
within 180 days, the Regulatory Compliance Department may place the
registration of such complex or lodging establishment on suspended status.
While on suspended status, no unoccupied unit in the complex may be occupied
and no occupied unit shall be occupied by new tenants until the complex has
been in full compliance with the Code of Mansfield, Texas and all applicable
laws for a minimum of 30 days. The registration shall remain suspended until
the complex or establishment has been in full compliance with the Code of
Mansfield, Texas and all applicable laws for a minimum of 180 days.
      (2)   If a multi-family dwelling complex or lodging establishment had a
suspended status within the previous 36 months, no dwelling unit in the complex
or lodging establishment may be occupied by new tenants until it has been in
full compliance for 90 days. The multi-family dwelling complex or lodging
establishment shall remain on suspended status until it has been in full
compliance with the city code and all applicable laws for 180 consecutive days.
      (3)   The Regulatory Compliance Department shall impose a monthly
administrative fee, as established in the Master Fee Schedule adopted by City
Council, as amended from time to time, on the landlord for as long as the
complex or lodging establishment remains on suspended status. In addition, a
reinspection fee, as established in the Master Fee Schedule adopted by City
Council, as amended from time to time, will be assessed to the landlord for
each dwelling unit inspected as long as the multi-family rental registration
status remains suspended.
   (C)   Revocation of registration.
      (1)   In addition to other authority granted by this section or any other
provision of the Code of Mansfield, Texas, the Regulatory Compliance Department
may revoke the registration of a multi-family dwelling complex or lodging
establishment if:
         (a)   The multi-family dwelling complex or lodging establishment is
found to have one or more violations that constitute a danger to the health or
safety of its tenants or the public at large and the landlord fails to correct
such violation(s) within the time specified in a notice of violation; or
         (b)   The multi-family dwelling complex or lodging establishment has
more than one fire, life safety violation during any a 12-month period.
      (2)   A multi-family dwelling complex or lodging establishment whose
registration has been revoked may not do business until such registration has
been reinstated. A multi-family dwelling complex or lodging establishment whose
registration has been revoked must be vacated within 60 days of such
revocation. A landlord commits an offense each day or portion of a day the
complex continues to offer a dwelling unit or guest room for a fee while its
registration is revoked and each day any unit remains occupied after the
expiration of 60 days from the date of revocation. If the city takes any
enforcement action that mandates the involuntary relocation of tenants prior to
the end of their contractual rental term, the city shall provide reasonable
relocation expenses to eligible tenants. The cost of such relocation expenses
shall be borne by the landlord. The failure to pay such expenses within 30 days
from notice of same shall result in the city placing a lien on the property to
secure such repayment.
      (3)   If the Regulatory Compliance Department denies or revokes a rental
registration license there shall be notification to the owner in writing by
mailing the denial or revocation notice by certified mail to all owner and
agent addresses identified in the registration application. The owner may
appeal the decision to the Construction Code Board of Adjustments and Appeals
(the “Board”) by filing a written request for appeal with the Director of
Regulatory Compliance no later than 5:00 p.m. on the tenth day following the
date of notice, as outlined in division (C)(4) below. If a rental registration
license was denied or revoked, the registration or renewal shall not be
considered by the Regulatory Compliance Department until all application or
inspection deficiencies that were the basis for the denial or revocation are
corrected.
      (4)   The multi-family dwelling complex or lodging establishment owner
shall file a notice of appeal with the Director of Regulatory Compliance that
alleges error in an order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Regulatory Compliance Department in the enforcement of this chapter. An appeal
must be made in writing and filed with the Director of Regulatory Compliance no
later than 5:00 p.m. on the tenth day following the date of notice from the
department of such order, requirement, decision, or determination. The director
shall forward the notice of appeal to the Construction Board of Adjustments and
Appeals within three business days of receipt of the notice of appeal.
         (a)   Service of the order is effective upon the date:
            1.   The notice is delivered in person to the landlord, owner, or
property manager; or
            2.   Two days after the copy of the inspection notice is deposited
with the U.S. Postal Service and addressed to the landlord, owner, or property
manager, with proper postage affixed. The inspection notice may establish
violation categories, which shall be corrected within a time specified in this
section. The completed inspection report notice is a public document that shall
be made available for public disclosure to any person who requests it according
to law.
         (b)   The Board shall schedule a hearing as soon as practicable upon
the timely filing of an appeal. The owner, property manager, or landlord may
attend and present evidence at the hearing. The Board shall promptly render a
decision based on the evidence presented at the hearing.
         (c)   The Board’s decision shall be final and binding. No appeal may
be taken from the decision of the Board.
         (d)   An appellant seeking judicial review of the Board’s decision on
appeal must file a petition with a court of competent jurisdiction located in
Tarrant County, Texas. Such judicial review shall be governed by the procedural
rules contained in Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 211.011 as if the city’s Board of
Adjustment had conducted the review on appeal.
   (D)   Reinstatement of suspended or revoked registration.
      (1)   A multi-family dwelling complex or lodging establishment whose
registration has been suspended or revoked may, at any time, make written
application for a reinstatement inspection and pay the inspection fee for the
purpose of reinstating the permit. Within ten days following receipt of a
written request, which shall include a statement signed by the applicant that
in the applicant’s opinion all of the violations that caused the suspension or
revocation of the permit have been corrected, and the applicable fee, the
Regulatory Compliance Department shall perform a reinstatement inspection. If
all of the violations that caused the suspension or revocation of the permit
have been corrected, the permit shall be reinstated. If all of the violations
that caused the suspension or revocation of the permit have not been corrected,
the permit will continue in its suspended or revoked status, and the Department
of Regulatory Compliance may, as deemed necessary or appropriate, proceed with
additional enforcement action.
(Ord. OR-2225-21, passed 10-11-21; Am. Ord. OR-2232-21, passed 12-13-21; Am.
Ord. OR-2251-22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. OR-2353-24, passed 3-25-24; Am. Ord.
OR-2393-24, passed 10-28-24)
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING COMPLEXES
§ 158.020 CRIME PREVENTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   The landlord of a multi-family dwelling complex shall provide the
following crime prevention measures:
      (1)   Signs for emergencies and code violations.
         (a)   A landlord of a multi-family dwelling complex shall post and
maintain signs on the premises of the complex that meet the following
conditions:
            1.   The sign required by this section shall be a minimum of 12
inches by 24 inches. Sign facings shall be fabricated out of weather-proof
material. The signs shall have a white background, with letters and numbers in
a contrasting color;
            2.   The emergency phone number described in Tex. Prop. Code §
92.020 (Emergency Phone Number);
            3.   Information regarding how to report code violations to the
city; and
            4.   At each multi-family dwelling complex there shall be at least
one sign posted per 50 units. The signs shall be prominently displayed in
exterior, publicly accessible areas of the complex. If more than one sign is
required under this section, the signs shall be placed in separate areas of the
property.
      (2)   Emergency numbers. Includes the names of designated employees or
other authorized persons who shall be assigned to respond to emergency
conditions, and a telephone number where said employees can be contacted during
any 24-hour period. Emergency conditions shall include fire, natural disaster,
flood, collapse hazard, burst pipes or violent crime.
      (3)   Lighting.
         (a)   Exterior illumination shall be provided at appropriate points
adjacent to all building entrances, including individual dwelling units.
Lighting shall be sufficient to illuminate areas where hazards may reasonably
exists and shall be operable between a half hour before sunset and a half hour
after sunrise.
         (b)   Control mechanisms for such illumination shall be activated and
deactivated by a photocell or seasonally adjusted timer switch, not operable by
individual tenants of the complex except at individual dwelling units.
         (c)   A landlord shall repair all inoperable exterior lighting
fixtures within a reasonable period of time after being notified that the
fixture is not working. In no instance shall a reasonable period of time be
deemed to mean more than seven days.
      (4)   Vacant buildings secured.
         (a)   All openings in vacant buildings and dwellings shall be closed
and secured from unlawful entry by the installation and maintenance of
appropriate locking devices and intact doors and windows which are proportioned
to securely and completely fit the openings.
         (b)   Alternatively, with the approval of the Regulatory Compliance
Department, openings may be temporarily secured by means of the installation of
proportioned wood materials in good condition. The surfaces of such materials
exposed to the weather shall be protected with the application of exterior
grade paint, or a similar weather resistant finish, which blends with the
background color of the building.
      (5)   Security gate access.
         (a)   A landlord of a multi-family dwelling complex which has
unstaffed security gates which restrict vehicle access onto the premises shall
provide master codes to the gates so that public safety vehicles and essential
city personnel are allowed unrestricted entry onto the premises when responding
to emergencies and calls for service and routine patrols.
         (b)   All electrical or mechanically operated gates must be equipped
with a Knox system gate access key switch as approved by the city’s Fire
Department.
         (c)   The owner or person in control of any property which contains a
security gate or barrier is responsible for any damage caused to emergency
equipment by said security gates or barriers, which malfunctioned or operated
improperly.
         (d)   The landlord of a multi-family dwelling complex shall produce
records of the number and type of security systems and fire alarm systems
maintained on the premises and the names and telephone numbers of the alarm
companies servicing said systems that respond to alarms or relay alarms to
emergency services upon request.
         (e)   Access through such security gates by fire trucks and fire
personnel shall be provided as required by the Fire Code.
            1.   Fire lanes shall be maintained in good condition with clearly
visible markings.
            2.   Fire apparatus access roads shall be continuously marked by
painted lines of red traffic paint six inches in width to show the boundaries
of the lane. The words “NO PARKING FIRE LANE” or “FIRE LANE NO PARKING” shall
appear in four-inch white letters at 25 feet intervals on the red border
markings along both sides of the fire lanes. Where a curb is available, the
striping shall be on the vertical face of the curb.
            3.   Signs shall read “NO PARKING FIRE LANE” or “FIRE LANE NO
PARKING” and shall be 12 inches wide and 18 inches high. Signs shall be painted
on a white background with letters and borders in red, using not less than two-
inch lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary post and the
bottom of the sign shall be six feet, six inches above finished grade. Signs
shall be spaced not more than 50 feet apart along both sides of the fire lane.
Signs may be installed on permanent buildings or walls or as approved by the
Fire Chief.
            4.   Fire apparatus access roads shall not be obstructed in any
manner, including the parking of vehicles, or used as loading zones. The
minimum widths and clearances established in § 503.2.1 and any area marked as a
fire lane as described in § 503.3 shall be maintained at all times.
         (f)   Crime prevention. The landlord at a multi-family dwelling
complex shall not allow a resident to engage in any activity on or near the
dwelling unit premises that would subject the resident to a penalty of a Class
C misdemeanor that involves possession of drug paraphernalia, assault or
disorderly conduct; Texas Penal Code Class A or B misdemeanors; Texas Penal
Code felony or Texas Health & Safety Code violation; or engage in any hazardous
conduct that otherwise jeopardizes the health, safety and welfare of the
landlord or another tenant, or which would involve imminent or actual serious
property damage. Nothing in this provision shall be construed as requiring or
encouraging the eviction or termination of a lease of a victim of domestic
violence. Nothing in this provision is intended to relieve any tenant of an
applicable responsibility to learn security plans, check safety devices, or
report criminal activity to the landlord or to an appropriate law enforcement
agency.
      (6)   Graffiti abatement. A landlord shall remove graffiti from the
landlord’s multi-family dwelling complex as required by the Code of Mansfield,
Texas.
      (7)   Occupancy limits. Every dwelling unit shall have at least 150
square feet of habitable floor area for the first occupant and 100 square feet
of habitable floor area for each additional occupant. Except for kitchens,
habitable rooms shall have an area of not less than 70 square feet. Where more
than two persons occupy a room used for sleeping purposes the required floor
area of 70 square feet shall be increased at the rate of 50 square feet for
each occupant in excess of two.
      (8)   Crime prevention. The landlord at a multi-family dwelling complex
shall not allow a resident to engage in any activity on or near the dwelling
unit premises that would subject the resident to a penalty of a Class C
misdemeanor that involves possession of drug paraphernalia, assault or
disorderly conduct; Tex. Penal Code Class A or B misdemeanors; Tex. Penal Code
Felony or Tex. Health and Safety Code violation; or engage in any hazardous
conduct that otherwise jeopardizes the health, safety and welfare of the
landlord or another tenant, or which would involve imminent or actual serious
property damage. Nothing in this provision shall be construed as requiring or
encouraging the eviction or termination of a lease of a victim of domestic
violence. Nothing in this provision is intended to relieve any tenant of an
applicable responsibility to learn security plans, check safety devices, or
report criminal activity to the landlord or to an appropriate law enforcement
agency.
   (B)   A landlord commits an offense if the landlord knowingly violates any
provision of this section or fails to comply with any provision of this
section.
(Ord. OR-2225-21, passed 10-11-21; Am. Ord. OR-2232-21, passed 12-13-21; Am.
Ord. OR-2251-22, passed 5-9-22; Ord. OR-2353-24, passed 3-25-24)
§ 158.021 LODGING ESTABLISHMENTS.
   The following additional standards shall apply to lodging establishments,
but do not apply to multi-family dwellings unless required by another provision
of this code:
   (A)   Furnishings shall be maintained in good condition and clean.
Furnishings with excessive wear, tears, or stains which present health and
safety issues shall be replaced.
   (B)   All rooms, furnishings, and bedding shall be free from an accumulation
or infestation of insects or ectoparasites. Lodging establishments shall, at a
minimum, perform monthly pest control for all lodging rooms, or at more
frequent intervals as required by the Regulatory Compliance Department, in
order to prevent infestation. Records of pest control treatments shall be made
available for review upon request by the Regulatory Compliance Department.
   (C)   A dispensed liquid soap shall be provided in all common and public
bathrooms and toilets.
   (D)   Ice provided to guests in any manner shall be produced only from
potable water. Ice machines shall be free from visible trash and sediment. Ice
shall not be made or stored in an owner’s or manager’s private refrigerator or
private living areas. Ice that is not produced at the lodging establishment
shall be obtained from an approved source and shall be properly labeled and
protected from contamination during transportation and storage. Ice machines
shall be of sanitary, durable, corrosion-resistant, and easily cleanable
construction. Ice machines shall be kept sanitized and in good repair. Ice
storage bins shall be drained into an approved sewage system and must have a
physical air gap. When replacement of a self-service ice machine becomes
necessary or additional machines are added, an automatic self-serve ice
dispensing machine shall be installed instead. Ice machines shall be located in
a place that provides protection from the elements and possible sources of
contamination. Exterior ice machine locations shall have, at a minimum,
overhead protection. The area shall be kept clean and shall be free of
accumulation of excessive moisture, drippage, or trash. An ice machine with a
storage bin for ice shall be equipped with an ice scoop that is attached to the
ice bin with a tether of easily cleanable material. The tether shall be of such
a length to prevent the scoop from touching the ground and shall be maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (E)   Clean linens, towels, and laundry shall be protected from dust, dirt,
vermin, or other contamination.
   (F)   Guest laundry facilities shall be clean and maintained in good repair.
   (G)   Lodging establishments shall, in general, be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition and in good repair. Kitchen amenities in guestrooms with
kitchens or kitchenettes shall be properly maintained and in good working
order.
   (H)   Not more than 10% of the lodging rooms in a lodging establishment may
be used for storage purposes. At least 90% of the lodging rooms in a lodging
establishment shall be available for occupancy or occupied by a guest.
   (I)   A lodging room may not be occupied by more persons than allowed by §
91.15 (Fire Code) or §
150.008 (Building Code) which shall be calculated by taking into account the
space taken up by luggage and other personal belongings of an occupant that are
not stored in a closet, dresser or other building feature or furniture provided
by the operator of the lodging establishment.
(Ord. OR-2251-22, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. OR-2353-24, passed 3-25-24)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 158.030 CRIMINAL ENFORCEMENT.
    A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to
exceed $2,000 in accordance with the City Code. Each separate occurrence of a
violation or each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. The failure to perform an act required by this chapter is a violation
of this chapter.
(Ord. OR-2225-21, passed 10-11-21; Am. Ord. OR-2232-21, passed 12-13-21; Am.
Ord. OR-2251-22, passed 5-9-22)
§ 158.031 CIVIL ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The city may invoke Tex. Local Government Code §§ 54.012 through
54.020, as amended, and petition the state district court or the applicable
county court at law, through the City Attorney, for either injunctive relief,
civil penalties or both injunctive relief and civil penalties, whenever it
appears that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this chapter.
   (B)   Pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code § 54.016, as amended, the city
may obtain against the owner or the operator of a facility, a temporary or
permanent injunction, as appropriate, that:
      (1)   Prohibits specific conduct that violates this chapter; or
      (2)   Requires specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with
this chapter.
   (C)   Pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code § 54.017, as amended, the city
may recover a civil penalty of not more than $1,000 per day for each violation
of any provision of this chapter that relates to any matter specified in
division (A) above, if the city proves that:
      (1)   The defendant was notified of the provisions of the chapter; and
      (2)   After the defendant received notice of the chapter provisions, the
defendant committed acts in violation of this chapter or failed to take action
necessary for compliance with this chapter.
   (D)   The city may also institute suit to recover the cost of any actual
damages incurred by the city, and any costs of response, remediation,
abatement, and restoration incurred by the city as allowed under state or
federal laws, or at common law.
   (E)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court should take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation, corrective
actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, and any other
factors as justice requires.
(Ord. OR-2225-21, passed 10-11-21; Am. Ord. OR-2232-21, passed 12-13-21; Am.
Ord. OR-2251-22, passed 5-9-22)
CHAPTER 159: EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION
Section
   
159.01   Petitions for release
§ 159.01 PETITIONS FOR RELEASE.
   (A)   A petition for release or a petition to hold an election for release
from the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction may be filed by a resident or
land owner within the extraterritorial jurisdiction, as provided by Tex. Local
Gov’t Code Ch. 42, as amended.
   (B)   A petition either for release or requesting an election is considered
filed when it meets the following requirements:
      (1)   The petition must comply with the signature requirements of Tex.
Local Gov’t Code Chapter 42, as amended, and Tex. Elections Code Ch. 277, as
amended;
      (2)   The petition must include a map of the land to be released and
describe the boundaries of the land by either:
         (a)   Metes and bounds, or
         (b)   Lot and block number, if there is a recorded map or plat;
      (3)   To permit the City Secretary to verify the petition, the petition
of a corporate owner must be accompanied by the following:
         (a)   Date of birth of the signor;
         (b)   Personal residence address of the signor;
         (c)   Business entity’s certificate of good standing from the Texas
Secretary of State;
         (d)   Business entity’s articles of incorporation, certificate of
formation, partnership agreement, or other corporate formation document;
         (e)   Business entity’s bylaws; and
         (f)   Resolution of the business entity authorizing the petition for
release be executed and filed by the entity representative; and
      (4)   The petition must be accompanied by a fee of $300. The petition
shall not be deemed complete or filed, and shall not be processed, without
payment of such fee.
   (C)   Upon receipt of a filed petition, the city must verify the petition.
The city shall notify the resident and landowners of the area described by the
petition of its results. This may be satisfied by notifying the party who filed
the petition.
   (D)   If the petition for release contains the requisite number of
signatures, the city shall release the area from its extraterritorial
jurisdiction by the later of the forty-fifth day after the date the petition
was filed or the next meeting of the city council that occurs after the
thirtieth date after the petition was filed.
   (E)   If the resident or landowner submits a verified petition to hold an
election for release, the city may either:
      (1)   Voluntarily release the area for which the election is to be held
from the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction before the date on which the
election would have been held; or
      (2)   Order an election for release, which must comply with the Tex.
Election Code and Tex. Local Gov’t Code Ch. 42, as amended.
   (F)   This section does not apply to the following properties in the
extraterritorial jurisdiction:
      (1)   In an area designated as an Industrial District under Tex. Local
Gov’t Code § 42.044, as amended;
      (2)   In an area subject to a strategic partnership agreement with the
city; or
      (3)   Any other exceptions to release of an area by petition of a
landowner or resident as described by Tex. Local Gov’t Code Ch 42.
(Ord. OR-2356-24, passed 4-8-24)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS
      
II.   CONTRACTS
      
III.   FRANCHISES
      
IV.   VACATIONS
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date     Description
         Passed
1133     11-11-96 Annexing a tract of land in the M. W. Davenport Survey
                  Abstract No. 432, Ellis County, Texas.
1347     4-23-01  Annexing 0.726 acres situated in the eastern right-of-way of
                  Warren Road, Tarrant County, Texas.
OR-1987- 12-16-15 Annexing 158 acres situated in Johnson County described and
15                depicted in Exhibit “A” of Ord. OR-1987-15.
OR-2120- 3-25-19  Annexing 25.02 acres situated in Johnson County as described
19                and depicted in Exhibit “A” of Ord. OR-2120-19.
OR-2222-          Annexing approximately 58.628 acres situated in Johnson
21       10-11-21 County as described and depicted in Exhibit "A" of Ord. OR-
                  2222-21.
                 
 
TABLE II: CONTRACTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.   Date Passed Description
                       Authorizing the city to enter into a contract to lease
1199       3-23-98     the facility located at 103 West Broad Street to
                       Woodhaven National Bank.
                       Authorizing the sale of certain real property located at
1569       4-10-06     the northeast corner of Highway 287 and Broad Street to
                       DCB Properties, Ltd.
                       Authorizing contracts of sale to Fort Worth Area Habitat
1656       12-10-07    for Humanity, Inc. and the Historic West Mansfield
                       Community Development Corporation to construct new,
                       affordable single-family housing in the city.
                       Authorizing contract of sale to Fort Worth Area Habitat
OR-1702-08 8-11-08     for Humanity, Inc. to construct new, affordable single-
                       family housing in the city.
                       Authorizing contract of sale to Fort Worth Area Habitat
OR-1745-09 6-8-09      for Humanity, Inc. to construct new affordable single-
                       family housing in the city.
                       Authorizing contract of sale to Fort Worth Area Habitat
OR-1747-09 6-8-09      for Humanity, Inc. to construct new affordable single-
                       family housing in the city.
                       Authorizing a boundary agreement between the City of
OR-1847-12 10-22-12    Mansfield and the City of Grand Prairie releasing and
                       accepting corporate limits.
                       Authorizing a contract of sale to Fort Worth Area
OR-1851-12 11-12-12    Habitat for Humanity, Inc., to construct new affordable
                       single-family housing in the city.
                       Authorizing the execution of a gas lease agreement
OR-1852-12 11-12-12    between the city and XTO Energy for city-owned property
                       located at 2464 Callender Road.
                       Authorizing the conveyance of legal interests acquired
OR-1860-12 12-10-12    due to tax delinquency in certain real property located
                       at 2464 Callender Road.
                       Authorizing the conveyance of certain real property
OR-1865-13 1-14-13     commonly known as the Station House at 100 East Broad
                       Street to Mellow Mushroom Three Peat Inc.
                       Authorizing the conveyance of certain real property
OR-1869-13 3-18-13     located at 528 Patterson Drive to Trinity Habitat for
                       Humanity.
                       Authorizing the execution of a gas lease agreement
OR-1880-13 7-22-13     between the city and Chesapeake Exploration, LLC, for
                       city-owned property located at 3100 East Broad Street.
OR-1889-13 11-25-13    Authorizing a lease agreement with Dallas MTA, L.P. d/b/
                       a Verizon Wireless.
                       Authorizing the sale of 10.588 acres of land located in
OR-1896-13 12-10-13    the Thomas J. Hanks survey, and including a portion of
                       Blocks 40 and 41 and a portion of Oak Street, to the
                       Mansfield Park Facilities Development Corporation.
                       Authorizing a development agreement and contract of sale
OR-1939-15 2-23-15     for the conveyance of 0.463 acres north of Alvarado
                       Street between First Avenue and Second Avenue to Posse
                       Construction LLC D/B/A Mansfield Custom Homes.
                       Authorizing the lease of certain real property located
OR-1945-15 4-15-15     at 110 S. Main Street and at 109 W. Broad Street to the
                       Historic Mansfield Performance Park for the purpose of
                       constructing and operating an outdoor amphitheater.
OR-1959-15 8-24-15     Approving a sports facility lease and operating
                       agreement.
OR-1997-16 2-8-16      Approving Mansfield Starcenter lease and operating
                       agreement.
OR-2015-16 8-22-16     Approving modification of Mansfield Starcenter lease and
                       operating agreement.
OR-2016-16 8-22-16     Authorizing the conveyance of approximately 4.22 acres
                       of city property to Shops at Broad, LLC.
                       Authorizing the conveyance of certain real property
OR-2077-18 1-22-18     located at 229 Cotton Drive to Trinity Habitat for
                       Humanity.
                       Approving the an agreement for waste disposal services
OR-2098-18 9-12-18     between the city and republic waste services of Texas,
                       ltd; authorizing the City Manager to execute all
                       documents necessary to complete the transaction.
                       Approving the sale of certain real property described as
                       Lot 18R1, Block 5, Hillcrest Addition, also known as 801
OR-2141-19 6-24-19     Stell Avenue, Lot 18R2, Block 5, Hillcrest Addition,
                       also known as 315 Mckown Drive, Lot 9, Block 7,
                       Hillcrest Addition also known as 416 Mckown Drive.
                       Granting authority to the City Manager to enter into and
OR-2417-25 8-25-25     sign certain contracts on behalf of the city; to make
                       certain budget transfers; and to administratively handle
                       certain matters.
                      
 
TABLE III: FRANCHISES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.   Date Passed Description
1178       9-22-97     Granting the Lone Star Gas Company a gas sales and
                       distribution franchise for a term of 20 years.
1205       5-26-98     Granting to Trinity Waste Services a waste disposal and
                       residential recycling collection franchise.
                       Granting consent to the transfer of control of a cable
1256       4-12-99     television system and franchise from Marcus Cable
                       Associates, L.L.C. to Paul G. Allen.
1443       9-8-03      Granting to Duncan Disposal a waste disposal and
                       residential recycling collection franchise.
1582       8-14-06     Amending Ordinance 1443.
OR-1705-08 8-25-08     Amending Ordinance 1443.
OR-1926-14 11-10-14    Granting to United Electric Cooperative Services an
                       electric power franchise.
OR-2042-17 4-10-17     Granting a gas franchise to SiENergy, L.P.
                       Renewing a franchise to construct, maintain, and operate
OR-2103-18 11-26-18    pipelines and equipment in the city granted Atmos Energy
                       Corporation, a Texas and Virginia Corporation.
OR-2320-23 9-11-23     Granting to Oncor Electric Delivery Company, LLC a non-
                       exclusive electric power franchise.
                      
 
TABLE IV: VACATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
1123  7-22-  Vacating and abandoning the 20 foot walkway right-of-way between Lots 9 and 10,
      96     Block 12, North Ridge Addition.
1146  2-10-  Vacating and abandoning a portion of the 30 foot right-of-way situated in the
      97     William C. Lowe Survey, Abstract 970.
1167  6-13-  Vacating and abandoning a portion of a utility easement on Lot 1, Block 41,
      97     Walnut Creek Valley, Section XIX.
1168  6-13-  Vacating and abandoning the former Bisbee Water Tower site.
      97
1192  2-9-98 Vacating and abandoning a utility easement relating to Lots 2 and 4, Walnut
             Creek Village.
1203  4-27-  Vacating and abandoning a portion of the right-of-way of the New Intermediate
      98     School South Addition.
1221  8-10-  Vacating and abandoning a utility easement within Lot 9, Block 7, Mansfield
      98     Country Estates, Section 5.
1222  8-10-  Vacating and abandoning a utility easement within Lot 1, Mansfield Town Center.
      98
1243  1-11-  Vacating and abandoning a portion of a utility easement on Lot 6, Block 2,
      99     Callender Hill.
1267  7-12-  Vacating and abandoning a portion of a utility easement relating to Lot 2-R,
      99     Block 11, Arbors of Creekwood, Phase 6.
      3-13-  Vacating and abandoning the right-of-way and easement in a 30 foot wide strip of
1308  00     land located in the Henry McGehee Survey, Abstract No. 998, Mansfield, Tarrant
             County, Texas.
1353  6-11-  Vacating and abandoning a portion of a utility easement relating to Lot 22R,
      01     Block 49, Walnut Creek Valley, Section XXI-C.
             Vacating and abandoning the right-of-way of Warren Road located in the J.M.
1357  7-9-01 Thomas Survey Abstract No. 1514 and the Henry McGehee Survey, Abstract No. 998,
             Mansfield, Tarrant County, Texas.
1360  7-23-  Vacating and abandoning a portion of an utility easement relating to Lot 6,
      01     Block 15, Hillcrest West Second Filing.
      8-27-  Vacating and abandoning a portion of the right-of-way of East Debbie Lane
1364  01     located in the Henry McGehee Survey, Abstract No. 998, Mansfield, Tarrant
             County, Texas.
1399  10-14- Vacating and abandoning a portion of an utility easement relating to Lot 5,
      02     Block 3, the Fairways of Walnut Creek, Section 3.
1400  10-14- Vacating and abandoning a portion of a drainage easement relating to Lot 114,
      02     Block 1, the villages of Spring Lake, Phase 1.
1412  12-9-  Vacating and abandoning a portion of an utility easement relating to Lot 53-A,
      02     Block 49, Walnut Creek Valley, Section 21-C.
1413  1-13-  Vacating and abandoning a portion of an utility easement relating to Lot 2A2,
      03     Block 48, Hillcrest Addition.
1438  6-23-  Vacating and abandoning the right-of-way and easement relating to Lot 22, Block
      03     16, Section VII, Phase Two Walnut Creek Valley.
1527  4-11-  Vacating and abandoning utility easement relating to Lots 5 through 9, Block 3,
      05     Strawberry Fields.
             Vacating and abandoning two right-of-ways relating to 0.174 acres of land
1535  5-9-05 located in the northwest corner of the intersection of F.M. 157 and Russell
             Lane.
1557  1-9-06 Vacating and abandoning a right-of- way easement, being approximately 12.77
             acres.
1561  2-13-  Vacating and abandoning a portion of the right-of-way of Ragland Road Extension.
      06
1562  2-27-  Vacating and abandoning a portion of a utility easement relating to Lot 5, Block
      06     1, McCampbell Estates.
1566  3-27-  Vacating and abandoning a utility easement relating to Lot 28, Block 4, Heritage
      06     Estates, Section 12.
1574  5-22-  Vacating and abandoning a portion of the right-of-way of the former County Road
      06     south of the Philip Thompson Soccer Complex.
1670  2-11-  Vacating and abandoning a portion of the north and west half of the Seeton Road
      08     right-of-way.
1671  2-11-  Vacating and abandoning a portion of the south and east half of the Seeton Road
      08     right-of-way.
1675  2-25-  Vacating and abandoning to the Texas Department of Transportation the right-of-
      08     way on a portion of the new F.M. 917.
OR-   4-27-  Vacating and abandoning a portion of the right-of-way of East Dallas Street
1767- 10     between Waxahachie Street and Graves Street.
10
OR-   6-10-  Vacating and abandoning a portion of a right-of-way along the south side of
1876- 13     Cannon Drive, east of Miller Road.
13
OR-   12-10- Vacating and abandoning a portion of a utility easement relating to Lot 9, Block
1897- 13     5, Twin Creeks addition.
13
OR-   1-28-  Vacating and abandoning a portion of Hospital Drive and declaring that such
1900- 14     property is unnecessary for use by the public.
14
OR-   12-9-  Vacating and abandoning a portion of drainage easement north of National Parkway
1935- 14     and east of S. Holland Rd.
14
OR-   12-9-  Vacating and abandoning a portion of a utility easement relating to Lot 7, Block
1936- 14     5, Twin City Creeks addition.
14
OR-          Vacating and abandoning a drainage easement relating to Plainco Properties, L.
1950- 6-8-15 P.
15
OR-   8-24-  Vacating and abandoning a portion of a utility easement relating to Lot 1, Block
1958- 15     1, Villas Di Lucca addition.
15
OR-
1996- 2-8-16 Vacating and abandoning a portion of the right-of-way along North Main Street.
16
OR-   10-26- Vacating and abandoning certain utility easements and drainage easements
2190- 20     relating to the M3 Ranch Addition.
20
OR-          Vacating and abandoning a 0.741 acre variable width drainage easement and a
2202- 2-8-21 1.630 acre variable width drainage easement in the Cresanto Vela Survey,
21           Abstract no. 851, City of Mansfield, Johnson County, Texas.
OR-   5-24-  Vacating and abandoning a 0.059 acre variable width drainage easement in the
2209- 21     Samuel C. Neill Survey, Abstract no. 1159, Tract 6A, City of Mansfield, Tarrant
21           County, Texas.
OR-   6-28-  Vacating and abandoning a portion of a right-of-way along House Road, and
2210- 21     reserving a public utility easement.
21
OR-   4-10-  Vacating and abandoning certain drainage easements relating to the Somerset
2292- 23     Addition.
23
OR-          Abandoning and vacating certain portions of a 30 foot easement for railroad spur
2302- 5-8-23 on property owned by the city and identified as Lot 1, Blk 50, Hillcrest
23           Addition, Ninth Installment.
             Authorizing the vacating, abandonment and conveyance of an approximate 10-foot
OR-          sanitary sewer easement located on an approximate 11.49 acre tract of land
2403- 1-13-  within the Thos. J. Hanks Survey, Abstract 644, Tarrant County, and located
25    25     within the Retta Estates Subdivision (Volume 3483, Page 19 DRTCT), such sanitary
             sewer easement being identified as “right-of-way easement” and recorded at
             Volume 7290, Pages 68 and 69 of the Tarrant County Land Records.
             Authorizing the vacating and abandoning of a portion of Bludworth Road right-of-
OR-   7-28-  way, declaring that such property is unnecessary for use by the public;
2413- 25     authorizing the City Manager or designee of the City of Mansfield, Texas, to
25           execute a quitclaim deed releasing public interest or control of said right-of-
             way.
             Vacating and abandoning a portion of right-of-way along Ellis Street, and
OR-   12-8-  drainage easement along Ambrose Parkway, declaring that such property is
2430- 25     unnecessary for use by the public; authorizing the Mayor of the City of
25           Mansfield, Texas, to execute a quitclaim deed releasing public ownership
             interest or control of said right-of-way.
             Vacating and abandoning a 2.5-foot wide portion of a 7.5-foot-wide utility
OR-   12-8-  easement within Lot 12, Block 3, the Fairways of Walnut Creek – Section Two,
2431- 25     City of Mansfield, Tarrant County, Texas; declaring that such property is
25           unnecessary for use by the public; authorizing the Mayor to execute a quitclaim
             deed.
            
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Texas Codes
References to 1978 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO TEXAS CODES
Administrative Code
Statutory Cite Code Section
Statutory Cite                                          Code Section
265.181 - 265.208                                       92.41
265.301 - 265.308                                       92.41
307.10                                                  52.18
Tit. 25, Ch. 228                                        94.01,
                                                        94.02
Tit. 25, § 228.2                                       94.04
Tit. 25, § 228.244                                     94.04
Tit. 25, § 229.661(b)(3)                               94.02
Tit. 25, Ch. 265                                        92.47
Tit. 25, Ch. 265, Subch. L                              92.42,
                                                        92.44
Tit. 25, Ch. 265, Subch. M                              92.42
Tit. 25, § 265.192                                     92.44
Tit. 26, Ch. 744                                        110.25
Tit. 26, Ch. 746                                        110.25
                                                        54.002,
Tit. 30, Part 1, Ch. 288, Subch. A, Rule 288.2          54.074,
                                                        Ch. 54, App. A
Tit. 30, Part 1, Ch. 288, Subch. A, Rule 288.2(a)(2)(B) 54.023
Tit. 30, Part 1, Ch. 288, Subch. B                   Ch. 54, App. C
Tit. 30, Ch. 312                                        115.003
Tit. 30, § 312.8                                       115.002
Tit. 30, § 312.44(j)(4)                                115.044
Tit. 30, § 330.3 (148)                                 50.01
Tit. 30, § 330.5                                       50.01
Tit. 30, Part 1, Ch. 344                                54.073
                                                        
 
Agricultural Code
 
Statutory Cite Code Section
Ch. 63         52.21
Ch. 75         52.21
Ch. 76         52.21
 
Business Organizations Code
 
Statutory Cite Code Section
1.008(d)       158.001
 
Code of Criminal Procedure
 
Statutory Cite Code Section
Art. 18.05     158.013
Art. 45.056    37.26
Ch. 62         130.09
Art. 102.017   37.20
102.0172       37.30
 
Elections Code
 
Statutory Cite Code Section
Ch. 277        159.01
 
Family Code
 
Statutory Cite    Code Section
51.12             110.27
141.042(d)        110.27
Ch. 264, Subch. B 130.09
                  
 
Health and Safety Code
Statutory Cite Code Section
Statutory Cite                           Code Section
Title 1, Ch. 1, §§ 1.005               92.41
Title 5, Subtitle A, Ch. 341, § 341.064 92.41
Title 5, Subtitle A, Ch. 341, § 341.064592.41
Title 5, Subtitle A, Ch. 341, § 341.069592.41
Title 9, Subtitle A, Ch. 757             92.41
Ch. 242                                  158.001,
                                         158.014
Ch. 247                                  158.001,
                                         158.014
262.001                                  32.15,
                                         32.16
341.013                                  92.04
341.082                                  92.07
342.006 - 342.007                        92.07
361.001 et seq.                          71.27
365.012                                  92.03
371.024                                  52.21
437.020                                  94.20
Art. 481.134                             130.09,
                                         130.10
Ch. 534, Subch. A                        158.001
751.001 et seq.                          98.30
Ch. 757                                  92.44
Ch. 792                                  158.013
822.0422                                 90.56
Ch. 823                                  90.50
Ch. 826                                  90.02,
                                         96.29
826.021                                  96.29
                                         
 
Human Resources Code
 
Statutory Cite                    Code Section
Tit. 2, Subt. D, Ch. 42, Subch. A 110.27
42.002(11), (12)                  110.27
Ch. 123                           158.001
 
Government Code
Statutory Cite Code Section
Statutory Cite  Code Section
Ch. 30          37.02
30.00005        37.02
30.00014        90.63
418.001 et seq. 36.02
551.001 et seq. 96.37
615.071 et seq. 34.04
851.001 et seq. 30.01
 
Local Government Code
Statutory Cite Code Section
Statutory Cite                       Code Section
Ch. 9                                Adopting Ordinance
22.042                               34.15
Ch. 42                            159.01
42.044                               159.01
53.001                               Adopting Ordinance
53.001(b)                            Adopting Ordinance
53.002                               Adopting Ordinance
Ch. 54, subc. B                      37.02,
                                     52.99
54.001                               10.99
54.012 through 54.020                158.031
54.012(5)                            52.99
54.016                               158.031
54.017                               158.031
134.151                              37.35
Ch. 171                              30.41
171.002                              30.41
171.004                              30.45
Ch. 176                              30.45
Ch. 201                              31.04
201.001 et seq.                      31.03
203.023                              31.04
211.011                              158.014
Ch. 214                              150.011
Ch. 214, subc. A                     37.02
215.072                              37.02
217.042                              37.02
331.001                              Ch. 96
341.903                              37.02
362.002                              34.15
                                     153.03,
Ch. 395                              153.04,
                                     153.07 -
                                     153.12
395.014(a)(7)                        153.10
395.015                              153.10
Ch. 402                              53.10
Ch. 402, subc. C                     53.01
Ch. 402, subc. C, §§ 402.041 et seq53.02
551.002                              37.02
Ch. 552                              53.10
Ch. 552, subc. C                     53.05
552.050                              53.08
 
Occupational Code
 
Statutory Cite   Code Section
Ch. 1702         90.70
2104.001 et seq. 98.30
Ch. 2308         72.24
 
Parks and Wildlife Code
 
Statutory Cite Code Section
31.055         93.01
 
Penal Code
Statutory Cite Code Section
Statutory Cite Code Section
Ch. 21         112.22
21.01          112.26
Ch. 22         112.22
Ch. 25         112.22
28.02          33.01
28.03          96.21,
               130.03
31.03          90.15
42.03          71.01,
               98.01
               90.06,
42.09          90.22,
               96.23
Ch. 43         112.22
43.23          130.22
46.05          130.04
 
Property Code
 
Statutory Cite Code Section
71.001 et seq. 34.55
92.020         158.020
 
Revised Civil Statutes
 
Statutory Cite Code Section
1028           Ch. 38
1029           Ch. 38
1041           Ch. 38
1175(18)       98.01
6243-101       150.001 
9102           156.06
 
Tax Code
Statutory Cite Code Section
Statutory Cite  Code Section
11.253          38.015
Ch. 23, subc. B 38.015
152.001         158.001
156.001(a)      158.001
Ch. 321         38.01
Subc. 351       38.20
351.002         38.15
352.003         38.15
351.005         38.20
                
 
Texas Constitution
 
Statutory Cite Code Section
Art. XI, § 5  Adopting Ordinance,
               53.02
 
Transportation Code
Statutory Cite Code Section
Statutory Cite    Code Section
504.201           72.24
504.202           72.24
545.356           71.04
550.026           70.02
550.067           70.02
621.303           71.25
623.163           71.27
Ch. 681           72.24
681.009           72.24
681.009(b)        72.24,
                  155.099
681.011           72.24
681.0011(f)       72.24
Ch. 683           93.10
Ch. 683, Subch. E 37.02
683.071           92.01
 
Utility Code
 
Statutory Cite Code Section
Title 2        Ch. 51
 
Water Code
 
Statutory Cite Code Section
11.039         Ch. 54, App. C
13.315         151.01
26.121         52.99
26.123(a)      52.99
26.124         52.99
 
REFERENCES TO 1978 CODE
1978 Code Section 2001 Code Section
1978 Code Section 2001 Code Section
1-2               10.18
1-5(part)         10.05
2-1               34.15
2-2               34.16
2-3               34.17
2-4               34.18
2-10              31.01
2-11              31.01
2-12              31.02
2-13              31.03
2-14              31.04
2-16              31.06
2-17              31.04
2-18              31.07
2-19              31.08
2-20              31.08
2-21              31.09
2-23              31.10,
                  31.11
2-24              31.12
2-25              31.13
2.5-1             112.01
2.5-2             112.02
2.5-3             112.03
2.5-20            112.04
2.5-21            112.05
2.5-30            112.20
2.5-31            112.21
2.5-32            112.22
2.5-33            112.23
2.5-34            112.24
2.5-35            112.25
2.5-36            112.26
2.5-37            112.27
2.5-38            112.28
2.5-41            112.40
2.5-42            112.41
2.5-43            112.42
2.5-44            112.43
2.5-45            112.44
2.5-50            112.99
2.5-51            112.06
3-1               130.20
3-2               130.21
3-3               130.22
4-1               130.01
6-30              150.040
6-31              150.041
6-32              150.042
6-33              150.043
6-34              150.044
6-35              150.045
6-36              150.046
6-37              150.047
6-38              150.048
6-39              150.049
6-40(a)           150.050
6-40(b)           150.099
6-50              150.002
6-54              150.003
6-82              150.001
6-95              150.020
6-96              150.021
6-97              150.022
6-98              150.023
6-99              150.024
6-100             150.026
6-101             150.027
6-102             150.028
6-103             150.029
7-1               36.01
7-2               36.02
7-3               36.03
7-4               36.04
7-5               36.05
7-6               36.06
7-7               36.07
7-8(a)            36.08
7-8(d)            36.99
8-1               33.01
8-2               33.02
8-3               33.02
8-20              33.15
8-21              33.16
8-22              33.17
8-23              33.18
8-24              33.19
8-25              33.20
8-26              33.21
8-27              91.01
8-28              91.02
8-29              91.03
8-31              91.04
8-40              91.15
8-41              91.16
8-42              91.17
8-43              91.18
8-44              91.19
8-45              91.20
8-49              91.99
9-1               92.02
9-2               92.02
9-3               130.07
9-4               130.07
9-5(a)            32.15
9-5(c)            32.16
9-20              92.01
9-21              92.03
9-22              92.04
9-27              92.06
9-28              92.07
9-29              92.08
9-30              92.09
9-47              92.99
9-81              92.20
9-82              92.21
9-83              92.22
9-84              92.23
9-85              92.25
9-88              92.40
9-89              92.41
9-90              92.42
9-91              92.43
9-92              92.44
9-94.1            92.48
9-95              92.49
9.5-11            95.01
9.5-12            95.02
9.5-13            95.03
9.5-14            95.04
9.5-21            95.15
9.5-31            95.16
9.5-32            95.17
9.5-33            95.18
9.5-34            95.19
9.9-1             37.01
9.9-2             37.02
9.9-3             37.03
9.9-4             37.04
9.9-5             37.05
9.9-6             37.06
10-30             110.45
10-31             110.46
10-32             110.47
10-33             110.48
10-40             110.10
10-41             110.11
10-42             110.99
10-50             110.25
10-51             110.26
10-52             110.27
10-53             110.28
10-54             110.29
10-55             110.27
10-56             110.30
10-57             110.31
10-58             110.35
10-60             38.15
10-61             38.16
10-61             38.17
10-63             38.18
10-64             38.19
10-65             38.21
10-80             98.50
10-81             98.51
10-82             98.52
10-83             98.53
10-84             98.54
10-85             98.55
10-90             110.01
11-1              130.02
11-2              130.02
11-3              130.03
11-4              130.04
11-20             98.30
11-21             98.31
11-22             98.32
11-23             98.33
11-24             98.34
11-25             98.35
11-26             98.36
11-27             98.37
11-36             130.35
11-37             130.37
11-38             130.38
11-39             130.36
11-51             130.05
11-61             130.06
11-70             130.50
11-71             130.51
11-72             130.52
11-73             130.53
11-74             130.54
11-75             130.55
12-1              96.01
12-3              96.37
12-4              96.37
12-5              96.37
12-6              96.37
12-7              96.36
12-8              96.35
12-9              96.20
12-10             96.21
12-11             96.22
12-13             96.24
12-14             96.25
12-21             96.02
12-22             96.03
12-23             96.04
12-24             96.05
13-50             30.15
13-51             30.16
13-52             30.17
13-53             30.18
13-54             30.19
13-55             30.20
13-56             30.21
13-57             30.22
13-58             30.23
13-59             30.24
13-60             30.25
13-61             30.26
13-62             30.27
13-63             30.30
13-64             30.28
13-65             30.29
13.5-11           34.30
13.5-12           34.31
13.5-13           34.32
13.5-14           34.33
13.5-15           34.34
13.5-16           34.35
13.5-17           34.36
13.5-26           34.50
13.5-27           34.51
13.5-28           34.52
13.5-29           34.53
13.5-30           34.54
13.5-31           34.55
13.5-36           34.01
13.5-37           34.02
13.5-38           34.03
13.5-39           34.04
14-1              38.02
14-2              38.03
14-3              38.04
14-4              38.05
15-1              98.01
15-2              98.15
15-3              98.16
15-4              98.17
15-5              98.18
15-6              98.18
15-7              98.02
16-1              70.01
16-2              71.01
16-3              70.02
16-4(part)        71.04
16-4(a)           Ch. 73, Sch. I
16-4(b)           Ch. 73, Sch. I
16-5              72.01
16-6              72.02
16-7              71.02
16-9              71.03
16-20             71.20
16-21             71.21
16-22             71.22
16-23(d)          71.23
16-23(e)          71.24
16-24             71.25
16-25             71.26
16-26             71.27
16-27             71.28
16-28             71.29
16-29             71.30
16-40             72.15
16-41             72.16
16-42             72.16
16-43             72.17
16-44             72.18
16-45             72.19
16-46             72.20
16-56             70.15
16-57             70.16
16-58             70.17
16-59             70.18
16-60             70.19
16-61             70.20
16-62             70.20
17-1              51.050
17-2              51.051
17-2.1            51.001
17-3              51.002
17-4              51.052
17-5              51.053
17-6(part)        51.054
17-7              33.35
17-8              33.36
17-9              33.37
17-10             33.38
17-38             51.055
17-38.1           51.056
17-44             51.999
17-71             51.070
17-72             51.071
17-73             51.072
17-74             51.073
17-75             51.074
17-76             51.075
17-77             51.078
17-78             51.079
17-79             51.076
17-80             51.077
17-81             51.080
17-82             51.081
17-83             51.082
17-84(a)          51.083
17-84(b)          51.999
17-85             51.095
17-86             51.096
17-87             51.097
17-88             51.098
17-89             51.099
17-90             51.100
17-91             51.101
17-92             51.102
17-93             51.103
18-20             113.26
18-21             113.26
18-22             113.25
18-23             113.27
18-24             113.28
18-25             113.29
18-26             113.30
18-27             113.31
18-28             113.32
18-29             113.33
18-30             113.34
18-31             113.35
18-32             113.36
18-33             113.37
18-34             113.38
18-35             113.39
18-36             113.40
18-37             113.41
18-38             113.42
18-50             113.01
18-51             113.02
18-52             113.02
18-53             113.03
18-54             113.04
18-55             113.05
18-56             113.06
18-57             113.07
18-58             113.08
18-59             113.09
18-60             113.99
                  
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.      Date Passed Code Section
21            6-10-47     70.02,
                          72.01
109           5-27-58     130.01
113           7-8-58      92.03
                          92.02,
122           8-1-59      92.04,
                          92.09
131           4-11-61     96.21
134           5-9-61      71.02
142           6-26-62     71.04,
                          Ch. 73, Sch. I
                          92.05,
144           8-14-62     92.07,
                          98.01
146           9-11-62     72.02
148           11-13-62    33.01
153           4-23-63     72.02
154           6-11-63     92.01
                          150.040 -
163           2-13-64     150.050,
                          150.099
168           6-22-64     72.01
170           7-28-64     130.07
175           1-26-65     130.03
                          71.20,
182           10-12-65    71.22 -
                          71.30
163A          3-22-66     150.044
168A          5-24-66     72.01
207           10-22-68    92.01,
                          92.03
209           2-11-69     38.02 -
                          38.04
213           5-13-69     154.01
219           4-14-70     71.04,
                          Ch. 73, Sch. I
235           10-12-71    33.15
                          33.16 -
235           10-12-71    33.21,
                          91.01 -
                          91.04
248           9-12-72     71.04,
                          Ch. 73, Sch. I
251           10-24-72    150.002,
                          150.003
255           10-24-72    130.02
257           3-27-73     92.01,
                          92.99
277           5-14-74     150.001
280           7-9-74      51.053
293           12-23-74    155.01
303           5-27-75     71.04,
                          Ch. 73, Sch. I
304           7-8-75      71.04,
                          Ch. 73, Sch. I
305           7-22-75     51.051
311           10-28-75    71.04,
                          Ch. 73, Sch. I
317           10-25-76    30.01
318           10-25-76    30.01
                          96.01,
                          96.20 -
319           11-22-76    96.22,
                          96.35 -
                          96.37
323           2-28-77     51.052
324           2-28-77     51.054
327           3-28-77     110.45 -
                          110.48
                           
328           6-13-77     51.055,
                          51.999
342           12-12-77    72.15 -
                          72.20
343           12-12-77    72.16
343           1-10-78     30.01
352           4-4-78      32.15,
                          32.16
353           4-24-78     51.050,
                          51.051
356           6-12-78     51.056
361           9-19-78     51.052
362           9-19-78     51.054
373           12-11-78    33.35,
                          33.36
376           1-22-79     51.002
396           10-8-79     33.36
398           10-22-79    30.01
                          91.10,
401           12-17-79    91.16 -
                          91.20,
                          91.99
435           1-12-80     51.052
402           1-28-80     34.50 -
                          34.55
403           2-11-80     96.24
408           4-28-80     70.15 -
                          70.20
420           7-28-80     34.30 -
                          34.36
422           8-11-80     130.07
426           9-15-80     51.052
427           9-15-80     51.054
432           12-8-80     95.01 -
                          95.04
433           12-23-80    30.01
434           12-23-80    30.01
444           7-13-81     71.03
446           8-12-81     71.04,
                          Ch. 73, Sch. I
462           4-26-82     34.33,
                          34.35
464           5-10-82     70.01,
                          71.01
465           5-10-82     92.99
473           9-15-82     51.052
474           9-15-82     51.054
480           12-13-82    72.15,
                          72.19
484           1-24-83     130.35 -
                          130.38
                          91.10,
487           4-11-83     91.16 -
                          91.20,
                          91.99
491           4-25-83     150.002
493           5-9-83      98.02
                          71.20 -
498           7-11-83     71.24,
                          71.27
500           8-1-83      130.01
                          51.999,
                          91.99,
519           11-28-83    92.99,
                          150.050,
                          150.099
528           3-26-84     95.03
537           5-31-84     38.05
568           10-8-84     51.052
571           10-22-84    51.054
                          110.10,
603           4-22-85     110.11,
                          110.99
615           6-24-85     33.02
617           7-8-85      71.04,
                          Ch. 73, Sch. I
627           8-26-85     71.04,
                          Ch. 73, Sch. I
629           9-9-85      51.052
630           9-9-85      51.054
                          38.15 -
634           9-23-85     38.19,
                          38.21
656           12-9-85     30.01
                          155.001 -
                          155.005,
                          155.010 -
                          155.012,
                          155.020 -
                          155.024,
                          155.030 -
                          155.050,
671           4-15-86     155.052 -
                          155.056,
                          155.065 -
                          155.070,
                          155.080 -
                          155.083,
                          155.090 -
                          155.102,
                          155.110 -
                          155.117
680           6-9-86      71.04,
                          Ch. 73, Sch. I
685           7-28-86     51.052
686           7-28-86     51.054
695           9-22-86     92.01,
                          92.99
699           10-13-86    92.05,
                          92.07
                          33.35,
703           11-10-86    33.36 -
                          33.38
704           11-10-86    113.42
705           11-10-86    98.50 -
                          98.55
709           11-24-86    71.27
715           12-8-86     30.01
740           5-13-87     110.01
                          92.20 -
741           5-19-87     92.23,
                          92.25,
                          92.99
                          113.01 -
754           9-14-87     113.09,
                          113.99
                          36.01 -
758           11-23-87    36.08,
                          36.99
760           12-14-87    30.01
761           12-14-87    30.01
762           12-14-87    96.25
                          51.070 -
763           12-28-87    51.083,
                          51.999
                          110.25 -
767           2-8-88      110.31,
                          110.35
771           3-14-88     96.24
                          38.21,
                          51.999,
773           4-11-88     91.99,
                          92.99,
                          150.050,
                          150.099
791           9-12-88     51.052
794           9-26-88     96.22
800           10-24-88    30.01
815           12-12-88    30.01
832           5-8-89      71.04,
                          Ch. 73, Sch. I
                          92.01,
843           8-28-89     92.03,
                          92.04,
                          92.99
844           8-28-89     71.04,
                          Ch. 73, Sch. I
851           9-25-89     51.052
852           9-25-89     51.054
854           11-13-89    30.01
856           11-27-89    71.04,
                          Ch. 73, Sch. I
858           3-12-90     Ch. 73, Sch. I
                          91.10,
862           4-23-90     91.16 -
                          91.19,
                          91.99
867           6-12-90     34.01 -
                          34.04
869           6-13-90     51.095 -
                          51.102
                          92.40  -
                          92.44 ,
879           10-22-90    92.48 ,
                          92.49 ,
                          92.99
882           11-26-90    30.01
                          31.01 -
886           12-11-90    31.04,
                          31.06 -
                          31.13
887           12-11-90    130.05
888           12-11-90    130.06
896           4-22-91     71.20 -
                          71.24
900           8-12-91     34.34,
                          34.35
903           9-4-91      71.04,
                          Ch. 73, Sch. I
905           9-23-91     92.05,
                          92.07
909           11-12-91    30.01
922           1-27-92     92.99
925           2-24-92     30.01
858           3-12-92     71.04
931           3-23-92     150.002,
                          150.003
                          91.10,
                          91.16,
933           3-23-92     91.18,
                          91.19,
                          91.99
938           8-10-92     51.054
949           2-8-93      51.001
952           2-8-93      51.052
953           2-8-93      51.054
954           3-8-93      91.18,
                          91.99
958           4-26-93     96.02 -
                          96.05
                          112.01 -
                          112.06,
                          112.20 -
969           8-9-93      112.28,
                          112.40 -
                          112.44,
                          112.99
981           9-27-93     71.04,
                          Ch. 73, Sch. I
                          30.15 -
                          30.24,
989           1-24-94     30.26,
                          30.28 -
                          30.30
997           3-28-94     71.04,
                          Ch. 73, Sch. I
1023          9-26-94     71.04,
                          Ch. 73, Sch. I
1063          1-23-95     71.04,
                          Ch. 73, Sch. I
                          51.097 -
1078          6-12-95     51.100,
                          51.103
1083          7-10-95     95.15 -
                          95.19
1086          7-24-95     37.01 -
                          37.06
1089          9-11-95     152.01
1098          10-23-95    71.04,
                          Ch. 73, Sch. I
                          53.01,
1103          11-27-95    53.02,
                          53.04,
                          53.06
1108          1-22-96     113.25 -
                          113.41
1113          3-11-96     130.50 -
                          130.55
                          150.020 -
1118          4-8-96      150.024,
                          150.026 -
                          150.029
1132          10-28-96    32.01 -
                          32.05
1144          1-13-97     150.025
1151          3-10-97     38.01
1170          6-23-97     155.01
1174          8-25-97     150.002,
                          150.003
1182          11-10-97    155.01
1186          1-12-98     Ch. 73, Sch. I
                          93.01 -
                          93.08,
1187          1-26-98     93.10,
                          93.12,
                          93.13,
                          93.99
                          35.01 -
1197          3-9-98      35.14,
                          35.99
1213          7-13-98     51.097 -
                          51.100
                          99.01 -
                          99.03,
                          99.15 -
                          99.18,
1220          7-27-98     99.30 -
                          99.40,
                          99.50 -
                          99.54,
                          99.98,
                          99.99, Ch. 99, Apps. C - E
1223          9-14-98     Ch. 73, Sch. I
1236          11-9-98     33.36 -
                          33.38
1247          2-22-99     91.05
1251          3-22-99     31.01,
                          31.09
1265          7-13-99     130.01,
                          130.99
                          150.060 -
1272          8-23-99     150.063,
                          150.099
1280          9-27-99     30.01
1281          9-27-99     150.010
                          153.01 -
                          153.12,
1293          12-14-99    153.25 -
                          153.31,
                          153.45 -
                          153.51
                          92.20 -
1309          4-10-00     92.27,
                          92.99
                          110.25 -
1346          4-23-01     110.31,
                          110.35
1356          7-2-01      155.01
1357          7-9-01      T.S.O. IV
1358          7-9-01      33.36
1360          7-23-01     T.S.O. IV
1364          8-27-01     T.S.O. IV
1365          8-27-01     51.097 -
                          51.100
1369          9-24-01     Adopting Ordinance
                          92.01,
                          92.05,
                          92.06,
1372          10-8-01     93.01,
                          93.03 -
                          93.13,
                          93.99
                          150.002,
1379          12-10-01    150.004,
                          150.005
1390          6-24-02     Ch. 73, Sch. I
1391          6-24-02     Ch. 73, Sch. I
1394          8-12-02     Ch. 73, Sch. I
1396          9-9-02      Ch. 73, Sch. I
1399          10-14-02    T.S.O. IV
1400          10-14-02    T.S.O. IV
1403          10-14-02    155.01
1412          12-9-02     T.S.O. IV
1413          1-13-03     T.S.O. IV
1415          2-10-03     155.01
1421          4-14-03     156.01 -
                          156.09
                          51.010 -
                          51.020,
1424          4-28-03     51.022,
                          51.024,
                          51.055,
                          51.999
1429          6-9-03      53.05 -
                          53.09
                          91.01 -
                          91.05,
1430          6-23-03     91.15 -
                          91.26,
                          91.99
1431          6-23-03     150.008
1432          6-23-03     150.010
1433          6-23-03     150.009
1434          6-23-03     150.007
1435          6-23-03     150.002 
1436          6-23-03     150.004
1437          6-23-03     150.006,
                          150.099
1438          6-23-03     T.S.O. IV
1443          9-8-03      T.S.O. III
1451          10-13-03    130.08,
                          130.99
1452          10-13-03    Ch. 73, Sched. I
1456          10-27-03    72.01
1465          12-8-03     Ch. 73, Sched. I
1466          12-8-03     30.40 -
                          30.50
1472          1-29-04     98.03
                          112.03,
                          112.23,
1486          7-12-04     112.25,
                          112.26,
                          112.40 -
                          112.47
1490          7-26-04     130.01
1492          8-9-04      Ch. 73, Sch. I
1502          10-25-04    Ch. 73, Sch. I
                          153.07 -
1509          11-27-04    153.12,
                          153.25,
                          153.26
1524          3-14-05     Ch. 73, Sch. I
1525          3-14-05     Ch. 73, Sch. I
1527          4-11-05     T.S.O. IV
1528          4-11-05     95.03
1535          5-9-05      T.S.O. IV
1492          8-9-04      Ch. 73, Sch. I
1544          10-10-05    91.19
1557          1-9-06      T.S.O. IV
1559          2-13-06     51.052
1560          1-9-06      51.054
1561          2-13-06     T.S.O. IV
1562          2-27-06     T.S.O. IV
1566          2-27-06     T.S.O. IV
1569          4-10-06     T.S.O. II
1574          5-22-06     T.S.O. IV
1582          8-14-06     T.S.O. III
                          51.095,
                          51.097 -
1587          8-29-06     51.100,
                          51.104,
                          51.105
                          112.01 -
                          112.06,
                          112.20 -
                          112.28,
1597          10-23-06    112.40-
                          112.50,
                          112.60,
                          112.61,
                          112.99
                          71.20,
1600          11-27-06    71.23,
                          71.28
1623          6-11-07     Ch. 73, Sch. I
1636          8-27-07     Ch. 73, Sch. I
1640          9-10-07     Ch. 73, Sch. I
1641          9-10-07     Ch. 73, Sch. I
1642          9-10-07     Ch. 73, Sch. I
1656          12-10-07    T.S.O. II
1657          12-10-07    38.015
1658          12-10-07    Ch. 73, Sch. I
1667          1-28-08     33.36,
                          33.38
1670          2-11-08     T.S.O. IV
1671          2-11-08     T.S.O. IV
1675          2-11-08     T.S.O. IV
                          52.01 -
                          52.06,
                          52.15 -
                          52.25,
1680          3-10-08     52.35 -
                          52.41,
                          52.50 -
                          52.55,
                          52.99
1688          4-28-08     130.09 -
                          130.11
OR-1702-08    8-11-08     T.S.O. II
OR-1705-08    8-25-08     T.S.O. III
OR-1706-08    8-25-08     Ch. 73, Sch. I
OR-1713-08    10-27-08    150.008
OR-1714-08    10-27-08    150.003
OR-1715-08    10-27-08    150.002
OR-1716-08    10-27-08    150.005
OR-1718-08    10-27-08    150.007
OR-1719-08    10-27-08    150.009
OR-1720-08    10-27-08    150.010
OR-1721-08    10-27-08    150.012
OR-1722-08    10-27-08    150.004
OR-1734-09    2-9-09      51.054
OR-1735-09    2-9-09      51.052
                          92.20 -
OR-1737-09    2-9-09      92.27,
                          92.99
                          91.01 -
                          91.05,
OR-1740-09    4-13-09     91.15 -
                          91.26,
                          91.99
OR-1742-09    5-11-09     51.011
OR-1745-09    6-8-09      T.S.O. II
OR-1747-09    8-10-09     T.S.O. II
OR-1750-09    9-1-09      Ch. 73
                          153.07 -
OR-1757-09    11-23-09    153.10,
                          153.25 -
                          153.27
OR-1758-09    12-14-09    51.052
OR-1759-09    12-14-09    51.054
                          51.073,
                          51.075,
OR-1760-09    12-14-09    51.076,
                          51.079,
                          51.081
OR-1767-10    4-27-10     T.S.O. IV
                          92.20,
OR-1773-10    6-28-10     92.28 -
                          92.33
                          97.01 -
OR-1775-10    8-9-10      97.12,
                          97.99,
                          Ch. 97, App. A
OR-1779-10    8-23-10     Ch. 73, Sch. I
OR-1781-10    8-30-10     51.052
OR-1782-10    8-30-10     51.054
                          99.03,
                          99.18,
                          99.33,
OR-1785-10    9-13-10     99.35,
                          99.37,
                          99.39,
                          99.99,
                          Ch. 99, App. C
OR-1786-10    10-11-10    Ch. 73, Sch. I
                          90.01 -
                          90.25,
OR-1787-10    10-11-10    90.35 -
                          90.39,
                          90.50,
                          90.99
OR-1789-10    10-11-10    Ch. 73, Sch. I
                          97.01 -
OR-1790-10    11-8-10     97.12,
                          97.99,
                          Ch. 97, App. A
OR-1799-11    3-21-11     53.05 -
                          53.09
OR-1804-11    4-11-11     150.005
                          90.06,
OR-1805-11    6-27-11     90.23.1,
                          90.99
OR-1810-11    8-1-11      Ch. 73, Sch. I
                          51.097,
OR-1811-11    8-8-11      51.098,
                          51.099,
                          51.100
                          95.01 -
OR-1818-11    9-26-11     95.04,
                          95.15 -
                          95.19
OR-1820-11    11-28-11    38.015
OR-1821-11    11-28-11    30.01
                          53.03,
OP-1829-12    1-9-12      53.06 -
                          53.08,
                          53.10
OR-1831-12    2-27-12     34.02
OR-1837-12    6-11-12     98.04
OR-1838-12    7-23-12     Ch. 73, Sch. I
OR-1839-12    9-10-12     51.052
OR-1840-12    9-10-12     51.054
OR-1844-12    9-24-12     33.36
OR-1847-12    10-22-12    T.S.O. II
OR-1851-12    11-12-12    T.S.O. II
OR-1852-12    11-12-12    T.S.O. II
OR-1860-12    12-10-12    T.S.O. II
OR-1865-13    1-14-13     T.S.O. II
OR-1869-13    3-18-13     T.S.O. II
                          151.01 -
                          151.13,
                          151.25 -
OR-1871-13    4-8-13      151.28,
                          151.40 -
                          151.44,
                          151.99
OR-1876-13    6-10-13     T.S.O. IV
                          96.01 -
                          96.06,
                          96.21,
OR-1877-13    6-24-13     96.22,
                          96.24,
                          96.25,
                          96.35 -
                          96.37
OR-1880-13    7-22-13     T.S.O. II
OR-1881-13    8-12-13     Ch. 73, Sch. I
OR-1889-13    11-25-13    T.S.O. II
OR-1896-13    12-10-13    T.S.O. II
OR-1897-13    12-10-13    T.S.O. IV
OR-1900-14    1-28-14     T.S.O. IV
                          92.20  -
                          92.22 ,
OR-1910-14    4-29-14     92.34 ,
                          92.35 ,
                          92.99
OR-1912-14    5-27-14     96.24
                          71.20 ,
OR-1918-14    9-8-14      71.23 ,
                          71.28
OR-1923-14    11-10-14    Ch. 73, Sch. I
                          50.01  -
                          50.10 ,
                          50.25  -
                          50.32 ,
OR-1924-14    11-10-14    50.45  -
                          50.49 ,
                          50.60  -
                          50.70 ,
                          50.85 ,
                          50.99
OR-1926-14    11-10-14    T.S.O. III
OR-1929-14    11-24-14    92.10
                          92.40  -
                          92.45,
OR-1930-14    11-24-14    92.47 -
                          92.49, 
                          92.99
OR-1935-14    12-9-14     T.S.O. IV
OR-1936-14    12-9-14     T.S.O. IV
OR-1939-15    2-23-15     T.S.O. II
                          114.01-
                          114.11,
                          114.12-
OR-1942-15    3-23-15     114.185,
                          114.19-
                          114.21,
                          114.99
OR-1945-15    4-15-15     T.S.O. II
OR-1950-15    6-8-15      T.S.O. IV
                          153.07-
OR-1955-15    7-27-15     153.11,
                          153.25-
                          153.27
OR-1956-15    8-10-15     Ch. 73, Sch. I
OR-1958-15    8-24-15     T.S.O. IV
OR-1959-15    8-24-15     T.S.O. II
OR-1960-15    9-8-15      Ch. 73, Sch. I
                          115.001-
                          115.003,
                          115.020-
OR-1969-15    9-28-15     115.023,
                          115.040-
                          115.045,
                          115.060,
                          115.999
OR-1970-15    10-12-15    Ch. 73, Sch. I
OR-1973-15    10-26-15    53.05
OR-1974-15    10-26-15    98.50 -
                          98.56
OR-1987-15    12-16-15    T.S.O. I
OR-1988-15    12-16-15    Ch. 73, Sch. I
OR-1996-16    2-8-16      T.S.O. IV
OR-1997-16    2-8-16      T.S.O. II
OR-2015-16    8-22-16     T.S.O. II
OR-2016-16    8-22-16     T.S.O. II
                          95.01 -
OR-2022-16    10-10-16    95.04,
                          95.15 -
                          95.19
OR-2034-17    2-13-17     Ch. 73, Sch. I
OR-2042-17    4-10-17     T.S.O. III
OR-2047-17    4-24-17     51.010 -
                          51.024
OR-2050-17    5-24-17     150.011
OR-2057-17    8-28-17     Ch. 73, Sch. I
OR-2058-17    9-7-17      93.01
OR-2059-17    9-7-17      92.05
OR-2060-17    9-7-17      92.04
OR-2063-17    9-11-17     150.011
OR-2077-18    1-22-18     T.S.O. II
OR-2092-18    8-27-18     71.23
OR-2097-18    9-12-18     150.020
OR-2098-18    9-12-18     T.S.O. II
OR-2100-18    10-22-18    Ch. 73, Sch. I
OR-2101-18    11-12-18    130.60 -
                          130.67
OR-2103-18    11-26-18    T.S.O. III
OR-2120-19    3-4-19      T.S.O. I
OR-2129-19    6-10-19     150.008
OR-2130-19    6-10-19     150.004
OR-2131-19    6-10-19     150.013
OR-2132-19    6-10-19     150.014
OR-2133-19    6-10-19     150.007
OR-2134-19    6-10-19     150.002
OR-2135-19    6-10-19     150.009
OR-2136-19    6-10-19     150.010
OR-2137-19    6-10-19     150.005
OR-2138-19    6-10-19     150.012
OR-2139-19    6-10-19     150.015
OR-2141-19    6-24-19     T.S.O. II
OR-2142-19    8-12-19     51.097 -
                          51.100
                          90.01,
                          90.02,
                          90.06 -
                          90.08,
OR-2143-19    8-26-19     90.11,
                          90.22 -
                          90.25,
                          90.37,
                          90.38,
                          90.99
OR-2146-19    9-9-19      38.30 -
                          38.37
OR-2153-19    10-28-19    Ch. 73, Sch. I
                          50.01,
OR-2155-2019  11-25-19    50.26,
                          50.27,
                          50.50
                          52.18,
OR-2156-2019  11-25-19    52.38,
                          52.40,
                          52.42
OR-2160-19    12-9-19     Ch. 73, Sch. I
OR-2171-20    3-2-20   Ch. 73, Sch. I
OR-2177-20    6-8-20      96.26
OR-2182-20    9-14-20     30.40 -
                          30.50
OR-2186-20    9-28-20     Ch. 73, Sch. I
                          155.066,
OR-2189-20    10-26-20    155.080,
                          155.083
OR-2190-20    10-26-20    T.S.O. IV
                          155.012,
OR-2193-20    10-26-20    155.054,
                          155.099
                          157.01 -
OR-2194-20    11-9-20     157.08,
                          157.99
                          72.18,
OR-2195-20    11-9-20     72.22,
                          72.23
                          96.01,
                          96.03,
                          96.05,
                          96.06,
OR-2197-20    12-14-20    96.20,
                          96.22,
                          96.23,
                          96.26 -
                          96.29,
                          96.37
                          38.16 -
OR-2201-21    2-8-21      38.18,
                          38.20,
                          38.21
OR-2202-21    2-8-21      T.S.O. IV
                          150.020,
OR-2203-21    3-8-21      150.022,
                          150.023
                          97.01,
                          97.05 -
OR-2206-21    4-26-21     97.07,
                          97.09,
                          97.11,
                          Ch. 97, App. A
OR-2208-21    5-24-21     155.099
OR-2209-21    5-24-21     T.S.O. IV
OR-2210-21    6-28-21     T.S.O. IV
OR-2213-21    7-26-21     Ch. 73, Sch. I
                          155.012,
OR-2217-21    9-13-21     155.054,
                          155.099
                          111.01 -
                          111.07,
                          111.11 -
OR-2221-21    10-11-21    111.13,
                          111.15 -
                          111.18,
                          111.21,
                          111.22
OR-2222-21    10-11-21    T.S.O. I
                          155.021,
                          155.051,
                          155.055,
                          155.056,
OR-2223-21    10-11-21    155.067,
                          155.070,
                          155.072,
                          155.090 -
                          155.093,
                          155.101
                          158.001 -
                          158.003,
                          158.010 -
OR-2225-21    10-11-21    158.014,
                          158.020,
                          158.030,
                          158.031
OR-2227-21    11-8-21     156.01 -
                          156.12
                          92.40,
OR-2230-21    12-13-21    92.42,
                          92.44,
                          92.45
OR-2231-21    12-13-21    110.31 -
                          110.34
                          158.001 -
                          158.003,
                          158.010 -
OR-2232-21    12-13-21    158.014,
                          158.020,
                          158.030,
                          158.031
                          94.01 -
OR-2235-21    12-13-21    94.17,
                          94.99
                          94.01 -
OR-2236-22    1-10-22     94.17,
                          94.99
OR-2237-22    1-10-22     111.04,
                          111.22
                          94.01 -
OR-2249-22    4-25-22     94.20,
                          94.99
                          158.001 -
                          158.003,
                          158.010 -
OR-2251-22    5-9-22      158.014,
                          158.020,
                          158.021,
                          158.030,
                          158.031
                          92.40 -
OR-2252-22    5-9-22      92.45,
                          92.47,
                          92.49
OR-2253-22    5-9-22      110.25 -
                          110.35
OR-2254-22  5-9-22      33.35 -
                          33.38
OR-2255-22    5-9-22      155.012
                          155.012,
OR-2256-22    5-9-22      155.054,
                          155.099
OR-2262-22    6-27-22     155.073
OR-2264-22    7-11-22     155.092
OR-2267-22    7-25-22     158.001,
                          158.013
                          91.15 -
                          91.18,
OR-2271-22    9-26-22     91.20,
                          91.24,
                          91.25,
                          150.014
OR-2277-22    10-24-22    155.073
                          153.07 -
OR-2280-22    11-14-22    153.11,
                          153.25 -
                          153.27
OR-2287-23    1-23-23     116.01 -
                          116.04
OR 2288-23    1-23-23     155.054,
                          155.099
OR-2289-23    1-23-23     155.069
OR-2292-23    4-10-23     T.S.O. IV
OR-2293-23    4-10-23     155.072
OR-2302-23    5-8-23      T.S.O. IV
                          37.01 -
                          37.06,
                          37.15,
                          37.20,
                          37.21,
OR-2303-23    5-22-23     37.25,
                          37.26,
                          37.30,
                          37.31,
                          37.35,
                          37.36
OR-2304-23    6-5-23      116.03,
                          116.04
                          117.01 -
OR-2305-23    6-12-23     117.07,
                          117.99
                          153.10,
OR-2306-23    6-12-23     153.25,
                          153.26
OR-2315-23    8-14-23     155.012,
                          155.054
OR-2316-23    7-10-23     155.092
OR-2320-23    9-11-23     T.S.O. III
                          155.012,
OR-2323-23    10-9-23     155.082,
                          155.099
OR-2324-23    10-9-23     155.082,
                          155.099
OR-2326-23    10-23-23    96.20
                          70.03,
OR-2327-23    11-13-23    70.04,
                          71.31
OR-2328-23    11-13-23    39.01 -
                          39.04
                          156.03,
OR-2333-23    12-11-23    156.05,
                          156.06
OR-2340-24    1-8-24      155.057
OR-2342-24    1-22-24     116.02,
                          116.03
OR-2346-24    2-12-24     155.054,
                          155.099
                          92.10,
                          92.41 -
OR-2347-24    2-26-24     92.45,
                          92.47 -
                          92.49
                          94.02 -
OR-2348-24    2-26-24     94.06,
                          94.10,
                          94.17
OR-2349-24    2-26-24     110.25 -
                          110.33
                          31.01,
OR-2352-24    3-25-24     31.04,
                          31.06,
                          31.10
                          158.001,
                          158.003,
OR-2353-24    3-25-24     158.010 -
                          158.014,
                          158.020,
                          158.021
OR-2356-24    4-8-24      159.01
OR-2357-24    4-8-24      155.073
OR-2358-24    4-22-24     155.099
                          54.001 -
                          54.004,
                          54.020 -
                          54.026,
                          54.040,
                          54.055,
OR-2361-24    4-22-24     54.070 -
                          54.076,
                          54.090 -
                          54.095, Ch. 54, App.
                          A,
                          B,
                          C
OR-2362-24    4-22-24     72.24
OR-2363-24    5-13-24     93.01
OR-2376-24    8-26-24     155.012,
                          155.054
OR-2377-24    8-26-24     155.072
                          51.052,
OR-2378-24    9-9-24      51.053,
                          51.054
                          37.15,
                          90.23.1,
OR-2379-24    9-9-24      91.05,
                          95.15,
                          150.006
                          155.012,
OR-2387-24    10-14-24    155.054,
                          155.056,
                          155.099
OR-2389-24    10-28-24    117.05
                          94.03,
OR-2390-24    10-28-24    94.04,
                          94.16
                          92.43,
OR-2391-24    10-28-24    92.44,
                          92.45,
                          92.49
OR-2392-24    10-28-24    110.28,
                          110.33
OR-2393-24    10-28-24    158.012,
                          158.014
                          90.01 -
                          90.03,
                          90.05 -
                          90.25,
OR-2395-24    12-9-24     90.35 -
                          90.50,
                          90.55 -
                          90.65,
                          90.68 -
                          90.70
OR-2396-24    12-9-24     155.099
OR-2398-24    12-9-24     153.10,
                          153.26
                          90.01,
                          90.55,
                          90.57,
OR-2402-25    1-13-25     90.59 -
                          90.62,
                          90.66,
                          90.67
OR-2403-25    1-13-25     T.S.O. IV
OR-2404-25    1-13-25     51.010 -
                          51.024
OR-2409-25    3-24-25     150.012
OR-2410-25    4-28-25     130.09,
                          130.99
OR-2413-25    7-28-25     T.S.O. IV
                          37.15,
                          90.23.1,
OR-2416-25    8-25-25     91.05,
                          95.15,
                          Ch. 97, App. A,
                          150.006
OR-2417-25    8-25-25     T.S.O. II
                          156.03,
OR-2420-25    9-8-25      156.05,
                          156.06
OR-2427-25    11-10-25    92.44
OR-2428-25    11-10-25    94.01
OR-2429-25    11-10-25    153.04
OR-2430-25    12-8-25     T.S.O. IV
OR-2431-25    12-8-25     T.S.O. IV
                         
 
 
