CITY OF PARKER, TEXAS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d8bd8f885120944a036ebdd2fee1d518e146dbe0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-687.gif]
 
2023 S-12 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Res. 2023-756, passed 9-19-2023
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
CITY GOVERNMENT
CITY GOVERNMENT
Mayor:                                   Lee Pettle
Mayor Pro-tem:                           Buddy Pilgram
Council Members:                         Colleen Halbert
                                        Billy Barton
                                        Roxanne Bogdan
                                        Darrel Sharpe
                                         
CITY PERSONNEL
City Administrator:                      Kent Manton
Asst. City Administrator/City Secretary: Patti J. Scott Hull
City Attorney:                           Catherine Clifton
City Engineer:                           Birkhoff, Hendricks and Carter
Public Works Director/Building Official: Gary Machado
Fire Chief:                              Justin Miller
Finance/H.R. Director:                   Grant Savage
Court Administrator:                     Lori Newton
Police Chief:                            Kenneth Price
                                         
OTHER BOARDS & COMMISSIONS
Planning and Zoning Commission
Zoning Board of Adjustment
Parks and Recreation Commission
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO. 622
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING THE THIRD ANNUAL SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF PARKER, TEXAS, COLLIN COUNTY AND DECLARING AN
EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the third annual supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Parker, Texas, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of the City of Parker; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Parker Municipal Code; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated sections
in accordance with the changes of the law of the City of Parker; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE CITY COUNCIL
OF THE CITY OF PARKER:
Section 1.   That the third annual supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Parker as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto (Exhibit A), be and the same is hereby
adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the
Political Subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such
supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office
of the City Secretary.
Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Parker on this 13th day
of May, 2008.
Jerry Tartaglino /s/
Mayor
ATTEST:
Carrie L. Smith /s/
City Secretary Carrie Smith, TRMC
ORDINANCE NO. 661
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING THE FIFTH ANNUAL SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF PARKER, COLLIN COUNTY, TEXAS.
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the Fifth Annual supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Parker, Texas, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of the City of Parker; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Parker Municipal Code; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated sections
in accordance with the changes of the law of the City of Parker; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE CITY COUNCIL
OF THE CITY OF PARKER, COLLIN COUNTY, TEXAS, AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1.   The Fifth Annual supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City
of Parker as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati,
Ohio, and as attached hereto (Exhibit A), be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
SECTION 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the City Secretary is
hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the copy of the
Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the City Secretary.
DULY PASSED by the City Council of the City of Parker, Texas, on the 21st day
of September, 2010.
                                       APPROVED:
Joe Cordina /s/
Joe Cordina, Mayor
ATTESTED:
Carrie L. Smith /s/
Carrie L. Smith, City Secretary
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
James E. Shepherd /s/
James E. Shepherd, City Attorney
ORDINANCE NO. 717
(Adoption of 2014 S-8 Codification Supplement)
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING THE
EIGHT SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
FOR THE CITY OF PARKER, TEXAS, COLLIN COUNTY.
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the Seventh supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Parker, Texas, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of the City of Parker; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Parker Municipal Code; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated sections
in accordance with the changes of the law of the City of Parker; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE CITY COUNCIL
OF THE CITY OF PARKER:
Section 1.   That the Eight supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Parker as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati,
Ohio, and as attached hereto (Exhibit A), be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the City Council and the City Secretary of the City of
Parker is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the copy
of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the City Secretary.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Parker on this 2nd day of
December, 2014.
                                       Z Marshall /s/
                                       Mayor Z. Marshall
ATTEST:
Carrie L. Smith /s/
City Secretary Carrie L. Smith
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
James E. Shepherd /s/
City Attorney James E. Shepherd
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.19   Altering or tampering with code
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Parker, Texas, shall
be designated as the Code of Parker and may be so cited.
Statutory reference:
   Authority of municipality to codify ordinances, see Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code,
Chapter 53
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, MUNICIPALITY, or TOWN. The City of Parker,
Texas.
      CODE, THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.
      COUNTY. Collin County, Texas.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Texas.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of
the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of that act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this municipality for the transaction of all
municipal business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of that notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   (A)   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication, including but not limited to the following types of ordinances:
      (1)   Any ordinance guaranteeing or promising the payment of money for
the municipality or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the municipality
or any evidence of the municipality’s indebtedness;
      (2)   Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for an annual
budget or prescribing salaries for municipal officers and employees;
      (3)   Any ordinance annexing territory to the municipality or
discontinuing territory as a part of the municipality;
      (4)   Any ordinance designating or otherwise relating to municipal
depositories;
      (5)   Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit, or other right;
      (6)   Any ordinance approving, prescribing, or otherwise relating to
rates to be charged by private utility companies;
      (7)   Any ordinance approving, authorizing, or otherwise relating to any
contract or agreement;
      (8)   Any ordinance accepting, dedicating, vacating, or otherwise
relating to any easement; and
      (9)   Any ordinance establishing or amending the zoning designation of
land.
   (B)   All such ordinances mentioned in division (A) are hereby recognized as
continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length
herein.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force,
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of that chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Am. Ord. 25, passed
1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, § 54.001) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Am. Ord.
20, passed 1-1-1985)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
Statutory reference:
   Inspection of public records, see Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, §§ 552.001 et seq.
§ 10.19 ALTERING OR TAMPERING WITH CODE.
   It shall be an offense for any unauthorized person to change or amend, by
addition or deletion, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or delete
pages or portions thereof, or to alter or to tamper with this code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause a law of the city to be misrepresented
thereby.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or whenever in the code or ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of
this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by:
      (1)   A fine not to exceed $2,000 in all cases arising under municipal
ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning, and public health and sanitation
other than vegetation and litter violations;
      (2)   A fine not to exceed $2,000, if a motor vehicle is used in illegal
dumping or an offense under the law or city ordinance violated by the illegal
dumping; and
      (3)   A fine not to exceed $500 in all other cases; provided, however,
that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same
or a similar offense under the laws of the state.
   (B)   Each day any violation of this code or of any ordinance shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that any such violation is
designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, the nuisance may be
summarily abated by the City Administrator or the Chief of Police or their
assigns.
Statutory reference:
   Municipal penalties, see Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, § 54.001
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   CITY GOVERNMENT
      
31.   MUNICIPAL COURT
      
32.   RECORDS MANAGEMENT
      
33.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES
      
34.   TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: CITY GOVERNMENT
Section
General Administrative Provisions
   
30.01   State statutes adopted
   
30.02   Official newspaper
City Council
   
30.15   Council member terms
City Officials
   
30.30   Municipal Attorney
   
30.31   Municipal Engineer
Personnel
   
30.45   Texas Municipal Retirement System (TMRS); ordinances adopted
   
30.46   Health benefits for retirees; ordinances adopted
Cross-reference:
   Planning and Zoning Commission, see §
150.02
   Zoning Board of Adjustment, see §
156.67
GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 STATE STATUTES ADOPTED.
   The provisions of Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, Title 2, relating to cities and
towns, be, and are hereby accepted and adopted.
(Ord. 192, passed 5-20-1975)
§ 30.02 OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER.
   (A)   The Dallas Morning News, Dallas, Texas, is designated as the official
newspaper for the city.
   (B)   The Mayor is authorized to execute a contract with The Dallas Morning
News establishing the applicable rates for publication of city notices.
   (C)   Until September 30, 2025, and thereafter until changed by resolution
of City Council, the city shall continue to publish in The Dallas Morning News
each ordinance, notice or other matter required to be published by law.
(Ord. 198, passed 10-21-1975; Am. Ord. 605, passed 10-10-2006; Am. Res. 2021-
676, passed 9-7-2021; Am. Res. 2023-756, passed 9-19-2023)
CITY COUNCIL
§ 30.15 COUNCIL MEMBER TERMS.
   (A)   For the purpose of staggering the terms of office of Council members,
they shall be divided into 2 groups. One group is to be composed of 2 Council
members, whose term of office shall expire in the same year that the term of
office of the Mayor expires. The other group shall be composed of the remaining
3 Council members, whose term of office shall expire in the year when the term
of office of the Mayor does not expire.
   (B)   Commencing with the election to be held in April, 1975, and at all
elections to be held thereafter, the office of any Council member whose term of
office expires that year, or expires in any year thereafter, shall be filled
for a term of 2 years.
(Ord. 166, passed 4-16-1974)
CITY OFFICIALS
§ 30.30 MUNICIPAL ATTORNEY.
   (A)   The City Council, pursuant to Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, § 22.071, hereby
creates the municipal officer position of Municipal Attorney.
   (B)   The Municipal Attorney shall be licensed to practice law in this
state, shall maintain that law license in good standing with the State Bar of
this state, and shall maintain malpractice insurance while acting as an officer
of the municipality.
   (C)   The Municipal Attorney shall represent the city in all legal matters
pertaining to the city at the discretion and direction of the City Council. The
Municipal Attorney shall not permit conflicts to occur by rendering legal
advice or representing agents, employees, or officers of the city, whether
individually or collectively, except in their official capacities as agents,
employees, or officers of the city, and then only in matters pertaining to the
city and in the best interest of the city.
(Ord. 537, passed 4-1-2003)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 30.31 MUNICIPAL ENGINEER.
   (A)   The City Council, pursuant to Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, § 22.071, hereby
creates the municipal officer position of Municipal Engineer.
   (B)   The Municipal Engineer shall be licensed to practice engineering in
this state and shall maintain that license in good standing with the state and
shall maintain malpractice insurance while acting as an officer of the
municipality.
   (C)   The Municipal Engineer shall represent the city in all engineering
matters pertaining to the city at the discretion and direction of the City
Council. The Municipal Engineer shall not permit conflicts to occur by
rendering engineering advice or representing agents, employees, or officers of
the city, whether individually or collectively, except in their official
capacities as agents, employees, or officers of the city, and then only in
matters pertaining to the city and in the best interest of the city. The
Municipal Engineer shall also not permit conflicts to occur by representing
persons, firms, or corporations coming to, or doing business with, the city
with projects, plans, or drawings to be reviewed by the Municipal Engineer.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-29-2003)
Penalty, see § 10.99
PERSONNEL
§ 30.45 TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM (TMRS); ORDINANCES ADOPTED.
   The city’s ordinances regarding participation in the Texas Municipal
Retirement System (TMRS), as they may be amended from time to time, are hereby
adopted by reference and shall be a part of this code as if set forth in full
herein.
(Ord. 302, passed 1-20-1987; Am. Ord. 325, passed 8-22-1989; Am. Ord. 326,
passed 8-22-1989; Am. Ord. 344, passed 12-10-1991; Am. Ord. 353, passed 8-10-
1993; Am. Ord. 379, passed 12-13-1994; Am. Ord. 429, passed 10-14-1997; Am.
Ord. 445, passed 9-8-1998; Am. Ord. 762, passed 7-17-2018; Am. Ord. 787, passed
11-19-2019; Am. Ord. 804, passed 7-20-2021)
§ 30.46 HEALTH BENEFITS FOR RETIREES; ORDINANCES ADOPTED.
   The city’s ordinances regarding provision of health benefits coverage to its
retirees through the Texas Municipal League Group Benefits Risk Pool, as they
may be amended from to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be a
part of this code as if set forth in full herein.
(Ord. 481, passed 5-2-2000)
CHAPTER 31: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
   
31.01   Establishment
   
31.02   Jurisdiction
   
31.03   Municipal Court Judge; Alternate
   
31.04   Municipal Court Clerk
   
31.05   Prosecuting attorney
   
31.06   Court costs; fees; funds
Statutory reference:
   Municipal court establishment and rules, see Tex. Gov’t Code, Ch. 29
§ 31.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The City Council hereby establishes the Municipal Court, which shall be
operated in accordance with the Constitution and laws of the state.
(Ord. 381-95, passed 3-14-1995)
§ 31.02 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The Municipal Court has exclusive original jurisdiction within the
territorial limits of the city in all criminal cases that:
      (1)   Arise under the ordinances of the city; and
      (2)   Are punishable only by a fine not to exceed:
         (a)   $2,000 in all cases arising under the city’s ordinances that
govern fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping
of refuse; or
         (b)   $500 in all other cases.
   (B)   The Municipal Court has concurrent jurisdiction with the justice court
of a precinct in which the city is located in all criminal cases arising under
state law that:
      (1)   Arise within the territorial limits of the city; and
      (2)   Are punishable only by a fine not to exceed $500.
   (C)   The Municipal Court has jurisdiction in the forfeiture and final
judgment of all bail bonds and personal bonds taken in criminal cases of which
the court has jurisdiction.
(Ord. 381-95, passed 3-14-1995)
§ 31.03 MUNICIPAL COURT JUDGE; ALTERNATE.
   (A)   The City Council shall appoint a legally qualified person as Municipal
Court Judge, who shall serve a term concurrent with the term of the city’s
Mayor. The Municipal Court Judge shall be compensated at a rate as established
by the City Council by resolution from time to time.
   (B)   The City Council may appoint a legally qualified person as Alternate
Municipal Court Judge, who shall serve a term concurrent with the term of the
city’s Mayor. The Alternate Municipal Court Judge shall be compensated at the
same rate as established by the City Council for the Municipal Court Judge.
(Ord. 381-95, passed 3-14-1995)
§ 31.04 MUNICIPAL COURT CLERK.
   The City Secretary shall serve as the Municipal Court Clerk unless the City
Council appoints a Court Clerk who shall qualify within the term provided by
law. The term of the Municipal Court Clerk shall be concurrent with the term of
the Mayor.
(Ord. 381-95, passed 3-14-1995)
§ 31.05 PROSECUTING ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney shall serve as the prosecuting attorney in the Municipal
Court, unless the City Council shall appoint another qualified attorney to be
the prosecuting attorney of the Municipal Court.
(Ord. 381-95, passed 3-14-1995)
§ 31.06 COURT COSTS; FEES; FUNDS.
   The ordinances establishing Municipal Court funds and fees, as they may be
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be a part
of this code as if set forth in full herein.
(Ord. 392, passed 11-14-1995; Ord. 549, passed 9-9-2003)
CHAPTER 32: RECORDS MANAGEMENT
Section
   
32.01   Records management program adopted
   
32.02   Title; purpose
   
32.03   Definitions
   
32.04   City records declared public property
   
32.05   Policy
   
32.06   Records Management Officer; designation
   
32.07   Records management plan; development and approval; application
   
32.08   Duties of Records Management Officer
   
32.09   Duties of custodians
   
32.10   Duties of City Council
   
32.11   Records control schedules; development and approval
   
32.12   Records control schedules; implementation
   
32.13   Destruction of unscheduled records
   
32.14   Electronic storage of records
 
   
32.99   Penalty
§ 32.01 RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM ADOPTED.
   The City Council does hereby establish and adopt a management program for
the orderly and efficient retention, retrieval, and destruction of the records
of the city as follows.
(Ord. 335, passed 2-12-1991)
§ 32.02 TITLE; PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “records
management program” of the city, providing for the proper and efficient
management of the municipal records of the city.
   (B)   Since the citizens of the city have a right to expect efficient and
cost-effective government, and recognizing the importance of local government
records in the lives of all citizens, the efficient management of city records
is necessary to the effective and economic operation of the city, the
preservation of records of permanent value is necessary to provide the people
of the state with resources concerning their history and to document their
rights of citizenship and property, and the establishment of uniform standards
and procedures for the maintenance, preservation, or other disposition of city
records is necessary to fulfill the high public purpose.
(Ord. 335, passed 2-12-1991)
§ 32.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMISSION. The State Library and Archives Commission.
   CUSTODIAN. The appointed or elected public officer who by the State
Constitution, state law, ordinance, or administrative policy is in charge of
the office that creates or receives local government records. A CUSTODIAN is a
department head, under the administration of the City Council, who is
responsible for all records in his or her department.
   DIRECTOR AND LIBRARIAN. The executive and administrative officer of the
State Library and Archives Commission.
   ESSENTIAL RECORDS. Any local government record necessary to the resumption
or continuation of government operations in an emergency or disaster, to the
re-creation of legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and
fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT RECORD. Any document, paper, letter, book, map, photograph,
sound or video recording, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic medium, or other
information recording medium, regardless of physical form or characteristic and
regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws
of the state, created or received by local city government offices or any of
its officers or employees pursuant to law, including an ordinance, or in the
transaction of public business, are hereby declared to be records of the city
and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the Act, Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code,
Title 6. The term does not include:
      (1)   Extra identical copies of documents created only for convenience of
reference or research by officers or employees of the city;
      (2)   Notes, journals, diaries, and similar documents created by an
officer or employee of the city for the employee’s personal convenience;
      (3)   Blank forms;
      (4)   Stocks of publications;
      (5)   Library and museum materials acquired solely for the purposes of
reference or display; or
      (6)   Copies of documents in any media furnished to members of the public
to which they are entitled under Tex. Gov’t Code, Chapter 552, or other state
law.
   OFFICE. Any office, department, division, program, commission, bureau,
board, committee, or similar entity of the city.
   RECORD. A record of the city.
   RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULE. A document prepared by or under the authority of a
records management officer listing the records maintained by the city, their
retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records
management program in the city or state law may require.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT. The application of management techniques to the
creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records
for the purpose of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of record
keeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the
management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of
essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of
inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports,
and correspondence, and the management of electronic and other record storage
systems.
   RECORDS RETENTION SCHEDULE. A document issued by the Commission establishing
mandatory retention periods for local government records.
   RETENTION PERIOD. The minimum time that must pass after the creation,
recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions
associated with a record before it is eligible for destruction.
(Ord. 335, passed 2-12-1991)
§ 32.04 CITY RECORDS DECLARED PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   All city records as defined in § 32.03 of this code are hereby declared to
be the property of the city. No city official or employee has, by virtue of his
or her position, any personal or property right to those records even though he
or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction,
removal from files, or use of these records is prohibited.
(Ord. 335, passed 2-12-1991)
Penalty, see § 32.99
§ 32.05 POLICY.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient,
economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution,
organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records
from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the
requirements of the Act and accepted records management practice.
(Ord. 335, passed 2-12-1991)
§ 32.06 RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER; DESIGNATION.
   The City Secretary, and the successive holders of that office, shall serve
as Records Management Officer for the city. As provided by state law, each
successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the Director
and Librarian of the State Library within 30 days of the initial designation or
of taking up the office as applicable.
(Ord. 335, passed 2-12-1991)
§ 32.07 RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN; DEVELOPMENT AND APPROVAL; APPLICATION.
   (A)   The Records Management Officer will implement, but is not limited to,
a program to encompass those areas of records management as are required to
preserve and keep in order all books, papers, documents, records, and files of
the City Council and of the executive departments to achieve the following
goals:
      (1)   Release space and reduce the need for storage and filing equipment;
      (2)   Establish an efficient retrieval operation for both active and
inactive municipal records;
      (3)   Provide for routine disposition of paperwork;
      (4)   Maintain total security over municipal records;
      (5)   Communicate the need of an effective records management program;
and
      (6)   Secure a central records storage facility which can be operated and
maintained by records management staff.
   (B)   Once approved by the City Council, the records management plan shall
be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions,
bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city, and the records
shall be created, maintained, stored, or disposed of in accordance with the
plan.
   (C)   State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or record
keeping requirements of a custodian do not exempt the custodian or the records
in the custodian’s care from the application of this chapter and the records
management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the custodian as a
basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city.
(Ord. 335, passed 2-12-1991)
Penalty, see § 32.99
§ 32.08 DUTIES OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER.
   In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, the Records Management
Officer shall:
   (A)   Administer the records management program and provide assistance to
custodians in its implementation;
   (B)   Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems,
standards, and procedures;
   (C)   In cooperation with custodians, identify essential records and
establish a disaster plan for each city office and department to ensure maximum
availability of the records in order to re-establish operations quickly and
with minimum disruption and expense;
   (D)   Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the
historically valuable records of the city;
   (E)   Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for record
keeping supplies;
   (F)   Establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control
system for the city;
   (G)   Provide records management advice and assistance to all city
departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and
by on-site consultation;
   (H)   Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by
the State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the records
management program and the city’s records control schedules are in compliance
with state regulations;
   (I)   Disseminate to the city and custodians information concerning state
laws and administrative rules relating to local government records;
   (J)   Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, destruction, or other
disposition of the city is carried out in accordance with the policies and
procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law;
   (K)   Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved
records control schedules, the volume of records stored electronically, and the
estimated cost and space savings as the result of that disposal or disposition;
   (L)   Report annually to the City Council on the implementation of the
records management program;
   (M)   Bring to the attention of the City Council noncompliance by custodians
or other personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management
program or the Act; and
   (N)   Prepare and file with the Director and Librarian, before January 2,
1995, the records control schedules and the lists of obsolete records required
by the Act, Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, Title 6.
(Ord. 335, passed 2-12-1991)
§ 32.09 DUTIES OF CUSTODIANS.
   In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, custodians shall:
   (A)   Cooperate with the Records Management Officer in carrying out the
policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and
economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this
chapter;
   (B)   Adequately document the transaction of government business and the
services, programs, and duties for which the custodian and his or her staff are
responsible; and
   (C)   Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their
preservation, destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the
policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 335, passed 2-12-1991)
§ 32.10 DUTIES OF CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Council shall:
   (A)   Establish, promote, and support an active and continuing program for
the efficient and economical management of all city records;
   (B)   Cause policies and procedures to be developed for the administration
of the program under the direction of the Records Management Officer;
   (C)   Facilitate the creation and maintenance of city records containing
adequate and proper documentation of the organization, functions, policies,
decisions, procedures, and essential transactions of the city and designed to
furnish the information necessary to protect the legal and financial rights of
the city, state, and persons affected by the activities of city government;
   (D)   Facilitate the identification and preservation of city records that
are of permanent value;
   (E)   Facilitate the identification and protection of essential city
records;
   (F)   Cooperate with the Commission in its conduct of statewide records
management surveys; and
   (G)   Review of a records control schedule or amended schedule by the
officers of the city as it considers necessary.
(Ord. 335, passed 2-12-1991)
§ 32.11 RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULES; DEVELOPMENT AND APPROVAL.
   (A)   The Records Management Officer, in cooperation with custodians, shall
prepare records control schedules listing all records created or received by
the custodians and the retention period for each record. Records control
schedules shall also contain other information regarding the disposition of the
city records as the records management plan may require.
   (B)   Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed
by the Records Management Officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in
compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it
continues to reflect the record keeping procedures and needs of the department
and the records management program of the city.
   (C)   Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to
and accepted for filing by the Director and Librarian as provided by state law.
If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make
it acceptable for filing. The Records Management Officer shall submit the
records control schedules to the Director and Librarian.
(Ord. 335, passed 2-12-1991)
§ 32.12 RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULES; IMPLEMENTATION.
   (A)   A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and
adopted shall be implemented according to the policies and procedures of the
records management plan.
   (B)   A record whose retention period has expired on a records control
schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the
record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit, or
the custodian requests in writing to the Records Management Officer that the
record be retained for an additional period.
   (C)   Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control
schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the Records
Management Officer.
(Ord. 335, passed 2-12-1991)
Penalty, see § 32.99
§ 32.13 DESTRUCTION OF UNSCHEDULED RECORDS.
   A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control
schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same
manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the Records
Management Officer has submitted to and received back from the Director and
Librarian an approved destruction authorization request.
(Ord. 335, passed 2-12-1991)
§ 32.14 ELECTRONIC STORAGE OF RECORDS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ELECTRONIC STORAGE. The maintenance of local government record data in
the form of digital electronic signals on a computer hard disk, magnetic tape,
optical disk, or similar machine- readable medium.
      SOURCE DOCUMENT. The local government record from which local government
record data is obtained for electronic storage. The term does not include
backup copies of the data in any media generated from electronic storage.
   (B)   Any city record data may be stored electronically in addition to or
instead of source documents in paper or other media, subject to the
requirements of the Act and rules adopted under it.
   (C)   The city will be subject to rules established by the Commission for
standards and procedures for electronic storage and will be subject to the
provisions of the Act, Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, Ch. 205.
(Ord. 335, passed 2-12-1991)
§ 32.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   Any individual, association, or corporation violating any portion or
provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction therefor, shall be punished by the assessment of a fine not
exceeding $500; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 335, passed 2-12-1991)
CHAPTER 33: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES
Section
   
33.01   County Emergency Management Plan adopted
   
33.02   Police Department; Police Reserve Force
   
33.03   Fire Department; Fire Marshal
   
33.04   Uniform EMS Ordinance adopted
§ 33.01 COUNTY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN ADOPTED.
   (A)   The city hereby adopts the County Emergency Management Plan as of its
most recent revision to date.
   (B)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to declare emergencies as required
subject to ratification by the City Council in accordance with § 10 of the
State Disaster Act.
(Ord. 360, passed 2-22-1994)
§ 33.02 POLICE DEPARTMENT; POLICE RESERVE FORCE.
   The city ordinances providing for the Police Department and Police Reserve
Force, as they may be amended from time to time, are adopted by reference and
shall be a part of this code as if set forth in full herein.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-10-1986; Ord. 498, passed 3-13-2001; Am. Ord. 769, passed
5-21-2019; Am. Ord. 770, passed 5-21-2019; Am. Ord. 832, passed 11-15-2022)
§ 33.03 FIRE DEPARTMENT; FIRE MARSHAL.
   The city ordinances providing for the Volunteer Fire Department and the Fire
Marshal, as they may be amended from time to time, are adopted by reference and
shall be a part of this code as if set forth in full herein.
(Ord. 415, passed 3-25-1997; Am. Ord. 515, passed 12-4-2001; Am. Ord. 699,
passed 7-15-2013)
§ 33.04 UNIFORM EMS ORDINANCE ADOPTED.
   The Uniform EMS Ordinance, as it may be amended from time to time, is
adopted by reference and shall be a part of this code as if set forth in full
herein.
(Ord. 507, passed 6-12-2001)
CHAPTER 34: TAXATION
Section
   
34.01   Sales and use tax adopted
   
34.02   County assessment and collection of taxes levied by city
   
34.03   Ad valorem tax; homestead exemption for individuals over 65
   
34.04   Delinquent property taxes; penalty
§ 34.01 SALES AND USE TAX ADOPTED.
   (A)   Adoption. Pursuant to Tex. Tax Code, Chapter 321, the city adopts a 1%
sales and use tax on all sales, use, storage, or other consumption of taxable
items purchased, leased, or rented within the city.
   (B)   Effective date. Pursuant to Tex. Tax Code, § 321.102, the effective
date of this section shall be October 1, 1996.
(Ord. 401, passed 5-14-1996)
§ 34.02 COUNTY ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF TAXES LEVIED BY CITY.
   The city ordinances authorizing the county to assess and collect taxes for
the city, as they may be amended from time to time, are adopted by reference
and shall be a part of this code as if set forth in full herein.
(Ord. 418, passed 8-8-1997)
§ 34.03 AD VALOREM TAX; HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FOR INDIVIDUALS OVER 65.
   The city ordinances establishing a residence homestead exemption from ad
valorem taxation for a person of 65 years of age or older, as they may be
amended from time to time, are adopted by reference and shall be a part of this
code as if set forth in full herein.
(Ord. 478, passed 1-18-2000)
§ 34.04 DELINQUENT PROPERTY TAXES; PENALTY.
   The city ordinances establishing a late charge for delinquent property
taxes, as they may be amended from time to time, are adopted by reference and
shall be a part of this code as if set forth in full herein.
(Ord. 313, passed 5-10-1988)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   SEWERS
      
53.   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL; RECYCLING
      
54.   STORMWATER REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS
Section
Water and Wastewater Facilities Extension
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Enforcement method not exclusive
   
50.03   Policy
   
50.04   Extension of mains for development
   
50.05   Oversize mains; city participation and reimbursement
   
50.06   Extensions to individual lots
   
50.07   Pro rata fees
 
   
50.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Subdivision Regulations, see
Chapter 155
WATER AND WASTEWATER FACILITIES EXTENSION
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEVELOPER. The person, business, corporation, or association responsible for
the development of the subdivision or lot, and includes the property owner or
subdivider.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to construction of buildings or other structures,
which results in demand for water or wastewater facilities and which requires
connection to the city’s water or wastewater system.
   LOT. A tract, plot, or portion of a subdivision, addition, or other parcel
of land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
transfer of ownership or possession, or for development.
   OVERSIZE MAIN. A water or wastewater main required to interconnect property
being developed with the existing water or wastewater system which exceeds the
size of a standard water or wastewater main.
   PRO RATA. A charge made against an existing lot abutting a water or
wastewater main that is 6 inches or larger, that is the average per-foot cost
of the line multiplied by the front footage of the land and that is imposed to
reimburse the city or the original developer his or her cost of installing or
paying for the main.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The record title holder of the premises served with water or
wastewater from a connection to the city’s water or wastewater system.
   SUBDIVIDER. Has the meaning given that term in
Chapter 155 of this code, the city’s subdivision regulations.
   SUBDIVISION. Has the meaning given that term in
Chapter 155 of this code.
(Ord. 458, passed 4-27-1999)
§ 50.02 ENFORCEMENT METHOD NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed in any way to be an exclusive
method of enforcing the payment of the pro rata cost against the consumers and
property owners, and this subchapter shall not be deemed in any manner to be a
waiver of the city’s right to validly assess the property owners and consumers
concerned for cost of the installation of standard size water and wastewater
mains and to fix and enforce liens against that property, all of which may be
done as provided by ordinance in the manner prescribed by law.
(Ord. 458, passed 4-27-1999)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.03 POLICY.
   (A)   Connection to water and wastewater systems. All subdivisions and each
lot to be developed within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall
be served by an approved water supply and distribution system and (in the event
the lot size of any lot in the subdivision is less than 1 acre) by an approved
sewage collection and disposal system. No development shall be approved unless
adequate assurances are provided that the development will be connected with
the city’s water supply and distribution system and (in the event the lot size
of any lot in the subdivision is less than 1 acre) with an approved wastewater
system. No building permits shall be issued until satisfactory evidence of this
connection has been provided.
   (B)   Responsibility for installation and extensions. The developer shall
install all water and wastewater facilities needed to serve the development and
shall extend all water and wastewater mains and appurtenances necessary to
connect the development with the city’s water supply and distribution system
and with the city’s wastewater system. All initial costs of installation shall
be borne by the developer, subject to reimbursement from proceeds of pro rata
fees pursuant to §
50.07(A) of this code. Requests for city extension of water and wastewater
mains shall be as provided for in §
50.05.
   (C)   Condition of main extensions. Authority to extend water and wastewater
mains to serve newly subdivided or platted land shall be granted by the city
only upon a determination by the City Engineer that all facilities necessary to
adequately serve the development are in place or will be in place prior to the
issuance of building permits for structures developed on that land.
   (D)   Location of facilities. The location of all water and wastewater mains
necessary to serve newly subdivided or platted land shall be in accordance with
the city’s master plan(s) for water and wastewater facilities and in accordance
with
Chapter 155 of this code.
   (E)   Construction standards. All water and wastewater facilities required
by these regulations shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements
and specifications contained in the Water and Sewer Design Manual, Standard
Construction Details, Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction,
and the requirements of the City Engineer, that are incorporated herein by
reference and made a part hereof.
   (F)   Lift stations. Should a lift station, either temporary or permanent,
be necessary to provide wastewater service to a subdivision, the developer
shall construct the station and all appurtenances thereto at his or her own
expense, §
50.07. If and when the lift station is no longer needed, the installation will
remain the property of the city, unless other provisions are made in an
improvements agreement. The lift station shall be designed and constructed for
the entire drainage area as approved by the City Engineer.
   (G)   Pro rata fees for adjacent mains. When an existing water or wastewater
main lies in a street, alley, or easement in or adjacent to an area or tract of
land to be subdivided, the developer shall pay all applicable pro rata fees
pursuant to §
50.07 of this code for the water main or wastewater main prior to release of
the engineering plans for the subdivision. When the proposed development is to
be served by a lift station required under division (F) above, the developer
shall pay all applicable pro rata fees for the station pursuant to §
50.07 prior to release of the engineering plans.
(Ord. 458, passed 4-27-1999)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.04 EXTENSION OF MAINS FOR DEVELOPMENT.
   Developers shall extend water and wastewater mains to and through the
property that is to be subdivided or developed in accordance with the following
procedures and minimum standards.
   (A)   Size of mains. Water and wastewater mains shall be sized and designed
in accordance with the city’s water distribution plans and sanitary sewer
master plans.
   (B)   Extensions within property to be developed. All water and wastewater
mains shall be extended through or across the frontage of the property to be
developed in streets, alleys, or in easements to the tract or addition in order
to provide service to adjacent property where applicable.
   (C)   Acquisition of easements. The developer must obtain, at no cost to the
city, all off-site easements which are necessary for extending water and
wastewater mains to the property being developed. A metes and bounds
description of the easements and a drawing of the easement must be submitted to
the City Engineer in order for the proper legal document to be prepared. The
document will be sent to the developer for acquisition of the required
signatures. The executed document and filing fees will be returned to the City
Administrator for filing with the County Clerk.
   (D)   Agreement required. Prior to extension of any water main or wastewater
main for which there is a city oversize reimbursement, or any construction of
such a facility or appurtenances thereto, the developer shall execute an
improvement agreement with the city that clearly defines the scope and details
of the proposed extension and which contains the developer’s agreement to abide
by all regulations of the city and to deliver to the city clear and
unencumbered title to all proposed improvements prior to the time of acceptance
by the city. The agreement shall provide for security in a form approved by the
City Attorney.
(Ord. 458, passed 4-27-1999)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.05 OVERSIZE MAINS; CITY PARTICIPATION AND REIMBURSEMENT.
   (A)   City participation policy. The city may participate in the reasonable
construction costs of oversizing water or wastewater mains and appurtenances
thereto that exceed the size of a water or wastewater main 12 inches in
diameter. The developer initially shall be responsible for the entire costs of
the oversize main. City oversize participation, if any, shall be in accordance
with
Chapter 155 (the subdivision regulations) and this subchapter.
   (B)   Funds; availability. In no event may the city be required to
participate in the costs of oversize mains pursuant to this section if the city
determines there are no funds available for those purposes.
   (C)   Participation and reimbursement requests. A request for city
participation authorized by divisions (A) and (B) hereof shall be initiated
through the submission of an application for participation by the developer in
accordance with
Chapter 155. The application shall be accompanied by as-built drawings showing
the reimbursable items, a copy of the contractor’s bid for construction, final
payments with quantities, oversize calculations for all reimbursable items, and
a project location map.
   (D)   City reimbursement. If the request for city participation is approved
by the city, following dedication and acceptance of a facility or appurtenances
in which it has agreed to participate, the city shall refund the costs of
oversizing the facility in accordance with the following procedures and
standards.
      (1)   Oversizing standards. The following standards apply to the
determination of the costs of oversizing water or wastewater mains:
         (a)   The size of a standard water main shall be 8 inches;
         (b)   The size of a standard wastewater main shall be 8 inches;
         (c)   Where the size of the water or wastewater main needed exceeds
that of a standard facility, the size of the main to be installed shall be
determined by the City Engineer, whose decision shall be final; and
         (d)   The city shall pay only the difference in cost between the
standard main with appurtenances and the oversized main with appurtenances as
required by the City Engineer.
      (2)   Oversize cost determination. The extent of the city’s participation
in the costs of oversized mains shall be determined by comparing costs computed
by the following 2 methods:
         (a)   Method 1. The developer shall take bids on installation of a
system using the standard size main and the larger size that will actually be
installed. Copies of the bids, tabulations, and figures shall be submitted to
the City Engineer. Calculations shall delineate the total cost for installation
of the oversize mains with appurtenances, along with the cost for installing
standard size mains with appurtenances, with the differences noted as
participation by the city; or
         (b)   Method 2. Periodically the City Engineer shall establish a table
of water and wastewater facility costs (“table”). The table shall establish
base unit costs used to determine the maximum difference in cost between the
standard size main and the cost of oversize mains likely to be installed, using
average costs of all water and wastewater mains installed in the general area
during the previous 12 months or by cost indexing based on data from
Engineering News Records, or other reliable sources. The then current table
shall be incorporated into this section as if fully set forth herein, and shall
be used to determine the city’s participation.
      (3)   City Engineer’s option. The City Engineer shall have the option to
use the method in division (D)(2)(b) whenever he or she considers the results
of the method in division (D)(2)(a) to be unreasonable or whenever the
developer fails to submit the proper information as required.
      (4)   Engineering costs. The city shall pay a maximum of 6% of the
construction cost for engineering fees, including surveying, construction
staking, and supervision.
      (5)   Street rights-of-way. A development shall be responsible for the
full cost of utilities which cross a street right-of-way, up to a maximum width
of 160 feet. A development on 1 side of the street shall be responsible for the
cost of utilities up to 80 feet in length. If the required street right-of-way
exceeds 160 feet, the city will assume the cost of the excess length of the
utility line as oversize participation.
(Ord. 458, passed 4-27-1999)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.06 EXTENSIONS TO INDIVIDUAL LOTS.
   For paramount purpose of health and safety, the city may extend a water or
wastewater main to individual residential lots. In these cases, each individual
lot owner shall be responsible for a pro rata share of the cost of the main
abutting the lot, as determined by the City Council.
(Ord. 458, passed 4-27-1999)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.07 PRO RATA FEES.
   (A)   Pro rata fees to be established.
      (1)   Nature of fee. A charge known as a “pro rata fee” shall be imposed
against all undeveloped property abutting an existing water or wastewater main
or for undeveloped property within the drainage area of a lift station, for
which that fee has been established pursuant to this subchapter, as a condition
of connection to that main or lift station, for the purpose of reimbursing the
city or the developer who previously installed or paid for the main or lift
station.
      (2)   Amount of fee. The pro rata fee shall be established for each side
of the main to which connections are to be made. The fee for each side shall be
equivalent to 1/2 the average cost of the standard size main, together with all
the appurtenances, based upon the verified costs pursuant to division (B) of
this section, for that length of the main abutting the property being charged.
For mains that can be connected to from 1 side only, the fee shall be
equivalent to the average cost of the standard size main, together with all
appurtenances, for that length of the main abutting the property being charged.
   (B)   Procedure for establishing pro rata fees.
      (1)   Request for pro rata fees. Prior to final acceptance of the
improvements, the developer shall submit a written request to the City
Engineer, stating whether a pro rata fee will or will not be established for
the main that the developer installed.
      (2)   Submittal requirements. The request to establish a pro rata fee
shall be in writing as designated by the city. The request shall include a copy
of the actual contract with unit prices. The request must identify the cost of
the main, including fire hydrants, valves, fittings, manholes, and other
appurtenances which were determined necessary by the city for the construction
of the line.
      (3)   Verification of costs by Engineer. The City Engineer shall verify
the developer’s calculations for the reimbursement. In the event of a
discrepancy, the City Engineer shall establish the cost per foot for the pro
rata fee.
      (4)   Reimbursement amount. The maximum amount for which a developer may
be reimbursed from the proceeds of pro rata fees for the main installed shall
not exceed the costs determined by the City Engineer under division (B)(3) of
this section, plus engineering fees, calculated at the rate of 6% of the
verified construction cost.
      (5)   Pro rata for lift station. In the event that a lift station which
exceeds the area necessary to serve a development is required pursuant to §§
50.03 - 50.06 of this code, the developer must submit a written request for
establishment of a pro rata fee for the lift station, which shall be on a cost
per acre basis. The costs eligible for reimbursement shall include the lift
station, force main, and other appurtenances, the other items included in
division (B)(2) of this section. The City Engineer shall be responsible for
approving the cost per acre submitted by the developer for the drainage area
served by the facility, as provided in division (B)(3) of this section.
   (C)   Payment of pro rata fees.
      (1)   Obligation to pay fees. As undeveloped property begins the
development process, the pro rata fee shall become payable with either the
preliminary plat or the final plat approval. The fee must be paid prior to the
approval of the engineering plans for the development, by the City Engineer.
      (2)   Calculation of fee. The amount of the pro rata fee shall be
calculated by multiplying the unit cost determined in division (B) of this
section by the number of linear feet of that portion of the property boundary
of a lot which abuts a street, alley, or easement containing a water or
wastewater main for which pro rata fees have been established, or the per acre
fee multiplied by the number of acres in the development.
   (D)   Pro rata fee account. Two pro rata fee accounts are hereby
established.
      (1)   In the first account, the city shall deposit all pro rata fees
collected pursuant to division (B) of this section (from developers) into the
account. Expenditure from this account shall be earmarked for reimbursement of
developers for the reasonable costs of installing water mains, wastewater
mains, and wastewater lift stations for which pro rata fees have been
established pursuant to division (B).
      (2)   The second account may hold the city funds from all other sources
for related improvements, and funds collected to reimburse the city for
expenses described in division (D)(1) above which the city has paid.
   (E)   Reimbursement for water and wastewater main extensions.
      (1)   Reimbursement time limit. For a period of 10 years after dedication
to and acceptance by the city of the completed facility, the developer shall be
entitled to reimbursement from the proceeds of the pro rata fees established
pursuant to division (B) of this section up to the total cost of the
extensions, save and except the portion attributable to the cost of the
extension to the developer’s tract(s). Payment shall be from the pro rata fee
account. The city shall make reimbursements within 90 days after receipt of the
pro rata fee.
      (2)   Unclaimed funds. If the city is unable to reimburse the developer
who installed the main, following reasonable attempts to locate the developer,
the city shall refund all fees which remain unclaimed 10 years following the
date of acceptance of the water or wastewater main, together with interest
accrued, to the depositor of the fee. If the depositor cannot be located, the
pro rata fees shall be transferred to the water and sewer fund for expenditure
in accordance with general provisions.
   (F)   City collection fee. On all pro rata fees returned to the developer,
the city shall deduct 2% of the amount collected plus $100 as a collection fee.
(Ord. 458, passed 4-27-1999)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of §§
50.01 et seq. shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
in the Municipal Court shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000 for each
offense.
(Ord. 458, passed 4-27-1999)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
Water System Regulations; General Provisions
   
51.01   Purpose
   
51.02   Scope
   
51.03   Area of service
   
51.04   Definitions
Water System Regulations; Construction
   
51.15   Compliance required; approval
   
51.16   Design standards apply
   
51.17   Specifications
   
51.18   Inspections; testing
Water System Regulations; Unlawful Acts
   
51.30   Unlawful connections and use
   
51.31   Cross-connections and undesirable plumbing practices
   
51.32   Interference with water system; prohibited acts
   
51.33   Plumbing restrictions
Water System Regulations; Water Service; Administration
   
51.45   Meters
   
51.46   Application for service
   
51.47   Billing
   
51.48   Discontinuance of service; grounds
   
51.49   Notice of disconnection
   
51.50   Voluntary disconnection
   
51.51   Notice of meter removal
   
51.52   Meter testing
   
51.53   Deposits
   
51.54   Indemnification
   
51.55   Free service not permitted
   
51.56   Rates set by Council
Emergency Water Management Plan
   
51.70   Purpose; scope
   
51.71   Exemption
   
51.72   Definitions
   
51.73   Emergency criteria
   
51.74   Authority to declare emergency
   
51.75   Plan implementation and termination
   
51.76   Duration; change or extension of stage of emergency
   
51.77   Landscape and outdoor watering
Water Impact Fees
   
51.85   General provisions
   
51.86   Water impact fees
   
51.87   Accounting and use of impact fees
 
   
51.99   Penalty
WATER SYSTEM REGULATIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the duty of the city to ensure that its citizens are provided a source
of potable water. These regulations, standards, and procedures are established
by the city. These regulations, standards, and procedures are designed to
promote public welfare, health, and safety and to provide a uniform water
service for the customers of the city.
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992)
§ 51.02 SCOPE.
   These regulations, standards, and procedures, when enacted as an ordinance
of the city, shall control the planning, installation, inspection, maintenance,
and operation of the water system. The enforcement and penalties for violations
of these regulations are established herein.
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.03 AREA OF SERVICE.
   The area of service of the water system for the city is defined to be that
territory within the corporate limits of the city and those customers residing
outside the city prior to June 30, 1988.
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992)
§ 51.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY WATER SYSTEM or WATER SYSTEM. The network of distribution lines
(pipes), pumps, meters, storage tanks, utility easements, or any portion
thereof, together with any ancillary devices or equipment that may be used in
the retail distribution of potable water. The CITY WATER SYSTEM does not
include any water lines, pipes, or equipment on the customer side of the water
meter. Further, the CITY WATER SYSTEM does not include private wells.
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992)
WATER SYSTEM REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
§ 51.15 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; APPROVAL.
   Additions, changes, deletions, or modifications to the water system must be
in compliance with the provisions of this section. Plans and specifications for
additions, changes, deletions, or modifications of the water system shall be
reviewed for compliance with these regulations and for certification of
compliance by the competent city authority or authorities as may be designated
by the city. Construction, as proposed by those plans and specifications, shall
not commence prior to certification by the designated authority and approval by
the city.
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.16 DESIGN STANDARDS APPLY.
   The design and construction of any improvements to the city water system
must comply with the applicable regulations published by the State Department
of Health relating to water distribution (25 TAC § 337.206) and the standards
published by the American Water Works Association (AWWA) as supplemented by the
specifications adopted in §
51.17 of this code.
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.17 SPECIFICATIONS.
   The following provisions and specifications are approved specifications and
provisions for water system construction in the city.
   (A)   Materials. All water lines shall be constructed of approved materials.
Main distribution lines and feeder lines shall be constructed of ductile iron
or AWWA C900 polyvinyl chloride pipe of SDR 21, 200 psi (minimum). Mechanical
joints, or a joint of the type which provides a recession in the bell for the
employment of a single rubber gasket to be placed before the insertion of the
succeeding spigot, shall conform to A.S.T.M. F 477.
   (B)   Size. Main distribution lines shall not be less than 8 inches inside
diameter, except where a main distribution line is proposed to serve a cul-de-
sac less than 400 feet with 6 homes or less, whereupon a 4-inch line may be
allowed, provided a fire hydrant is not required. Larger diameter pipe may be
required by the city.
   (C)   Surface markings. A suitable and permanent marking shall be approved
by the city and provided at ground surface level which will aid in locating the
position of main distribution lines, feeder lines, and cut-off valves. Surface
markings shall not be covered by vegetation or soil such that their location
would be hidden.
   (D)   Utility easements. Sufficient easements for the water system shall be
granted to the city for the purpose of serving the water system and for reading
water meters. Easements shall not be less than 20 feet in width. No permanent
construction, building, fence, or any other improvement which prohibits access
to the water system shall be located within the easement.
   (E)   Location. Main distribution lines, feeder lines, and water meters
shall be located within the utility easement. Main distribution lines and
feeder lines shall not be closer than 2.5 feet to the boundary of the easement
as measured from the closest surface of the pipe to the boundary of the
easement. Water meters may be located outside of the easements, but shall not
be more than 1 foot from the extreme point of the meter to the boundary of the
easement.
   (F)   Trenching. Trenches for installing water main lines shall be a minimum
of 18 inches in width and 12 inches wider than the diameter of the pipe. Water
mains shall be at least 42 inches below ground level. The trench bottom shall
be bedded with 4 inches of tamped sand or gravel. A minimum of 2 inches of
bedding sand shall cover the top surface of the pipe. Any person that installs
water mains shall be responsible for trench safety and stability.
   (G)   Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed as may be required to
provide that no structure is more than 450 feet from a fire hydrant. Standard
3-way fire hydrants, approved by the city, are required, with five 6-inch or
larger connections to mains with a minimum of 5-inch valve openings. Each fire
hydrant shall have a cut-off valve.
   (H)   Valves.
      (1)   Cut-off valves are required not more than 800 feet apart and shall
be placed in such a manner as to require 2 but no more than 3 valves to shut
down an area equivalent to 1 city block, or as many as may be required to
prevent shutting down any more than 1 fire hydrant.
      (2)   On cross-fed main lines without services, a maximum of 4 valves
shall be used to shut down each area equivalent to 1 city block. Valves shall
be placed at or near the end of mains in such a manner that a shut-down if
required can be made for a future main extension without causing loss of
service on the existing main. Valves of 12 inches or under shall be resilient
seat gate valves (RSGV). Valve boxes shall have a concrete pad around them for
easy location with the top of the valve box level with the final grade.
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.18 INSPECTIONS; TESTING.
   (A)   General. Inspection of the water system shall be conducted by the City
Water Department staff. Several inspections are to be conducted as noted
herein. Proceeding to the next phase of construction, prior to the completion
of the inspection or approval by the City Water Department personnel, is
prohibited. The following on-site inspections shall be required.
      (1)   Easement site inspection;
      (2)   Basic installation inspection;
      (3)   Continuity test; and
      (4)   Final inspection and certification.
   (B)   Easement site inspection. The easement site inspection is to provide
the Water Department staff with a visual location of the water system easement.
The easement shall be located and clearly marked by certified surveyors. These
markings shall identify the boundary of the easement, the center line of the
water line, and the location of fire hydrants and cut-off valves. Location of
water mains shall be marked. These features shall be compared to the approved
copy of the engineering plans.
   (C)   Basic installation inspection. The water system basic installation
inspection shall be conducted upon the completion of all trenching operations
and the installation of pipes, cut-off valves, fire hydrants, water meter
boxes, saddle and corner blocks, and other equipment and features. The
inspector shall certify the water system with respect to location, adherence to
specifications, material, and other installation features.
   (D)   Continuity testing.
      (1)   The purpose of the leakage test is to establish that the section of
line tested, including all joints, fittings, and other appurtenances, will not
leak, or that leakage is within the limits of the applicable allowance.
      (2)   Normal operating pressure is usually applied for leakage tests.
Pressure should be maintained at a constant level throughout the period of
test. Measurement of the amount of additional water pumped in during the test
provides a measurement of the amount of leakage, if any.
      (3)   Air trapped in the line during test will affect test results.
Generally the project engineer will establish leakage allowance and indicate
methods and procedures for testing. If not, Table Z, below, may be used to
determine maximum leakage allowable.
      (4)   A properly installed line will normally show little or no leakage
using the methods described.
      (5)   A gross leak can usually be traced to a major problem (such as left
out gasket, dislodged gasket, broken pipe, loose mechanical joint bolts,
inadequate thrust block). Usually these problems are readily detected and
quickly repaired.
      (6)   A minor leak greater than allowable limits is frequently
frustrating and difficult to find and repair. The use of dye in the system may
be necessary. The best way to avoid this problem is to prevent it during
installation.
         (a)   Vent all high points; use a corporation stop if air release
valves are not required.
         (b)   Double and triple check all mechanical joint bolts.
Table Z: Leakage Allowable, in U.S. Gallons per 1,000 Feet per Hour
Pipe Size Test Pressure
          50 psi 100 psi 150 psi 200 psi 250 psi
Table Z: Leakage Allowable, in U.S. Gallons per 1,000 Feet per Hour
Pipe Size Test Pressure
          50 psi 100 psi 150 psi 200 psi 250 psi
4 inches  0.38   0.54    0.66    0.77    0.85
6 inches  0.57   0.81    0.99    1.15    1.28
8 inches  0.76   1.08    1.32    1.53    1.71
10 inches 0.96   1.35    1.66    1.91    2.14
12 inches 1.15   1.62    1.99    2.30    2.56
 
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992)
Penalty, see § 51.99
WATER SYSTEM REGULATIONS; UNLAWFUL ACTS
§ 51.30 UNLAWFUL CONNECTIONS AND USE.
   (A)   No part of the water system may be directly or indirectly connected,
either in a temporary or permanent manner, to a private water source, well,
storage tank, or other non-approved water source.
   (B)   No fraudulent device or arrangement for the purpose of providing water
for individuals or others from private connections will be permitted.
   (C)   No connections to the city water system may be made without the
approval of the city.
   (D)   No water of the system may be turned on, off, or used without the
approval of the city.
   (E)   No utility bypass or connection between meters and the main source of
water will be permitted.
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.31 CROSS-CONNECTIONS AND UNDESIRABLE PLUMBING PRACTICES.
   (A)   The customer shall allow his or her property to be inspected for
possible cross-connections and other undesirable plumbing practices. These
inspections shall be conducted by the water system or its designated agent
prior to initiating service and periodically thereafter. The inspections shall
be conducted during the water system’s normal business hours.
   (B)   The water system shall notify the customer in writing of any cross-
connection or other undesirable plumbing practice which has been identified
during the initial inspection or the periodic reinspection.
   (C)   The customer shall immediately correct any undesirable plumbing
practice on his or her premises.
   (D)   The customer shall, at his or her expense, properly install, test, and
maintain any backflow prevention device required by the water system. Copies of
all testing and maintenance records shall be provided to the water system.
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.32 INTERFERENCE WITH WATER SYSTEM; PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to do, commit, or assist in
the committing of any of the following acts:
   (A)   To open or close any fire hydrant, gate valve, or stop cock connected
with the water system, or lift or remove the covers of any gate valve or shut-
offs thereof, without the permission of the City Water Department, except in
case of fire, and then under the direction of an officer of the Fire
Department;
   (B)   To interfere with, destroy, deface, injure, or wantonly force open any
gate or door, or in any way whatsoever destroy, injure, or deface any part of
any pump house, reservoir, ground storage tank, elevated tank, building or
buildings, or appurtenances, fences, trees, shrubs, or fixtures or property
appertaining to the water system;
   (C)   To go upon or ascend the stairway or steps, on any elevated water
storage tank or stand pipe of the water system, except by permission of the
City Water Department;
   (D)   To place any utility pole, fence, or any obstruction whatsoever within
3 feet of any fire hydrant;
   (E)   To place upon or about any fire hydrant, gate valve, water meter, or
curb cock connected with the water system any object, material, debris, or
structure of any kind, or to interfere in any manner whatsoever with any of the
waterworks, or to turn on the water after service has been disconnected;
   (F)   To park a vehicle within 15 feet of any fire hydrant;
   (G)   To remove any water meter that has been installed by the city, or to
in any manner change, interfere with, or tamper with any water meter; provided
that the provisions of this division shall not apply to the employees of the
city when acting in their official capacity; or
   (H)   To receive water through the water meter of another customer. The
existence of any unauthorized pipe, hose, or other method of transmitting water
between properties, as the case may be, is in violation of the provisions of
this section.
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.33 PLUMBING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or install or allow the use
or installation of the following materials.
   (B)   (1)   No pipe or pipe fitting which contains more than 8.0% lead may
be used for the installation or repair of plumbing at any connection which
provides water for human use.
      (2)   No solder or flux which contains more than 0.2% lead can be used
for the installation or repair of plumbing at any connection which provides
water for human use.
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992)
Penalty, see § 51.99
WATER SYSTEM REGULATIONS; WATER SERVICE; ADMINISTRATION
§ 51.45 METERS.
   Each resident or primary structure shall be served by a separate water
meter. The water meter shall be a 3/4-inch diameter service on the outlet side
with a 5/8-inch diameter opening. Meters shall be installed in the easement in
the center of the front property line. Water service lines shall be 1-inch type
K copper and shall be installed with a corporation stop at the main and an
angle curb stop at the point of metering. All fittings shall be brass. The
meter shall be set whereby the top of the meter is 8 inches below the final
grade level centered in a box acceptable by the city. All water meters shall be
the property of the City Water Department.
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.46 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any connection to the city
water system as defined herein without:
      (1)   Making application to the city, stating fully the proposed use for
which water service is desired;
      (2)   Filing a plat with the city of the area and dwelling to be served;
and
      (3)   Approval of the required application by the city.
   (B)   Before any water service is initiated by the city on an approved
application for water service, the applicant must execute a water service
agreement which will, among other provisions, incorporate the water system
regulations in this chapter, as amended, as a part of the agreement and the
customer’s acknowledgment of the penalties for violation of the regulations. In
addition, if the customer fails to comply with the terms of the service
agreement, the water system shall, at its option, either terminate service or
properly install, test, and maintain an appropriate backflow prevention device
at the service connection. Any expenses associated with the enforcement of this
agreement shall be billed to the customer.
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.47 BILLING.
   Monthly charges for water shall become due and payable on the sixteenth day
of the billing month. If the total amount due the city is not paid by 5:00 p.m.
on the sixteenth day of the billing month, then the bill shall be considered
delinquent and a late fee in the amount specified in the city’s current fee
schedule shall be added to the amount delinquent.
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.48 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; GROUNDS.
   Water service may be discontinued for any of the following reasons:
   (A)   Failure of a customer or user of the city water system to pay a
monthly charge within 30 days from the billing date shall be grounds for the
city to disconnect the service so supplied; and service shall not be resumed
until the total amount due the city and the disconnect/reconnect fee for the
water service has been paid in full;
   (B)   A finding by the City Water Department that the customer is in
violation of 1 or more of these regulations; or
   (C)   Filing by the customer of a petition in bankruptcy.
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992)
§ 51.49 NOTICE OF DISCONNECTION.
   Notice of disconnection of water service shall consist of a mailing or hand
delivery to the customer at least 10 days prior to the date of disconnection.
In the event of disconnection for nonpayment of the monthly bill, there shall
be a disconnect/reconnect fee in the amount specified in the city’s current fee
schedule, which must be paid in addition to the total amount of the bill and
late fee, prior to reconnection of service. The city shall have access to its
meters, equipment, and other property located on a customer’s premises at all
times and for the purposes connected with or in furtherance of its business
operations, and may remove that property from the customer’s premises. The city
shall be under no duty or obligation to inspect, maintain, or repair the pipes,
equipment, or facilities belonging to a customer, and shall not be liable for
damages thereto or arising therefrom.
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992; Am. Ord. 618,
passed 1-22-2008) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.50 VOLUNTARY DISCONNECTION.
   A customer who has a valid right to use a city water meter and is current on
all monetary obligations to the city relating to that meter may request that
the meter be removed. At any time for 5 years after the date of the removal of
the water meter, the customer may have a meter reinstalled upon the payment of
a fee in the amount specified in the city’s current fee schedule. The fee for
reinstallation may be amended by the City Council by resolution.
(Ord. 345A, passed 1-12-1993)
§ 51.51 NOTICE OF METER REMOVAL.
   In the event a customer whose water service has been disconnected due to
nonpayment of the monthly bill, has not had service reconnected within 30 days
from the date of disconnect, the customer shall be given a 10-day written
notification of the intent of the city to remove the water meter for nonpayment
of the bill, and that the customer’s right to use of that meter shall have been
forfeited due to nonpayment. The customer shall be further advised that should
the meter removal occur, a new application and a new meter will be required for
service, at current cost (as specified in the city’s current fee schedule).
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992)
§ 51.52 METER TESTING.
   In the event a customer questions the accuracy of the meter serving his or
her property, the meter shall be checked by the City Water Department. If the
Water Department is of the opinion that the meter is operating properly and the
customer continues to question the accuracy of the meter, the city shall
require a deposit in the amount specified in the city’s current fee schedule to
be paid, and the meter shall be removed from the customer’s property and tested
by an independent testing firm. If the meter is inaccurate by more than 1%, the
city shall refund the deposit and absorb the cost of a new meter. If the meter
is accurate within 1% or less, the deposit shall be retained by the city.
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992)
§ 51.53 DEPOSITS.
   (A)   In general, no deposit is required of customers on the city water
system, with the following exceptions.
   (B)   Any customer that has failed on 3 occasions within any 12-month period
to pay for water service within 30 days of the date printed on any invoice for
water service, shall tender a deposit in the form of cash or certified funds in
accordance with the following schedule:
      (1)   Residential customers: the amount specified in the city’s current
fee schedule; or
      (2)   Commercial customers: 1/6 of the amount billed within the last 12
months.
   (C)   If the customer fails to tender the deposit required within 15 days
after written notice by the city, then the city shall have the right to
terminate water service and remove the city’s water meter.
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.54 INDEMNIFICATION.
   All water service customers shall be held responsible for and indemnify the
city against any injury or loss of city owned property and equipment while it
is on the customer’s premises, arising out of or caused by the negligence,
carelessness, or willful act of the customer or his or her servants, agents,
employees, or any member of his or her household, or any person or persons upon
his or her premises by authority of his or her consent or sufferance.
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.55 FREE SERVICE NOT PERMITTED.
   No free water or utility service shall be permitted, and to the extent the
city or any of its agencies or instrumentalities shall avail themselves of the
services and facilities provided by the water system, they shall pay therefor
the same rates and charges as established for other customers.
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.56 RATES SET BY COUNCIL.
   The ordinances providing for water rates are adopted by reference and shall
be a part of this code as if set forth in full herein.
(Ord. 329, passed 11-14-1989; Am. Ord. 469, passed 10-5-1999; Am. Ord. 592,
passed 3-28-2006; Am. Ord. 618, passed 1-22-2008; Am. Ord. 648, passed 12-1-
2009; Am. Ord. 720, passed 1-22-2015; Am. Ord. 739, passed 8-10-2016; Am. Ord.
840, passed 3-21-2023)
EMERGENCY WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
§ 51.70 PURPOSE; SCOPE.
   (A)   There is hereby established a City Emergency Water Management Plan (in
this subchapter called “the Plan”) to provide procedures to minimize the
effects of a water shortage to customers of the city. The Plan provides for
voluntary and mandatory outdoor water usage reduction to address short or long-
term emergencies.
   (B)   The Plan applies to:
      (1)   All persons and premises within the city using water from the
city’s water system (in the Plan called “the system”);
      (2)   All service customers outside the city; and
      (3)   All retail customers who live in unincorporated areas within the
city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction and are served by the system.
(Ord. 439, passed 7-14-1998)
§ 51.71 EXEMPTION.
   Governmental uses of water determined to be necessary for the public health,
safety, and welfare, or for essential services such as fire, police, and
emergency services, are exempt from any and all restrictions or mandates
herein.
(Ord. 439, passed 7-14-1998)
§ 51.72 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The City Administrator of this city or his or her
designee.
   CITY STAFF. All department heads, including the Chief of Police.
   GENERAL EMERGENCY. A condition in which the existing or projected water
supply available to the city is not anticipated to meet the ordinary water
requirements of metered water users. This condition may be the result of
factors including, but not limited to, natural emergency conditions (such as
drought and the like) or a failure of the city’s or its supplier’s water
distribution systems.
   GEOGRAPHICAL EMERGENCY. A condition in which the existing or projected water
supply available to the city is not anticipated to meet the ordinary water
requirements of a section or sections of the metered water users. This
condition may be the result of factors including, but not limited to, natural
emergency conditions (such as drought, fire, and the like) or a failure of the
city’s or its supplier’s water distribution systems.
   LANDSCAPE. Natural plant materials indigenous to a region and the addition
of decorative or functional plantings around buildings or on grounds (such as
trees, shrubbery, grasses, flowers).
   MAYOR. The Mayor of this city or his or her designee.
(Ord. 439, passed 7-14-1998)
§ 51.73 EMERGENCY CRITERIA.
   Emergency criteria triggering the implementation of various stages of the
Plan include, but are not limited to, the following:
   (A)   General or geographical emergency;
   (B)   Water system failures or emergencies (such as pressure zone
deficiencies, chemical spills, broken water mains, power outages, electrical
failure, failure of storage tanks or other equipment, treatment plant
breakdown, and water contamination);
   (C)   Supply failure from the North Texas Municipal Water District or
initiation of any stage in its drought contingency plan;
   (D)   An inability to recover approximately 90% in all storage facilities
within a 24-hour period;
   (E)   An inability to recover approximately 90% in all storage facilities
within a 48-hour period; or
   (F)   Notification by the North Texas Water Management District of a
catastrophic decrease in reservoir levels or delivery capabilities resulting in
an inability, presently or in the immediate future, to recover resources
sufficient to provide services necessary for the public health, safety, and
welfare.
(Ord. 439, passed 7-14-1998)
§ 51.74 AUTHORITY TO DECLARE EMERGENCY.
   Upon the recommendation of the Mayor and the City Administrator that an
emergency situation exists and that implementation of an emergency water
management plan is necessary to protect the public welfare and safety, the
Mayor is hereby authorized to declare that a state of emergency exists and to
authorize the City Administrator to implement the applicable provisions of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 439, passed 7-14-1998)
§ 51.75 PLAN IMPLEMENTATION AND TERMINATION.
   (A)   Determination of emergency. The City Administrator, after consultation
with the city staff, and if reasonably possible, a representative from the
North Texas Municipal Water District, may, based upon the criteria listed in
this subchapter, determine that conditions of a water emergency exist. Upon
that determination, the City Administrator shall advise the Mayor. The Mayor
shall, based upon the criteria specified in §
51.77 of this code, specify the appropriate stage of emergency that exists and
may order that the measures authorized under §
51.77 be implemented.
   (B)   General emergency.
      (1)   To initiate effective general emergency implementation of the Plan
in the event of a general emergency, the order must be:
         (a)   Made by public announcement; and
         (b)   Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city
within 24 hours after the public announcement.
      (2)   The order becomes effective immediately upon publication.
   (C)   Geographical emergency or demand restrictions. Geographical
emergencies may include an area served by the city resulting in a demand for
water which lessens the overall pressure and supply of water to either an
unacceptable or dangerous level. Upon the recommendation from city staff, the
Mayor may determine that the supply to a geographical area may specifically be
restricted, including the regulation of specific water usage. Notwithstanding
any other provision in this subchapter, a water customer whose use is
determined by the Mayor to be high enough to create a negative impact on other
customers in the geographic area shall be ordered to reduce consumption
immediately. Any water customers affected by the order shall be provided
written instructions as to what the emergency restrictions shall be upon their
use of water until the emergency is abated. Failure to immediately follow the
written instructions of the city is a violation of this subchapter, in
accordance with this section. The restrictions for a geographic emergency may
be directed to an individual water customer, a homeowners association, a
developer, and any other customer or user of water provided by the city.
   (D)   Mayor’s absence. The Mayor may appoint the Mayor Pro Tem or the City
Administrator to take action in the event of the Mayor’s absence.
   (E)   Supplemental notification. Any number of supplemental public
notifications may also be utilized after an emergency is declared, including
notices posted at City Hall, the fire station, and publicized by direct mail,
television, radio, and other news media.
   (F)   Termination. All implemented actions remain in effect until the
condition(s) which triggered activation of those actions have been alleviated
or until the Mayor determines that the conditions triggering the emergency no
longer exist and advises the City Administrator. The Mayor may then order the
termination of emergency measures. The public will be informed of the
termination in the same manner as provided above in divisions (B) and (C).
(Ord. 439, passed 7-14-1998; Am. Ord. 523, passed 8-13-2002)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.76 DURATION; CHANGE OR EXTENSION OF STAGE OF EMERGENCY.
   The Plan is effective on a year-round basis. Upon the recommendation of the
City Administrator, the Mayor may upgrade or downgrade the stage of emergency
when the criteria identified in §
51.77 trigger such an upgrade or downgrade. Any change in the order must be
implemented in the same manner, and must meet all notice requirements
prescribed in §
51.75. The Mayor may declare any stage of the Plan specified herein to be
effective for a period not to exceed 90 days. Thereafter, the City Council may,
upon recommendation of the Mayor and the City Administrator, extend the
duration of the particular stage for additional time periods up to, but not to
exceed, 120 days each. The Mayor may terminate the particular stage in the
manner prescribed in §
51.75, when the City Administrator determines the conditions creating the
emergency no longer exist and advises the Mayor accordingly.
(Ord. 439, passed 7-14-1998)
§ 51.77 LANDSCAPE AND OUTDOOR WATERING.
   (A)   Landscape and outdoor watering as defined below in this chapter are
limited to the following addresses on the following days. Watering may take
place once every week under the Stage 3 restrictions.
 
Last Digit of Address Allowed Landscape Water Days
0 or 9                Monday
1 or 8                Tuesday
2 or 7                Wednesday
3 or 6                Thursday
4 or 5                Friday
No outdoor watering on Saturday or Sunday
 
   (B)   In the event NTMWD determines landscape watering should be modified
and reduced to once per every 2 weeks, notice of that requirement and a
calendar showing watering weeks will be posted on the city website. Additional
notice may be mailed to Parker water customers. The calendar will start each
calendar year the first week in May, example shown below. A property owner with
an address ending in 0 or 9 would comply with the once every 2 weeks schedule
in the example calendar below by watering on Monday the 5th, and/or Monday the
19th. There would be no outdoor watering at that address on any other day in
May in the example given below.
 
May 2014
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
                                1        2      3
4      5      6       7         8        9      10
11     12     13      14        15       16     17
18     19     20      21        22       23     24
25     26     27      28        29       30     31
 
   (C)   The following provisions of §§ 11.4 through 11.9 of the NTMWD Model
Plan are modified, adopted and incorporated within this chapter. Definitions
are as follows:
      CITY.  The City of Parker.
      NTMWD.  The North Texas Municipal Water District.
   (D)   Provisions for continuing public education and information. The city
may inform and educate the public about the Drought Contingency and Water
Emergency Response Plan by the following means:
      (1)   Preparing a bulletin describing the Plan and making it available at
city hall and other appropriate locations.
      (2)   Making the Plan available to the public through the city's web
site.
      (3)   Including information about the Drought Contingency and Water
Emergency Response Plan on the city's web site.
      (4)   Notifying local organizations, schools, and civic groups that staff
are available to make presentations on the Drought Contingency and Water
Emergency Response Plan (usually in conjunction with presentations on water
conservation programs).
      (5)   At any time that the Drought Contingency and Water Emergency
Response Plan is activated or the drought stage or water emergency response
stage changes, the city may notify local media of the issues, the drought
response stage or water emergency response stage (if applicable), and the
specific actions required of the public. The information may also be publicized
on the city's web site (if available). Billing inserts will also be used as
appropriate.
   (E)   Initiation and termination of drought or water emergency response
stages.
      (1)   Initiation of a drought or water emergency response stage. The City
Administrator, Mayor or official designee may order the implementation of a
drought or water emergency response stage when 1 or more of the trigger
conditions for that stage is met. The following actions will be taken when a
drought or water emergency response stage is initiated:
         (a)   The public will be notified through local media and the city's
web site.
         (b)   If any mandatory provisions of the Drought Contingency and Water
Emergency Response Plan are activated, the city will notify the Executive
Director of the TCEQ and the Executive Director of the NTMWD within 5 business
days.
         (c)   Drought contingency/water emergency response stages imposed by
NTMWD action must be initiated by the city. For other trigger conditions
internal to a city or water supply entity, the City Administrator, Mayor, or
official designee may decide not to order the implementation of a drought
response stage or water emergency even though 1 or more of the trigger criteria
for the stage are met. Factors which could influence such a decision include,
but are not limited to, the time of the year, weather conditions, the
anticipation of replenished water supplies, or the anticipation that additional
facilities will become available to meet needs. The reason for this decision
should be documented.
      (2)   Termination of a drought/water emergency response stage. The City
Administrator, Mayor, or official designee may order the termination of a
drought or water emergency response stage when the conditions for termination
are met or at their discretion. The following actions will be taken when a
drought or emergency response stage is terminated:
         (a)   The public will be notified through local media and the city's
web site.
         (b)   Wholesale customers (if any) and the NTMWD will be notified by
e-mail with a follow-up letter or fax.
         (c)   If any mandatory provisions of the Drought Contingency and Water
Emergency Response Plan that have been activated are terminated, the city will
notify the Executive Director of the TCEQ and the Executive Director of the
NTMWD within 5 business days.
         (d)   The City Administrator, Mayor, or official designee may decide
not to order the termination of a drought or water emergency response stage
even though the conditions for termination of the stage are met. Factors which
could influence such a decision include, but are not limited to, the time of
the year, weather conditions, or the anticipation of potential changed
conditions that warrant the continuation of the drought stage. The reason for
this decision should be documented.
   (F)   Drought contingency and water emergency response stages and measures.
      (1)   Stage 1.
         (a)   Initiation and termination conditions for Stage 1.
            1.   The NTMWD has initiated Stage 1, which may be initiated due to
1 or more of the following:
               a.   The NTMWD Executive Director, with the concurrence of the
NTMWD Board of Directors, finds that conditions warrant the declaration of
Stage 1.
               b.   Water demand is projected to approach the limit of the
permitted supply.
               c.   The storage in Lavon Lake is less than 65% of the total
conservation pool capacity.
               d.   NTMWD's storage in Jim Chapman Lake is less than 65% of
NTMWD's total conservation pool capacity.
               e.   The Sabine River Authority has indicated that its Upper
Basin water supplies used by NTMWD (Lake Tawakoni and/or Lake Fork) are in a
mild drought.
               f.   NTMWD has concern that Lake Texoma, the East Fork Raw Water
Supply Project, or some other NTMWD source may be limited in availability in
the next 6 months.
               g.   NTMWD water demand exceeds 90% of the amount that can be
delivered to customers for 3 consecutive days.
               h.   Water demand for all or part of NTMWD's delivery system
approaches delivery capacity because delivery capacity is inadequate.
               i.   NTMWD's supply source becomes contaminated.
               j.   NTMWD's water supply system is unable to deliver water due
to the failure or damage of major water system components.
            2.   The city's water demand exceeds 90% of the amount that can be
delivered to customers for 3 consecutive days.
            3.   The city's water demand for all or part of the delivery system
approaches delivery capacity because delivery capacity is inadequate.
            4.   The supply source becomes contaminated.
            5.   The city's water supply system is unable to deliver water due
to the failure or damage of major water system components.
            6.   The city's individual Plan, if adopted, may be implemented if
other criteria dictate.
            7.   Stage 1 may terminate when NTMWD terminates its Stage 1
condition or when the circumstances that caused the initiation of Stage 1 no
longer prevail.
         (b)   Goal for use reduction and actions available under Stage 1.
Stage 1 is intended to raise public awareness of potential drought or water
emergency problems. The goal for water use reduction under Stage 1 is a 2%
reduction in the amount of water produced by NTMWD. The City Administrator,
Mayor, or official designee may order the implementation of any of the actions
listed below, as deemed necessary:
            1.   Request voluntary reductions in water use by the public and by
wholesale customers.
            2.   Notify wholesale customers of actions being taken and request
implementation of similar procedures.
            3.   Increase public education efforts on ways to reduce water use.
            4.   Review the problems that caused the initiation of Stage 1.
            5.   Intensify efforts on leak detection and repair.
            6.   Reduce non-essential city government water use. (Examples
include street cleaning, vehicle washing, operation of ornamental fountains,
and the like).
            7.   Notify major water users and work with them to achieve
voluntary water use reductions.
            8.   Reduce city government water use for landscape irrigation.
            9.   Ask the public to follow voluntary landscape watering
schedules.
      (2)   Stage 2.
         (a)   Initiation and termination conditions for Stage 2.
            1.   The NTMWD has initiated Stage 2, which may be initiated due to
1 or more of the following:
               a.   The NTMWD Executive Director, with the concurrence of the
NTMWD Board of Directors, finds that conditions warrant the declaration of
Stage 2.
               b.   Water demand is projected to approach the limit of the
permitted supply.
               c.   The storage in Lavon Lake is less than 55% of the total
conservation pool capacity.
               d.   NTMWD's storage in Jim Chapman Lake is less than 55% of
NTMWD's total conservation pool capacity.
               e.   The Sabine River Authority has indicated that its Upper
Basin water supplies used by NTMWD (Lake Tawakoni and/or Lake Fork) are in a
mild drought.
               f.   NTMWD has concern that Lake Texoma, the East Fork Raw Water
Supply Project, or some other NTMWD source may be limited in availability in
the next 3 months.
               g.   NTMWD water demand exceeds 95% of the amount that can be
delivered to customers for 3 consecutive days.
               h.   NTMWD water demand for all or part of the delivery system
equals delivery capacity because delivery capacity is inadequate.
               i.   NTMWD's supply source becomes contaminated.
               j.   NTMWD's water supply system is unable to deliver water due
to the failure or damage of major water system components.
            2.   The city's water demand exceeds 95% of the amount that can be
delivered to customers for 3 consecutive days.
            3.   The city's water demand for all or part of the delivery system
equals delivery capacity because delivery capacity is inadequate.
            4.   The supply source becomes contaminated.
            5.   The city's water supply system is unable to deliver water due
to the failure or damage of major water system components.
            6.   The city's individual Plan may be implemented if other
criteria dictate.
            7.   Stage 2 may terminate when NTMWD terminates its Stage 2
condition or when the circumstances that caused the initiation of Stage 2 no
longer prevail.
         (b)   Goal for use reduction and actions available under Stage 2. The
goal for water use reduction under Stage 2 is a 5% reduction in the amount of
water produced by NTMWD. If circumstances warrant or if required by NTMWD, the
City Administrator, Mayor, or official designee can set a goal for greater
water use reduction. The City Administrator, Mayor, or official designee may
order the implementation of any of the actions listed below, as deemed
necessary. Measures described as "requires notification to TCEQ" impose
mandatory requirements on customers. The city must notify TCEQ and NTMWD within
5 business days if these measures are implemented:
            1.   Continue or initiate any actions available under Stage 1.
            2.   Notify wholesale customers of actions being taken and request
them to implement similar procedures.
            3.   Initiate engineering studies to evaluate alternatives should
conditions worsen.
            4.   Further accelerate public education efforts on ways to reduce
water use.
            5.   Halt non-essential city government water use. (Examples
include street cleaning, vehicle washing, operation of ornamental fountains,
and the like).
            6.   Encourage the public to wait until the current drought or
emergency situation has passed before establishing new landscaping.
            7.   Requires notification to TCEQ - limit landscape watering with
sprinklers or irrigation systems to no more than 2 days per week. An exception
is allowed for landscape associated with new construction that may be watered
as necessary for 30 days from the date of the certificate of occupancy. An
exemption is also allowed for registered and properly functioning ET/Smart
irrigation systems and drip irrigation systems, which do not have restrictions
to the number of days per week of operation.
            8.   Requires notification to TCEQ - restrict landscape and lawn
irrigation from 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. beginning April 1 through October 31 of
each year.
            9.   Requires notification to TCEQ - Prohibit planting of cool
season grasses (such as rye grass or other similar grasses) that intensify cool
season water requirements.
      (3)   Stage 3.
         (a)   Initiation and termination conditions for Stage 3.
            1.   The NTMWD has initiated Stage 3, which may be initiated due to
1 or more of the following:
               a.   The NTMWD Executive Director, with the concurrence of the
NTMWD Board of Directors, finds that conditions warrant the declaration of
Stage 3.
               b.   Water demand is projected to approach or exceed the limit
of the permitted supply.
               c.   The storage in Lavon Lake is less than 45% of the total
conservation pool capacity.
               d.   NTMWD's storage in Jim Chapman Lake is less than 45% of
NTMWD's total conservation pool capacity.
               e.   The Sabine River Authority has indicated that its Upper
Basin water supplies used by NTMWD (Lake Tawakoni and/or Lake Fork) are in a
moderate drought. (Measures required by SRA under a moderate drought
designation are similar to those under NTMWD's Stage 3.)
               f.   The supply from Lake Texoma, the East Fork Raw Water Supply
Project, or some other NTMWD source has become limited in availability.
               g.   NTMWD water demand exceeds 98% of the amount that can be
delivered to customers for 3 consecutive days.
               h.   NTMWD water demand for all or part of the delivery system
exceeds delivery capacity because delivery capacity is inadequate.
               i.   NTMWD's supply source becomes contaminated.
               j.   NTMWD's water supply system is unable to deliver water due
to the failure or damage of major water system components.
            2.   The city's water demand exceeds 98% of the amount that can be
delivered to customers for 3 consecutive days.
            3.   The city's water demand for all or part of the delivery system
exceeds delivery capacity because delivery capacity is inadequate.
            4.   The supply source becomes contaminated.
            5.   The city's water supply system is unable to deliver water due
to the failure or damage of major water system components.
            6.   The city's individual Plan may be implemented if other
criteria dictate.
            7.   Stage 3 may terminate when NTMWD terminates its Stage 3
condition or when the circumstances that caused the initiation of Stage 3 no
longer prevail.
         (b)    Goals for use reduction and actions available under Stage 3.
The goal for water use reduction under Stage 3 is a reduction of 10% in the
amount of water obtained from NTMWD. If circumstances warrant or if required by
NTMWD, the City Administrator, Mayor, or official designee can set a goal for a
greater water use reduction. The City Administrator, Mayor, or official
designee must implement any action(s) required by NTMWD. In addition, the City
Administrator, Mayor, or official designee may order the implementation of any
of the actions listed below, as deemed necessary. Measures described as
"requires notification to TCEQ" impose mandatory requirements on customers. The
city must notify TCEQ and NTMWD within 5 business days if these measures are
implemented:
            1.   Continue or initiate any actions available under Stages 1 and
2.
            2.   Notify wholesale customers of actions being taken and request
them to implement similar procedures.
            3.   Implement viable alternative water supply strategies.
            4.   Requires notification to TCEQ - initiate mandatory water use
restrictions as follows:
               a.   Prohibit hosing of paved areas, buildings, or windows.
(Pressure washing of impervious surfaces is allowed.)
               b.   Prohibit operation of all ornamental fountains or other
amenity impoundments to the extent they use treated water.
               c.   Prohibit washing or rinsing of vehicles by hose except with
a hose end cutoff nozzle.
               d.   Prohibit using water in such a manner as to allow runoff or
other waste.
            5.   Requires notification to TCEQ - limit landscape watering with
sprinklers or irrigation systems at each service address to once every 7 days.
Exceptions are as follows:
               a.   Foundations, new landscaping, new plantings (first year) of
shrubs, and trees may be watered for up to 2 hours on any day by a hand-held
hose, a soaker hose, or a dedicated zone using a drip irrigation system.
               b.   Golf courses may water greens and tee boxes without
restrictions.
               c.   Public athletic fields used for competition may be watered
twice per week.
               d.   Locations using other sources of water supply for
irrigation may irrigate without restrictions.
               e.   Registered and properly functioning ET/Smart irrigation
systems and drip irrigation systems may irrigate without restrictions.
            6.   Requires notification to TCEQ - limit landscape watering with
sprinklers or irrigation systems between November 1 and March 31 to once every
2 weeks. An exception is allowed for landscape associated with new construction
that may be watered as necessary for 30 days from the date of the certificate
of occupancy, temporary certificate of occupancy, or certificate of completion.
            7.   Requires notification to TCEQ - prohibit hydroseeding,
hydromulching, and sprigging.
            8.   Requires notification to TCEQ - existing swimming pools may
not be drained and refilled (except to replace normal water loss).
            9.   Requires notification to TCEQ - initiate a rate surcharge as
requested by NTMWD.
            10.   Requires notification to TCEQ - initiate a rate surcharge for
all water use over a certain level.
            11.   Requires notification to TCEQ - if NTMWD has imposed a
reduction in water available to the city, impose the same percent reduction on
wholesale customers.
            12.   Requires notification to TCEQ - prohibit watering of golf
courses using treated water, except as needed to keep greens and tee boxes
alive.
      (4)   Stage 4.
         (a)   Initiation and termination conditions for Stage 4.
            1.   The NTMWD has initiated Stage 4, which may be initiated due to
1 or more of the following:
               a.   The NTMWD Executive Director, with the concurrence of the
NTMWD Board of Directors, finds that conditions warrant the declaration of
Stage 4.
               b.   Water demand is projected to approach or exceed the limit
of the permitted supply.
               c.   The storage in Lavon Lake is less than 35% of the total
conservation pool capacity.
               d.   NTMWD's storage in Jim Chapman Lake is less than 35% of
NTMWD's total conservation pool capacity.
               e.   The Sabine River Authority has indicated that its Upper
Basin water supplies used by NTMWD (Lake Tawakoni and/or Lake Fork) are in a
severe drought or emergency.
               f.   The supply from Lake Texoma, the East Fork Raw Water Supply
Project, or some other NTMWD source has become severely limited in
availability.
               g.   NTMWD water demand exceeds the amount that can be delivered
to customers.
               h.   NTMWD water demand for all or part of the delivery system
seriously exceeds delivery capacity because the delivery capacity is
inadequate.
               i.   NTMWD's supply source becomes contaminated.
               j.   NTMWD's water supply system is unable to deliver water due
to the failure or damage of major water system components.
            2.   City's water demand exceeds the amount that can be delivered
to customers.
            3.   City's water demand for all or part of the delivery system
seriously exceeds delivery capacity because the delivery capacity is
inadequate.
            4.   Supply source becomes contaminated.
            5.   City's water supply system is unable to deliver water due to
the failure or damage of major water system components.
            6.   City's individual Plan may be implemented if other criteria
dictate.
            7.   Stage 4 may terminate when NTMWD terminates its Stage 4
condition or when the circumstances that caused the initiation of Stage 4 no
longer prevail.
         (b)   Goals for use reduction and actions available under Stage 4. The
goal for water use reduction under Stage 4 is a reduction of whatever amount is
necessary in the amount of water obtained from NTMWD. If circumstances warrant
or if required by NTMWD, the City Administrator, Mayor, or official designee
can set a goal for a greater water use reduction. The City Administrator,
Mayor, or official designee must implement any action(s) required by NTMWD. In
addition, the City Administrator, Mayor, or official designee may order the
implementation of any of the actions listed below, as deemed necessary.
Measures described as "requires notification to TCEQ" impose mandatory
requirements on the city. The city must notify TCEQ and NTMWD within 5 business
days if these measures are implemented.
            1.   Continue or initiate any actions available under Stages 1, 2,
and 3.
            2.   Notify wholesale customers of actions being taken and request
them to implement similar procedures.
            3.   Implement viable alternative water supply strategies.
            4.   Requires notification to TCEQ - prohibit the irrigation of new
landscaping using treated water.
            5.   Requires notification to TCEQ - prohibit washing of vehicles
except as necessary for health, sanitation, or safety reasons.
            6.   Requires notification to TCEQ - prohibit commercial and
residential landscape watering, except that foundations and trees may be
watered for 2 hours on any day with a hand-held hose, a soaker hose, or a
dedicated zone using a drip irrigation system. ET/Smart irrigation systems are
not exempt from this requirement.
            7.   Requires notification to TCEQ - prohibit golf course watering
with treated water except for greens and tee boxes.
            8.   Requires notification to TCEQ - prohibit the permitting of
private pools. Pools already permitted may be completed and filled with water.
Existing private and public pools may add water to maintain pool levels but may
not be drained and refilled.
            9.   Requires notification to TCEQ - require all commercial water
users to reduce water use by a percentage established by the City
Administrator, Mayor, or official designee.
            10.   Requires notification to TCEQ - if NTMWD has imposed a
reduction in water available to the city, impose the same percent reduction on
wholesale customers.
            11.   Requires notification to TCEQ - initiate a rate surcharge for
all water use over normal rates for all water use.
   (G)   Procedures for granting variances to the Plan. The City Administrator,
Mayor, or official designee may grant temporary variances for existing water
uses otherwise prohibited under this Drought Contingency and Water Emergency
Response Plan if 1 or more of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   Failure to grant such a variance would cause an emergency condition
adversely affecting health, sanitation, or fire safety for the public or the
person or entity requesting the variance.
      (2)   Compliance with this Plan cannot be accomplished due to technical
or other limitations.
      (3)   Alternative methods that achieve the same level of reduction in
water use can be implemented.
      (4)   Variances shall be granted or denied at the discretion of the City
Administrator, Mayor, or official designee. All petitions for variances should
be in writing and should include the following information:
         (a)   Name and address of the petitioners.
         (b)   Purpose of water use.
         (c)   Specific provisions from which relief is requested.
         (d)   Detailed statement of the adverse effect of the provision from
which relief is requested.
         (e)   Description of the relief requested.
         (f)   Period of time for which the variance is sought.
         (g)   Alternative measures that will be taken to reduce water use.
         (h)   Other pertinent information.
   (H)   Procedures for enforcing mandatory water use restrictions.
      (1)   Mandatory water use restrictions may be imposed in Stage 2, Stage 3
and Stage 4 drought contingency and water emergency response stages. The
penalties associated with the mandatory water use restrictions will be
determined by each entity.
      (2)   Appendix G of the NTMWD Model Plan contains potential ordinances,
resolutions, and orders that may be adopted by the City Council, board, or
governing body approving the Drought Contingency Plan and Water Response Plan,
including enforcement of same.
   (I)   Coordination with the regional water planning groups.
      (1)   Appendix F pf the NTMWD Model Plan includes a copy of a letter sent
to the Chair of the Region C water planning group with this model Drought
Contingency and Water Emergency Response Plan.
      (2)   The cities will send a draft of its ordinance(s) or other
regulation(s) implementing this Plan to NTMWD for their review and comment. The
city will also send the final ordinance(s) or other regulation(s) to NTMWD.
(Ord. 439, passed 7-14-1998; Am. Ord. 713, passed 9-2-2014) Penalty, see §
51.99
WATER IMPACT FEES
§ 51.85 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Short title. This subchapter shall be known and cited as the City of
Parker Water Impact Fee subchapter.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to help ensure that
adequate water facilities are available to serve new growth and development,
and to provide for new growth and development to bear a proportionate share of
the cost of water and wastewater facilities that serve the new growth and
development.
   (C)   Authority; implementing guidelines.
      (1)   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to Tex. Local Gov’t Code Ch.
395.
      (2)   Guidelines to implement and administer this subchapter may be
developed and approved by ordinance or resolution of the City Council.
   (D)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ADVISORY COMMITTEE. The Capital Improvements Advisory Committee on impact
fees in accordance with Tex. Local Gov’t Code Ch. 395.
      CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT. A water facility with a life expectancy of 3 or more
years that is owned and operated by or on behalf of the city, whether or not
the facility is within the impact fee service area.
      CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN. The plan approved by the City Council which
describes the water capital improvements or facility expansions and their costs
which are necessitated by and attributable to development in the impact fee
service area based on the approved land use assumptions. The initial capital
improvements plan is the Capital Improvements Plan and Report for Water Impact
Fees prepared for the city by Birkhoff, Hendricks, and Carter, LLP, which was
approved by the City Council by resolution dated January 9, 2017.
      CITY. The City of Parker, Texas.
      DEVELOPMENT. The subdivision of land, or the construction,
reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation,
or enlargement of any structure, or any use or extension of the use of land,
any of which increases the number of service units that may be used on the land
or in conjunction with the structure. DEVELOPMENT includes the conversion of an
existing use from on-site water facilities to the use of city water facilities.
      FACILITY EXPANSION. An expansion of the capacity of any existing water
facility for the purpose of serving development; it does not include the
repair, maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing water facility
to the extent it serves existing development.
      IMPACT FEE. A fee for water facilities imposed on development in order to
generate revenue to fund or recoup the costs of capital improvements or
facility expansions necessitated by and attributable to the development. IMPACT
FEE does not include:
         (a)   The dedication of rights-of-way or easements for water
facilities;
         (b)   Construction or dedication of on-site or off-site water
facilities under the city's subdivision or other regulations;
         (c)   Fees placed in trust funds for the purpose of reimbursing
developers for oversizing or constructing water facilities;
         (d)   Pro rata fees for reimbursement of the costs for extending city
water; or
         (e)   Charges for water services to a wholesale customer such as a
water district, political subdivision of the state, or other wholesale utility
customer.
      IMPACT FEE RATE. The amount of the impact fee living unit.
      IMPACT FEE SERVICE AREA. The area designated in the Water Impact Fee
Report adopted by the City Council by resolution on January 9, 2017 and adopted
herein by reference within which impact fees will be collected in connection
with development, and for which impact fees will be expended for capital
improvements or facility expansions.
      LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS. A report describing the impact fee service area and
projections of changes in land uses, densities, intensities, and population in
the service area. The initial land use assumptions are contained in the report
on land use assumptions for the implementation of water impact fees prepared
for the city by Birkhoff, Hendricks, and Carter, LLP, which was approved by the
City Council by resolution dated January 9, 2017.
      PROPERTY OWNER. Any person, corporation, legal entity or agent thereof
having a legal or equitable interest in the land for which an impact fee
becomes due. PROPERTY OWNER includes the developer for a development.
      SERVICE UNIT. The applicable standard units of measure shown on the land
use equivalency table in the Impact Fees Capital Improvements Plan which can be
converted to water meter equivalents, for water facilities, which serves as the
standardized measure of consumption, use or generation attributable to the new
unit of development. For roadway facilities, the service unit is converted
vehicle miles.
      WATER FACILITY. Water meter interceptor or main, pump station, storage
tank or other facility included within and comprising an integral component of
the city's water storage or distribution system. WATER FACILITY includes land,
easements or structures associated with such facilities. WATER FACILITY
excludes site-related facilities.
   (E)   Water impact fee service area; applicability of article.
      (1)   The water impact fee service area is depicted on a map included in
the Water Impact Fee Report prepared for the city by Birkhoff, Hendricks, and
Carter, LLP. A copy of this map shall be retained on file at City Hall.
      (2)   This subchapter applies to all development within the impact fee
service area. The provisions of this subchapter shall apply uniformly within
the impact fee service area.
   (F)   Land use assumptions and Capital Improvements Plan.
      (1)   The land use assumptions are incorporated by reference in this
subchapter.
      (2)   The Capital Improvements Plan is incorporated by reference in this
subchapter.
   (G)   Impact fees in relation to other fees and development regulations.
      (1)   Impact fees established by this subchapter are in addition to water
and wastewater meter, tap, or connection fees.
      (2)   For each development to which impact fees apply, the payment of
impact fees as described in this subchapter will constitute a condition of
plat, construction permit, utility connection and other development approvals.
      (3)   This subchapter shall not affect the permissible uses of property,
the density of development, public improvement standards and requirements, or
any other aspect of city development regulations.
   (H)   Functions of Advisory Committee. The Advisory Committee may perform
the following functions:
      (1)   Advise and assist the City Council and city staff in reviewing,
adopting and updating the land use assumptions and the Capital Improvements
Plan;
      (2)   File written comments on the land use assumptions and the Capital
Improvements Plan;
      (3)   Monitor and evaluate implementation of the Capital Improvements
Plan;
      (4)   Advise the city of the need to update or revise the land use
assumptions, Capital Improvements Plan and impact fees; and
      (5)   File periodic reports evaluating the progress of the Capital
Improvements Plan and identifying perceived inequities in implementing the Plan
or administering the impact fees.
   (I)   Updates to plans and revision of fees.
      (1)   The city shall update the land use assumptions and Capital
Improvements Plan at least every 10 years, and shall recalculate the maximum
impact fee rates based on the update, unless the City Council determines that
an update is not needed under division (I)(3). The initial 10-year period will
run from the January 9, 2017 date of the City Council's adoption of the Capital
Improvements Plan.
      (2)   The city may review its land use assumptions, impact fees, Capital
Improvements Plan and other factors such as market conditions more frequently
than provided in division (I)(1) to determine whether the land use assumptions
and Capital Improvements Plan should be updated and the maximum impact fee
rates recalculated.
      (3)   If the City Council determines that no changes to the land use
assumptions, Capital Improvements Plan or impact fees are needed at the time an
update is required under division (I)(1), the Council will provide notice of
this determination as described in Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 395.0575. If no
person submits a timely request for an update of the land use assumptions,
Capital Improvements Plan or impact fee, no update will be necessary.
      (4)   The City Council may amend the actual impact fee rates herein at
any time without revising the land use assumptions and Capital Improvements
Plan. The actual impact fee rates may not, however, exceed the maximum impact
fee rates established herein.
(Ord. 746, passed 4-4-2017)
§ 51.86 WATER IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   Actual and maximum impact fee rates.
      (1)   The actual impact fee rate charged by the city for each category of
capital improvements is set as follows:
         (a)   One-inch meter: $3,938.95.
         (b)   Two-inch meter: $15,755.82.
      (2)   The maximum water impact fee rate allowed by state law for capital
improvements is calculated in the Capital Improvements Plan to be as follows:
         (a)   Single Family Residential 1-inch meter (living unit equivalent:
1) : $3,938.95.
         (b)   Single Family Residential 2-inch meter (living unit equivalent:
4) : $15,755.82.
   (B)   Determination of impact fee rates.
      (1)   The impact fee rates will be those in effect at the time an
application for a building permit, plumbing permit, or utility connection is
submitted to the city, except as provided in division (2) below.
      (2)   For development on property platted or replatted after the original
effective date of this subchapter, the impact fee rates will be those in effect
at the time the plat or replat of the property was recorded. The applicant for
a building or plumbing permit shall submit evidence of the date of plat or
replat recording with the application for a building or plumbing permit.
   (C)   Refunds.
      (1)   At the written request of an owner of the property on which an
impact fee has been paid, the political subdivision shall refund all or part of
the impact fee, together with interest calculated from the date of collection
to the date of refund, if any of the following apply:
         (a)   Existing facilities are available to serve the development and
service is denied for any reason;
         (b)   Existing facilities were not available to serve the development
when the fee was paid, and the city has failed to commence construction of
facilities to provide service within 2 years of payment of the fee; or
         (c)   Existing facilities were not available to serve the development
when the fee was paid, and the city has failed to make service available within
a reasonable period considering the type of facilities to be constructed, but
in no event later than 5 years from the date of payment.
      (2)   Upon written request of an owner of the property on which an impact
fee has been paid, the portion of an impact fee which has not been expended
within 10 years from the date of payment shall be refunded. The application for
refund under this section shall be submitted within 60 days after the
expiration of the 10-year period. Under this section, impact fees will be
deemed expended on a first-in, first-out basis. An impact fee collected under
this subchapter will be deemed expended if the total expenditures for capital
improvements or facility expansions within 10 years after the date of payment
exceeds the total amount of fees collected for the category of improvements or
expansions (water or wastewater) during that period.
      (3)   If a refund is due under divisions (1) or (2) of this section, the
city shall divide the difference between the amount of expenditures and the
amount of the fees collected by the total number of service units identified in
the land use assumptions for the service area to determine the refund due per
service unit. The refund shall be calculated by multiplying the refund due per
service unit by the number of service units for the development for which the
fee was paid, and interest due shall be calculated on that amount. Refunds
shall be made to the record owner of the property at the time of the refund.
   (D)   Rebates. If a building or plumbing permit or an approval of a utility
application in a development expires after an impact fee has been paid, and no
utility connection has been made under the permit or approval, and a modified
or new application has not been filed within 6 months of the expiration, and
the property owner submits a written request to the city within 6 months of the
expiration, the city shall rebate the amount of the impact fee to the record
owner of the property at the time of the refund. If no request for a rebate is
submitted within this period, no rebate shall become due.
(Ord. 746, passed 4-4-2017)
§ 51.87 ACCOUNTING AND USE OF IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   Accounting for impact fees.
      (1)   The city shall establish separate interest-bearing accounts for
water system impact fees.
      (2)   Interest earned on each account shall be credited to that account,
and shall be used solely for the purposes authorized in this subchapter.
      (3)   The city shall establish and maintain financial and accounting
controls to ensure that impact fees disbursed from an account are used solely
for the purposes authorized in this subchapter. Disbursement of funds shall be
authorized by the city at such times as are reasonably necessary to carry out
the purposes and intent of this subchapter.
      (4)   The city shall maintain financial records for each account which
show the source and disbursement of all funds. The records shall be open for
public inspection during ordinary business hours.
   (B)   Use of impact fee accounts.
      (1)   Impact fees collected under this subchapter shall be used to pay or
recoup the costs of constructing capital improvements or facility expansions
identified in the Capital Improvements Plan. Construction costs include the
construction contract price, surveying and engineering costs, and land
acquisition costs (including purchase price, court awards and costs, attorney's
fees, and expert witness fees).
      (2)   Impact fees may be used to pay the principal and interest and other
finance costs on bonds, notes or other obligations issued by or on behalf of
the city to finance capital improvements or facility expansions identified in
the Capital Improvements Plan.
      (3)   Impact fees may be used to pay fees to an independent qualified
engineer or financial consultant (i.e., an engineer or consultant who is not an
employee of the city) for preparing or updating the Capital Improvements Plan.
      (4)   Impact fees collected under this subchapter shall not be used to
pay for any of the following:
         (a)   Construction or acquisition of capital improvements or facility
expansions other than those identified in the Capital Improvements Plan;
         (b)   Repair, operation, or maintenance of existing or new capital
improvements or facility expansions;
         (c)   Upgrade, expansion or replacement of existing capital
improvements that serve existing uses in order to meet stricter safety,
efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards;
         (d)   Upgrade, expansion, or replacement of existing capital
improvements to provide better service to existing uses; or
         (e)   Administrative and operating costs of the city.
      (5)   The city may pledge impact fee revenues as security for the payment
of debt service on a bond, note, or other obligation issued to finance a
capital improvement or facility expansion identified in the Capital
Improvements Plan if the City Council certifies in an ordinance or resolution
that none of the revenues will be used or expended for an improvement or
expansion not identified in the Plan.
   (C)   Exceptions and exemptions.
      (1)   Impact fees shall not be collected from any local taxing unit, as
defined in the state tax code that is authorized to impose and is imposing ad
valorem taxes on property.
      (2)   No wastewater impact fee shall be charged for an irrigation meter.
      (3)   No impact fee shall be charged for a fire line meter that serves
only a fire suppression system.
(Ord. 746, passed 4-4-2017)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   General. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter
for which no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   Water system regulations. Any person, firm, or corporation violating
any of the provisions of this chapter, except §§
51.70 et seq., shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction,
shall be punished by a penalty or fine not to exceed the sum of $2,000 for each
offense; and each and every day the offense is continued shall constitute a new
and separate offense. Further, the city may enforce the provisions of this
chapter, except §§
51.70 et seq., by a civil action for damages or injunctive relief in a court of
competent jurisdiction. In addition to the penalties provided for herein, any
violation of these sections may result in the termination of water service.
(Ord. 337, passed 4-9-1991; Am. Ord. 345, passed 2-11-1992)
   (C)   Emergency water management.
      (1)   Criminal penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of
the provisions or terms of the Emergency Water Management Plan, §§
51.70 et seq., shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000 for each offense; and each
and every day the violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a
separate offense.
      (2)   Administrative remedy. In addition to the fine that may be imposed
for a violation of that subchapter pursuant to division (C)(1) above, upon
Municipal Court conviction of a second offense within an 18-month period of any
Stage 2 or Stage 3 requirement, the city may also terminate service and remove
the meter from the location where the violations occurred.
      (3)   Administrative remedy; customers outside city. The City
Administrator of Public Works shall advise customers outside the city limits
receiving water service from the city of actions taken under the Plan.
Noncompliance with any requirement in any stage shall result in termination of
service and removal of meter. Prior to this termination, the customer shall be
given notice of the city’s intent to terminate service and shall have 5
business days from the mailing of the notice to appeal the decision to the City
Administrator. Notice shall be sufficient if sent by certified mail to the last
known address of the customer. If service is terminated, the customer shall be
liable for all costs of reinstallation.
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of §
51.56, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of
$200 for each offense, and each and every day such violation shall continue be
deemed and constitute a separate offense.
   (E)   Any person violating any provision of §§
51.85 through
51.87 commits a misdemeanor and is subject to the penalty provided in the city
code upon conviction.
(Ord. 439, passed 7-14-1998; Am. Ord. 523, passed 8-13-2002; Am. Ord. 592,
passed 3-28-2006; Am. Ord. 746, passed 4-4-2017)
CHAPTER 52: SEWERS
Section
   
52.01   Construction standards adopted
   
52.02   Residential sanitary sewer service
   
52.03   Sewer tap and road bore fees
 
   
52.99   Penalty
§ 52.01 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS ADOPTED.
   (A)   Short title. This section shall be known as the city’s “uniform
construction standards for on-site sewerage facilities” and may be cited as
such.
   (B)   Adoption of standards. The city hereby adopts the Construction
Standards for On-Site Sewerage Facilities, as published as of January 1, 1989,
by the State Department of Health, or as amended in the future and as modified
by the city’s Building Code Handbook, § VII, as amended herein and attached to
Ord. 320 as Exhibits A and B, respectively, and the same shall govern the
construction and use of on-site sewerage facilities within the corporate limits
and the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 320, passed 1-10-1989; Am. Ord. 320A, passed 8-28-1990)
Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.02 RESIDENTIAL SANITARY SEWER SERVICE.
   (A)   All residential customers connected to the city’s sanitary sewer
system shall pay the minimum sum of $64.11 per month for the sanitary sewer
service, effective January 1, 2018, and an increase to $78.98, effective
January 1, 2019. All customers shall comply with all the rules, requirements,
and regulations of the North Texas Municipal Water District, Collin County, the
State of Texas, and the City of Parker with respect to discharge and effluent
placed by the customer into the system. No person shall discharge any
substance, liquid, or material into the system which is prohibited by
applicable state, federal, or county law, or the rules of the North Texas
Municipal Water District.
   (B)   Sanitary sewer fees are due monthly on the same terms and conditions
as the city’s water bills.
(Ord. 495, passed 12-19-2000; Am. Ord. 593, passed 3-28-2006; Am. Ord. 618,
passed 1-22-2008; Am. Ord. 650, passed 3-16-2010; Am. Ord. 755, passed 10-24-
2017) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.03 SEWER TAP AND ROAD BORE FEES.
   (A)   Sewer service connection fees will be charged in the amounts as
specified in the city’s current fee schedule.
 
Tap Size Tap Fee          Road Bore Charge, If Needed, Per Foot
4 inches See fee schedule See fee schedule
6 inches See fee schedule See fee schedule
8 inches See fee schedule See fee schedule
 
   (B)   Monthly sewer rate charges established in §
52.02 are not changed by this section, and are ratified by this section.
(Ord. 522, passed 7-23-2002)
Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of §
52.01 of this code or Construction Standards for On-Site Sewerage Facilities as
modified by the city’s Building Code Handbook shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and, upon conviction in the Municipal Court, shall be subject to a
fine not to exceed $1,000 for each offense; and each and every day any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 320, passed 1-10-1989)
   (C)   Any person, firm, company, partnership, corporation, or association
violating any provision of §
52.02 of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined an amount of not less than $100 nor more
than $1,000 for each violation; and each and every day that the provisions of
that section are violated shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 495, passed 12-19-2000; Am. Ord. 593, passed 3-28-2006)
   (D)   Any person, firm, company, partnership, corporation, or association
violating any provision of §
52.03 of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined an amount of $1,000 for each violation; and
each and every day that the provisions of that section are violated shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 522, passed 7-23-2002)
CHAPTER 53: SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL; RECYCLING
Section
   
53.01   Unlawful deposit of trash
   
53.02   Scavenging recyclables from residential areas prohibited
   
53.03   Solid waste collection and disposal
   
53.04   Brush and bulky items
 
   
53.99   Penalty
§ 53.01 UNLAWFUL DEPOSIT OF TRASH.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, throw, or deposit in any
manner garbage, trash, dirt, concrete, rocks, stagnant water, dead animal,
glass, cans, paper, bottles, nails, or any other rubbish into or along any
drain, gutter, street, vacant lot or acreage, or upon any public or private
premises within the corporate limits of the city; and the presence of same upon
any street or public place shall be held to constitute a violation of this
section.
(Ord. 102, passed 3-24-1970)
Penalty, see § 53.99
§ 53.02 SCAVENGING RECYCLABLES FROM RESIDENTIAL AREAS PROHIBITED.
   No person or persons within the corporate city limits, other than the
current resident or owner of the property on which recyclable materials are
placed, or an authorized carrier, shall remove, pick up, or transfer recyclable
materials left in front of a single-family residence in a specifically marked
recovery container. Recyclable materials referred to herein shall include
recyclable materials identified in the city’s recycling program or contract for
pickup of recyclable materials.
(Ord. 347, passed 9-8-1992)
Penalty, see § 53.99
§ 53.03 SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL.
   (A)   The city shall henceforth provide a solid waste collection and
disposal service in and for the residents of the city, and the City Council is
hereby empowered to enter into those contracts with other governmental
entities, individuals, or corporations as may be necessary to provide solid
waste collection and disposal service, all or any part thereof.
   (B)   The City Council is hereby empowered to establish, by its own
resolution, rules and regulations as are necessary to effect and achieve the
intents and purposes of this section, and to provide for and establish
penalties, not to exceed $100 for each offense or violation of those rules and
regulations and of this section.
   (C)   It shall, from and after the effective date of this section, be
unlawful for any person, company, corporation, or entity to engage in or
provide solid waste collection service within the corporate limits of the city
without first obtaining a permit or license from the City Council, as it shall
in its discretion issue.
   (D)   Bulky items include appliances, and other trash items too large to be
contained in the residential trash bin.
   (E)   Brush items include trees, tree limbs, plants, and/or leaves.
   (F)   It is a violation of this section to place or store bulky or brush
items less than 25 feet from the edge of the surface of the road or anywhere
that may be visible to the public prior to the Saturday before the week such
items are scheduled to be removed by the city’s solid waste service provider.
   (G)   For a temporary period not to exceed 60 days, the Mayor and City
Administrator may, upon notice to the city’s website, suspend the time frame in
division (F) above, substituting a reasonable time and distance, as may be
necessary for exigent circumstances.
(Ord. 185, passed 12-17-1974; Am. Ord. 814, passed 3-15-2022) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.04 BRUSH AND BULKY ITEMS.
   (A)   Bulky items include appliances, and other trash items too large to be
contained in the residential trash bin.
   (B)   Brush items include trees, tree limbs, plants, and/or leaves.
   (C)   It is a violation of this section to place or store bulky or brush
items less than 25 feet from the edge of the surface of the road or anywhere
that may be visible to the public before the Thursday prior to the Monday of
the week such items are scheduled to be removed by the city’s solid waste
service provider.
   (D)   Residents may place their bulky or brush items within 10 feet from the
edge of the roadbed prior to Monday of the week such items are scheduled to be
removed by the city solid waste service provider.
(Ord. 640, passed 4-7-2009; Am. Ord. 666, passed 4-19-2011; Am. Ord. 706,
passed 10-15-2013; Am. Ord. 725, passed 3-17-2015; Am. Ord. 777, passed 8-4-
2020) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   Violators of §
53.01 of this code will be subject to a fine of up to but not to exceed $200.
(Ord. 102, passed 3-24-1970)
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §
53.02 of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined an amount of not more than $500 for each
violation; and each and every day that the provisions of that section are
violated shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 347, passed 9-8-1992)
   (D)   Any person, company, corporation, or entity who shall violate any of
the provisions of §
53.03 of this code or any rule or regulation established in compliance
therewith, or who fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine not to exceed $100 for
each violation.
(Ord. 185, passed 12-17-1974)
   (E)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or
terms of §
53.04 upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500
for each offense; and each and every day such violation shall continue shall be
deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 666, passed 4-19-2011; Am. Ord. 725, passed 3-17-2015; Am. Ord. 814,
passed 3-15-2022)
CHAPTER 54: STORMWATER REGULATIONS
Section
   
54.01   Title
   
54.02   General provisions
   
54.03   General prohibition
   
54.04   Specific prohibitions and requirements
   
54.05   Release and reporting cleanup
   
54.06   Stormwater discharges from construction activities
   
54.07   Compliance monitoring
   
54.08   Administrative enforcement remedies
   
54.09   Right to reconsideration, hearing and appeal
   
54.10   Judicial enforcement remedies
   
54.11   Post construction stormwater controls
§ 54.01 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be officially known, cited, and referred to as the
“stormwater regulations” of the city (thereinafter “this chapter”).
(Ord. 785, passed 6-2-2020)
§ 54.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Purposes. The purposes and objectives of this chapter are as follows:
      (1)   To maintain and improve the quality of surface water within the
City of Parker, Collin County, and all waters of the US. (See 40 CFR 122.2 or
definition of Waters of the U.S. in MS4 General Permit).
      (2)   To prevent the discharge of contaminated stormwater runoff from
industrial, commercial, residential, and construction sites into the city, the
municipal separate stormwater sewer system (MS4) and natural waters within the
city.
      (3)   To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper
discharge of hazardous substances, petroleum products, household hazardous
waste, industrial waste, sediment from construction sites, pesticides,
herbicides, fertilizers, and other contaminants into the storm sewers and
natural water of the city.
      (4)   To encourage recycling of used motor oil and safe disposal of other
hazardous consumer projects.
      (5)   To facilitate compliance with state and federal standards and
permits by owners and operators of industrial and construction site within the
city.
      (6)   To enable the city to comply with all federal and state laws and
regulations applicable to stormwater discharges.
   (B)   Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director of
Public Works (DPW), and/or Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) shall administer,
implement, and enforce any the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted
to or duties imposed upon these people may be authorized to other personnel
(aka, city personnel or third party) in accordance with 30 TAC § 305.44 and 30
TAC § 305.128.
   (C)   Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the
following terms shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:
      AGRICULTURAL STORMWATER RUNOFF. Any stormwater runoff from orchards,
cultivated crops pasture, range lands, and other nonpoint source agricultural
activities, but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding operations as
defined in 40 CFR 122.23 or discharges from concentrated aquatic animal
production facilities a defined in 40 CFR 122.24.
      BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or
reduce the pollution of waters of the US. BMPs also include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff,
spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material
storage.
      BIORETENTION. A method of treating surface runoff and settling of
suspended solids through a terrestrial aerobic (upland) plant/soil/microbe
complex to remove pollutants through a variety of physical, chemical and
biological processes.
      CHANNEL. A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. This shall
include the bed, the banks, and the entire erosion hazard setback floodplain,
zone, and easement.
      CITY. The City of Parker. For purposes of this chapter, the CITY refers
to the jurisdiction within the city limits. It also refers to the system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins curbs, gutters, ditches manmade channels, or storm drains) owned and
operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying
stormwater, and which is not used for collecting or conveying sewage, as
defined in 40 CFR 122.26.
      CITY DRAINAGE SYSTEM. The natural or artificial system for moving,
storing, or otherwise effecting the flow of stormwater, whether publicly or
privately owned or maintained.
      CITY INSPECTOR(S). Refers to the Director of Public Works, Code
Enforcement Officer, or their duly authorized representative who go on-site to
determine if the provisions of this chapter are being met.
      CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The person appointed by the city to enforce
city codes or his/her duly authorized representative.
      COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION. The disturbance of soils associated with
clearing, grading, or excavating activities or other construction activities.
      COMMERCIAL. Pertaining to any business, trade, industry, or other
activity engaged in for profit.
      DEBRIS. Any solid waste or yard waste.
      DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS (DPW). The person appointed by the city to
manage field operations and provide environmental education, or his /her duly
authorized representative.
      DISCHARGE. Any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stormwater, or
any other substance whatsoever into the City of Parker drainage system or into
waters of the US.
      DISCHARGER. Any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise
responsible for a discharge, including without limitation, any operator of a
construction site or industrial facility.
      DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Human excrement, gray water (from home clothes washing,
bathing, showers, dishwashing, and food preparation), other wastewater from
household drains, and waterborne waste normally discharged from the sanitary
conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office
buildings, factories, and institutions, that is free from industrial waste.
      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA). The United States Environmental
Protection Agency, the regional office thereof, any federal department, agency,
or commission that may succeed to the authority of the EPA, and any duly
authorized official of EPA or such successor agency.
      EXTREMELY HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. Any substance listed in the Appendices to
40 CFR 355, Emergency Planning and Notification.
      FACILITY. Any building, structure, installation, process, or activity
from which there is or may be a discharge of a pollutant.
      FERTILIZER. A solid or nonsolid substance or compound that contains an
essential plant nutrient element in a form available to plants and is used
primarily for its essential plant nutrient element content in promoting or
stimulating growth of a plant or improving the quality of crop, or a mixture of
2 or more fertilizers. The term does not include the excreta of an animal,
plant remains, or a mixture of those substances, for which no claim of
essential plant nutrients is made.
      FINAL STABILIZATION. The status when all soil disturbing activities at a
site have been completed, and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a
density of 70% of the cover for unpaved areas and areas not covered by
permanent structures has been established or equivalent permanent stabilization
measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, landscaping or geotextiles) have
been employed.
      FIRE DEPARTMENT. The Fire Department of the City of Parker, or any duly
authorized representative thereof.
      FIRE PROTECTION WATER. Any water, and any substances or materials
contained therein, used by any person other than the fire department to control
or extinguish a fire.
      GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the
handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food, including waste
materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of
produce and other food products.
      GENERALLY ACCEPTED MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES. Procedures, work tasks,
technique and schedules established for the sustainability and function of a
stormwater feature published by a governmental agency, educational
organization, professional organization or other subject matter expert.
      HARMFUL QUANTITY. The amount of any oily substance that will cause
pollution of waters of the US. (Clean Water Act as amended by the Oil Pollution
Act of 1990)
      HAZARDOUS HOUSEHOLD WASTE (HHW). Any material generated in a household
(including single and multiple residences, hotels and motels, bunk houses,
ranger stations, crew quarters, camp grounds, picnic grounds, and day use
recreational areas) by a consumer which, except for the exclusion provided in
40 CFR 261(b)(1), would be classified as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261.
      HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. Any substance listed in Table 302.4 of 40 CFR 302.
      HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste
by the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR 261.
      HAZARDOUS WASTE TREATMENT, DISPOSAL AND RECOVERY FACILITY. All contiguous
land, and structures, other appurtenances and improvements on the land, used
for the treatment, disposal, or recovery of hazardous waste.
      HERBICIDE. A substance or mixture of substances used to destroy a plant
or to inhibit plant growth.
      INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any waterborne liquid or solid substance that results
from any process of industry, manufacturing, mining, production, trade or
business.
      MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES. Practices required for the long-term
sustainability and function of a component or system. This includes periodic
inspections, debris removal and disposal, replanting of trees, maintaining
vegetation, removal of silt, and repair of manmade components. The maintenance
activities in natural channels and riparian areas shall be as minimal as
possible.
      MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL. Any vehicle crankcase oil, antifreeze, transmission
fluid, brake fluid, differential lubricant, gasoline, diesel fuel, gasoline/
alcohol blend, and any other fluid used in a motor vehicle.
      MUNICIPAL LANDFILL (or LANDFILL). An area of land or an excavation in
which municipal solid waste is placed for permanent disposal, and which is not
a land treatment facility, a surface impoundment, an injection well, or a pile
(as these terms are defined in regulations promulgated by the Texas Water
Commission.
      MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). The system of conveyances
(including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins curbs,
gutters, ditches manmade channels, or storm drains) owned and operated by the
city and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and which is
not used for collecting or conveying sewage.
      MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE. Solid waste resulting from or incidental to
municipal, community, commercial, institutional, or recreational activities,
and includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles, and other solid waste other than industrial waste.
      NATURAL CHANNELS. Channels left in or near their natural state,
maintaining the natural alignment and grade and riparian corridor.
      NPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES ASSOCIATED WITH INDUSTRIAL
ACTIVITY (or INDUSTRIAL GENERAL PERMIT). The industrial general permit issued
by EPA on August 27, 1992, and published in Volume 57 of the Federal Register
at page 1217 on September 9, 1992, and any subsequent modifications or
amendments thereto.
      NPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM CONSTRUCTION SITES
(or CONSTRUCTION GENERAL PERMIT). The construction general permit issued by EPA
on August 27, 1992, and published in Volume 57 of the Federal Register at page
41217 on September 9, 1992, and any subsequent modifications or amendments
thereto.
      NPDES PERMIT. A permit issued by EPA (or by the state under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b)), as amended, that authorizes the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
      NONPOINT SOURCE. Any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a
“point source.”
      NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI). The notice of intent that is required by either
the industrial general or the construction general permit.
      NOTICE OF TERMINATION (NOT). The notice of termination that is required
by either the industrial general permit or the construction general permit.
      OIL. Any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to,
petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil or any fraction thereof which is liquid at
standard conditions of temperature and pressure, sludge, oil refuse, and oil
mixed with water.
      OPERATOR. The persons who, either individually or taken together, meet
the following 2 criteria: (1) they have operational control over the facility
specifications (including the ability to make modifications in specifications);
and (2) they have the day-to-day operational control over those activities at
the facility necessary to ensure compliance with pollution prevention
requirements and any permit conditions.
      OWNER. The person who owns a facility or part of a property.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental
entities.
      PESTICIDE. A substance or mixture or substances intended to prevent,
destroy, repel, or mitigate any pest, or any substance or mixture of substances
intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant, or desiccant.
      PETROLEUM PRODUCT. A petroleum product that is obtained from distilling
and processing crude oil and that is capable of being used as a fuel for the
propulsion of a motor vehicle or aircraft, including motor gasoline, gasohol,
other alcohol blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate fuel oil,
and #1 and #2 diesel. The term does not include naphtha-type jet fuel,
kerosene-jet fuel, or a petroleum product destined for use in chemical
manufacturing or feedstock of that manufacturing.
      PETROLEUM STORAGE TANK (PST). Any 1 or combination of above ground or
underground storage tanks that contain petroleum products and any connecting
underground pipes.
      POINT SOURCE. Any discernable, confined, and discrete conveyance,
including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well,
discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding
operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft
from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include
return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff.
      POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar
dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water.
The term POLLUTANT does not include tail water or runoff water from irrigation
or rainwater runoff from cultivated or uncultivated range land, pasture land,
and farm land.
      POLLUTION. The alternation of the physical, thermal, chemical, or
biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water in the state that
renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life,
vegetation, or property, or to the public health, safety, or welfare, or
impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or
reasonable purpose.
      PUBLIC NUISANCE. A condition that is injurious to health, or is indecent
or offensive to the senses, or any obstruction to the free use of property, so
as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property; or, affects
at the same time an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable
number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted
upon individuals may be unequal.
      QUALIFIED PERSONNEL. Persons who possess the appropriate competence,
skills and ability (as demonstrated by sufficient education, training,
experience, and/or, when applicable, any required certification or licensing)
to perform a specific activity in a timely and complete manner consistent with
the applicable regulatory requirements and generally-accepted industry
standards for such activity.
      REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER (RPE). A person who has been duly
licensed and registered by the Texas Board of Registration for Professional
Engineers to engage in the practice of engineering in the State of Texas.
      REPORTABLE QUALITY (RO). For any “hazardous substance,” the quantity
established and listed in Table 302.4 of 40 CFR 302, as amended; for any
“extremely hazardous substance,” to quantity established in 40 CFR 355, as
amended, and listed in Appendix A thereto.
      RUBBISH. Non-putrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consist of:
(A) combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood,
excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar
materials; and (B) noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery,
tin cans, aluminum cans, melt furniture, and similar materials that do not burn
at ordinary incinerator temperature (1,600 to 1,800° Fahrenheit).
      SANITARY SEWER (or SEWER). The system of pipes, conduits, and other
conveyances which carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and
institutions, whether treated or untreated, to the city sewage treatment plant
(and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally
admitted).
      SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Any domestic sewage from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
      SERVICE STATION. Any retail establishment engaged in the business of
selling fuel for motor vehicles that is dispensed from stationary storage
tanks.
      SEWAGE (or SANITARY SEWAGE). The domestic sewage and/or industrial waste
that is discharged into the city sanitary sewer system and passes through the
sanitary sewer system to the city sewage treatment plant for treatment.
      SITE. The land or water area where any facility or activity is physically
located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the
facility or activity.
      SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, rubbish, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment
plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, and
other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained
gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, mining, and
agricultural operations, and from community and institutional activities.
      STATE. The State of Texas.
      STORMWATER. Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and
drainage.
      STORMWATER DETENTION. The temporary storage of storm runoff with the
goals of controlling peak discharge rates and providing gravity settling of
pollutants.
      STORMWATER DETENTION FACILITY. A detention basin or alternative structure
designed for the purpose of temporary storage of surface runoff and gradual
release of stored water at controlled rates.
      STORMWATER DISCHARGE ASSOCIATED WITH INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. The discharge
from any conveyance which is used for collecting and conveying stormwater and
which is directly related to manufacturing, processing, or raw materials
storage areas at an industrial plant which is within 1 of the categories of
facilities listed in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14), as amended, and which is not
excluded from EPA’s definition of the same term.
      STORMWATER FEATURE. A natural or manmade component or system which
remains as a permanent part of a development also known as structural BMPs. The
purpose of which includes stormwater conveyance, stormwater quality
improvement, flood mitigation, or erosion reduction. The features include but
are not limited to, channels, detention facilities, retention ponds,
bioretention, rain harvest systems, landscape buffers, riparian areas, enhanced
swales, filter strips, permeable pavers and manufactured devices.
      STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A plan required by either
the construction general permit or the industrial general permit and which
describes and ensures the implementation of practices that are to be used to
reduce the pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction or
other industrial activity at the facility.
      UNCONTAMINATED. Not containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
      USED OIL (or USED MOTOR OIL). Any oil that has been refined from crude
oil or synthetic oil that, as a result of use, storage, or handling, has become
unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of
original properties, but that may be suitable for further use and is recyclable
in compliance with state and federal law.
      WATER IN THE STATE (or WATER). Any groundwater, percolating or otherwise,
lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico, inside the territorial
limits of the state, and all other bodies of surface water natural or
artificial, inland, or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or non-navigable, and
including the beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface water,
that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or inside the
jurisdiction of the state.
      WATER QUALITY STANDARD. The designation of a body or segment of surface
water in the state for desirable uses and the narrative and numerical criteria
deemed by the state to be necessary to protect those uses, as specified in
Texas Administrative Code, Title 31, Chapter 307, as amended.
      WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES (US). All waters which are currently used,
were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign
commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the
tide; all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands, all other waters
the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect
interstate or foreign commerce; all tributaries of waters identified in this
definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition; and
any waters within the federal definition of “waters of the United States” at 40
CFR 122.2, as amended; but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment
ponds, or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the Federal Clean Water
Act.
      WETLAND. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater
at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for
life in saturated soil conditions. WETLANDS generally include swamps, marshes,
bogs, and similar areas.
      YARD WASTE. Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, ad brush
that results from landscaping maintenance and land-clearing operations.
(Ord. 785, passed 6-2-2020)
§ 54.03 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   (A)   No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the city
drainage system any discharge that poses a reasonable threat to human health or
the environment as defined herein or by other applicable law.
   (B)   Allowable non-stormwater discharges are:
      (1)   Water line flushing (excluding discharges of hyper-chlorinated
water, unless the water is first dechlorinated and discharges are not expected
to adversely affect aquatic life);
      (2)   Runoff or return flow from landscape irrigation, lawn irrigation,
and other irrigation utilizing potable water, groundwater, or surface water
sources;
      (3)   Discharges from potable water sources;
      (4)   Diverted stream flows;
      (5)   Rising groundwaters and springs;
      (6)   Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration;
      (7)   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
      (8)   Foundation and footing drains;
      (9)   Air conditioning condensation;
      (10)   Water from crawl space pumps;
      (11)   Individual residential vehicle washing;
      (12)   Flows from wetlands and riparian habitats;
      (13)   Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
      (14)   Street wash water;
      (15)   Discharges or flows from fire-fighting activities (fire-fighting
activities do not include washing of trucks, runoff water from training
activities, test water from fire suppression systems, and similar activities);
      (16)   Other allowable non-stormwater discharges listed in 40 CFR 122.26
(d)(2)(iv)(B)(1), as amended;
      (17)   Non-stormwater discharges that are specifically listed as
allowable in the TPDES Multi-Sector General Permit (MSGP) or the TPDES
Construction General Permit (CGP);
      (18)   A discharge from a temporary car wash sponsored by a group
organization where only soap and water are used and where efforts are made to
minimize pollutants in the discharge; and
      (19)   Other similar occasional incidental non-stormwater discharges,
unless the TCEQ develops permits or regulations addressing these discharges.
   (C)   There shall be no allowable discharge if the discharge or flow in
question has been determined by the DPW to be a source of a pollutant or
pollutants to the waters of the US or the city drainage system, written notice
of such determination has been provided to the discharger, and the discharge
has occurred more than 14 calendar days beyond such notice. The correctness of
the DPW’s determination that a discharge is a source of a pollutant or
pollutants may be reviewed in any administrative or judicial enforcement
proceeding.
(Ord. 785, passed 6-2-2020)
§ 54.04 SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The specific prohibitions and requirements in this section are not
necessarily inclusive of all the discharges prohibited by the general
prohibition in §
54.03 above.
   (B)   No person shall intentionally dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit,
empty discharge, leach, dispose, or introduce any of the following substances
into the city’s drainage system and all persons shall to the maximum extent
practicable under prevailing circumstances, employ control measures to prevent
the following substances from entering into the city’s drainage system:
      (1)   Any motor oil, antifreeze, or any other motor vehicle fluid;
      (2)   Any garbage or rubbish;
      (3)   Any wastewater from a commercial carwash facility; from any vehicle
washing, cleaning, or maintenance at any new or used automobile or other
vehicle dealership, rental agency, body shop, repair shop, or maintenance
facility; or from any washing, cleaning, or maintenance of any business or
commercial or public service vehicle, including a truck, bus, or heavy
equipment, by a business or public entity;
      (4)   Any wastewater from the washing, cleaning, de-icing, or other
maintenance of aircraft;
      (5)   Any wastewater from a commercial mobile power washer or from the
washing or other cleaning of a building exterior that contains any soap,
detergent, degreaser, solvent, or any other harmful cleaning substance;
      (6)   Any wastewater from floor, rug or carpet cleaning;
      (7)   Any wastewater from the wash-down or other cleaning of pavement
that contains any harmful quantity of soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser,
emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance; or any
wastewater from the wash-down or other cleaning of any pavement where any
spill, leak, or other release of oil, motor fuel, or other petroleum or
hazardous substance has occurred, unless all harmful quantities of such
released material have been previously removed;
      (8)   Any effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emissions
scrubber, emissions filter, or the blow down from a boiler;
      (9)   Any ready-mixed concrete, mortar, ceramic, or asphalt base material
or hydro much material, or from the cleaning of commercial vehicles or
equipment containing, or used in transporting or applying, such material;
      (10)   Any runoff or wash-down water from any animal pen, kennel, or foul
or livestock containment area;
      (11)   Any filter backwash from a swimming pool, fountain or spa;
      (12)   Any swimming pool water containing any harmful quantity of
chlorine, muriatic acid or other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection
of the swimming pool water or in pool cleaning;
      (13)   Any discharge from water line disinfection by hyper-chlorination
or other means if it contains any harmful quantity of chlorine or any other
chemical used in line disinfection;
      (14)   Any fire protection water containing oil or hazardous substances
or materials that the fire code in this Code of Ordinances requires to be
contained and treated prior to discharge, unless treatment adequate to remove
pollutants occurs prior to discharge (This prohibition does not apply to
discharges or flow from fire-fighting by the fire department.);
      (15)   Any water from a water curtain in a spray room used for painting
vehicles or equipment;
      (16)   Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle;
      (17)   Any substance or material in an amount that will damage, block, or
clog the city’s drainage system.
   (C)   No person shall intentionally or negligently introduce or cause to be
introduced into the city’s drainage system sediment, silt, earth, soil, or
other material associated with clearing, grading, excavation or other
construction activities, or associated with landfilling or other placement or
disposal of soil, rock, or other earth materials in an amount that would
damage, clog or otherwise divert the flow of the city’s drainage system.
   (D)   No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic or
industrial, to the MS4, or allow such a connection to continue.
   (E)   No person shall cause or allow any pavement wash water from a service
station to be discharged into the MS4 unless such wash water has passed through
a properly functioning and maintained grease, oil, and sand interceptor before
discharge into the city’s drainage system.
   (F)   Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers. All persons shall, to the
maximum extent practicable under prevailing circumstances, employ control
measures to minimize pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers from entering the
city’s drainage system. This includes the following:
      (1)   Apply products according to manufacture recommendations.
      (2)   Apply products according to all state and federal laws.
      (3)   Proper storage and disposal.
(Ord. 785, passed 6-2-2020)
§ 54.05 RELEASE AND REPORTING CLEANUP.
   (A)   The person in charge of any facility, vehicle, or other source of any
spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, escaping,
leaching, dumping, disposing, or any other release of any of the following
quantities of any of the following substances that may flow, leach, enter, or
otherwise be introduced into the city’s drainage system or waters of the US,
shall notify the city concerning the incident immediately:
      (1)   An amount equal to or in excess of a reportable quantity of any
hazardous substance, as established under 40 CFR 302, as amended;
      (2)   An amount equal to or in excess of a reportable quantity of any
extremely hazardous substance, as established under 40 CFR 355, as amended; or,
      (3)   An amount of oil that either:
         (a)   Violates applicable water quality standards; or
         (b)   Causes a film or sheen upon or discoloration of the surface of
the water or any adjoining shoreline or causes a sludge or emulsion to be
deposited beneath the surface of the water or upon an adjoining shoreline.
   (B)   The immediate notification required by division (A), if known, shall
include the following information:
      (1)   The identity or chemical name of the substance released, and
whether the substance is an extremely hazardous substance;
      (2)   The exact location of the release;
      (3)   The time and duration of the release;
      (4)   An estimate of the quantity and concentration of the substance
released;
      (5)   The source of the release;
      (6)   Any known or anticipated health risks associated with the release
and where appropriate, advice regarding medical attention that may be necessary
for exposed individuals;
      (7)   Any precautions that should be taken as a result of the release;
      (8)   Any steps that have been taken to contain and/or clean up the
released material and minimize its impacts; and
      (9)   The names and telephone numbers of the person or persons to be
contacted for further information.
   (C)   Within 14 calendar days following such release, the responsible person
in charge of the facility, vehicle, or other source of the release shall, upon
request by the DPW, submit a written report containing each of the items of
information specified above in division (B), as well as the following
additional information:
      (1)   The ultimate duration, concentration, and quantity of the release;
      (2)   All actions taken to respond to contain, and clean up the release
substances, and all precautions taken to minimize the impacts;
      (3)   Any known or anticipated acute or chronic health risks associated
with the release;
      (4)   Where appropriate, advice regarding medical attention necessary for
exposed individuals;
      (5)   The identity of any governmental/private sector representatives
responding to the release; and
      (6)   The measure taken or to be taken by the responsible person(s) to
prevent similar future occurrences.
   (D)   The notifications required by divisions (B) and (C) above shall not
relieve the responsible person of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of the release, including any liability for
damage to the city’s drainage system, to natural resources, or to any other
person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the responsible person
of any fine, penalty, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this
chapter or to state or federal law.
   (E)   Any person responsible for a release described in division (A) above
shall reimburse the city for any cost incurred by the city in responding to the
release.
(Ord. 785, passed 6-2-2020)
§ 54.06 STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   All operators of construction sites shall use best management
practices to control and reduce the discharge to the city’s drainage system and
to waters of the US of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other material
associated with the clearing, grading, excavation, and other construction
activities to the maximum extent practicable under the circumstances. Such best
management practices may include, but not be limited to the following measure:
         (a)   Preservation of existing vegetation and stabilization measures
will be per city approved construction plans and specifications;
         (b)   Use of structural practices to divert flows from exposed soils,
store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from the
site to the extent feasible;
         (c)   Minimization of the tracking of sediments off-site by vehicles,
the generation of dust, and the escape of other windblown waste from the site;
         (d)   Providing general good housekeeping measure to prevent and
contain spills of paints, solvents, fuels, septic waste, and other hazardous
chemicals and pollutants associated with construction, and to assure proper
cleanup ad disposal of any such spills in compliance with state, federal and
local requirements;
         (e)   Prevention of the discharge of building materials, including
cement, lime, concrete, and mortar to the city’s drainage system or waters of
the US;
         (f)   Implementation of proper waste disposal and waste management
techniques, including covering waste materials and minimizing ground contact
with hazardous chemicals and trash;
         (g)   Timely maintenance of vegetation, erosion and sediment control
measures, and other best management practices in good and effective operating
condition; and
         (h)   Post construction controls should be used per the city’s
approved construction plans and specifications and maintained in accordance
with the city’s SWMP.
      (2)   Qualified personnel (provided by the operator of the construction
site) shall inspect disturbed areas of any construction site that have not been
finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to
precipitation, structural control measures, and locations where vehicles enter
or exit the site, on either of the schedules designated in the CGP (either
every 14 calendar days and within 24 hours of a ½ inch rain event, or at least
once every 7 days regardless of when it rains). All erosion and sediment
control measures and other identified best management practices shall be
observed in order to ensure that they are operating correctly and are effective
in preventing significant impacts to receiving waters and the city. Based on
the results of the inspection, best management practices shall be revised as
appropriate, and as soon as is practicable. Based on the results of the
inspection, a follow-up inspection will be conducted and 1 day given for
completion of corrective action(s).
      (3)   The city may require any plans and specifications that are prepared
for the construction of site improvements to illustrate and describe the best
management practices required by division (A)(1) above, that will be
implemented at the construction site. The city may deny approval of any
building permit, grading permit, or any other city approval necessary to
commence or continue construction, or to assume occupancy, on the grounds that
the management practices described in the plans or observed upon a site
inspection by the DPW are determined not to control and reduce the discharge of
sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other materials associated with clearing,
grading, excavation, and other construction activities to the maximum extent
practicable under the circumstances.
      (4)   Any owner with any control over construction activity on their
property, whether or not he/she is an operator, is jointly and severally
responsible for compliance with the requirements in division (A).
      (5)   Any contractor or subcontractor on a site of construction activity,
who is not an owner or operator, but who is responsible under his/her contract
or subcontract for implementing a best management practices control measure, is
jointly and severally responsible for any willful or negligent failure on his/
her part to adequately implement that control measure if such failure causes or
contributes to causing the city to violate a water quality standard, the city’s
NPDES permit, or any state-issued discharge permit for discharges from the
city.
      (6)   The city may require specific structural controls or non-structural
controls be installed to protect water quality. Controls may include, but are
not be limited to, silt fencing, rock check dams, gabions, soil stabilizers,
street sweeping or additional inspections .
   (B)   Five-acre disturbances.
      (1)   All operators of sites of construction activity, including
clearing, grading, and excavation activities, that result in the disturbance of
5 or more acres of total land area, or that are part of a common plan of
development or sale within which 5 or more acres of total land area are
disturbed, or who are required to obtain an NPDES permit for stormwater
discharges associated with construction activity, shall comply with the
following requirements (in addition to those in division (A)):
         (a)   Any operator who intends to obtain coverage for stormwater
discharges from a construction site under the NPDES general permit for
stormwater discharges from construction sites (“the construction general permit
or CGP”) shall submit a signed copy of its notice of intent (NOI) to the DPW at
least 2 days prior to the commencement of construction activities. If the
construction activity is already underway upon the effective date of this
chapter, the NOI shall be submitted within 30 days or upon request by the city.
For stormwater discharges from construction sites where the operator changes,
an NOI shall be submitted at least 2 days prior to when the new operator
commences work at the site.
         (b)   Signage shall be posted in accordance with the TCEQ construction
general permit.
         (c)   A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be prepared
and implemented in accordance with the requirements of the construction general
permit or any individual or group NPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges
from the construction site, and with any additional requirement imposed by or
under this chapter and any other city ordinance.
         (d)   The SWPPP shall be completed prior to the submittal of the NOI
to the DPW and, for new construction, prior to the commencement of construction
activities. The SWPPP shall be updated and modified, as appropriate, and as
required by the construction general and this chapter.
         (e)   A copy of any NOI that is required by division (B)(1)(a), shall
be submitted to the city in conjunction with any application for a building
permit, grading permit, and any other city approval necessary to commence or
continue construction at the site.
         (f)   The DPW may require any operator who is required by division (B)
(1)(b) to prepare a SWPPP, to submit the SWPPP, and any modification thereto,
to the DPW for review. Such submittal and review of the SWPPP may be required
by the DPW prior to commencement of or during construction activities at the
site.
         (g)   At the city’s discretion it may make the determination to deny
any approval of any permit, grading permit, or any approval necessary to
commence or continue construction, or to assume occupancy if a site is
contributing pollutants to the city’s drainage system.
         (h)   The operator shall make the SWPPP and any modifications (as
required and for the duration of the project) thereto available to the DPW upon
request.
         (i)   The DPW may notify the operator at any time that they are not in
compliance with their TPDES construction permit. Within 7 days of such
notification from the DWP (or as otherwise provided by the DPW), the operator
shall make the required changes to the SWPPP and shall submit to the DPW a
written certification that the requested changes have been made.
         (j)   Upon final stabilization of the construction site, the owner (or
the duly authorized representative thereof) shall submit written certification
to the DPW that the site has been finally stabilized. (See definition of final
stabilization in this chapter). The city may withhold an occupancy or use
permit for any premises construction on the site until such certification of
final stabilization has been filed and the DPW has determined, following any
appropriate inspection, that final stabilization has, in fact, occurred and
that any required permanent structural controls have been completed.
   (C)   Less than 5 acres of disturbance. 
      (1)   All operators of sites of construction activity, including
clearing, grading, and excavation activities, that result in the disturbance of
less than 5 acres of total land area, or that are part of a common plan of
development or sale within which 1 to 5 acres of total land area are disturbed,
or who are required to obtain an NPDES permit for stormwater discharges
associated with construction activity, shall comply with divisions (B)(1)a
through j and (C)). However, instead of submitting a NOI, the construction site
notice (CSN) should be submitted in accordance with the construction general
permit.
      (2)   A copy of the construction site notice (CSN) shall be displayed at
the construction site at a place readily available for viewing by the general
public, and local, state, and federal authorities.
(Ord. 785, passed 6-2-2020)
§ 54.07 COMPLIANCE MONITORING.
   (A)   Right of entry, inspection, and sampling. City inspectors shall have
the right to enter the premises of any person reasonably suspected by the city
of discharging pollutants into the city or to waters of the US to determine if
the discharger is complying with all requirements of this chapter, and with any
state or federal discharge permit, limitation or requirement. Dischargers shall
allow the city inspectors ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and for the
performance of any additional duties. Dischargers shall make available to the
city inspector, upon request, any SWPPPs, modifications thereto, self-
inspection reports, monitoring records, compliance evaluations, notices of
intent, and any other records, reports, and other documents related to
compliance with this chapter and with any state or federal discharge permit.
      (1)   Where a discharger has security measures in force which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
discharger shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, the city inspector will be
permitted to enter without unreasonable delay for the purposes of performing
his/her responsibilities.
      (2)   The city inspector shall have the right to set up on the
discharger’s property, or require installation of, such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the discharger’s operations.
      (3)   When pollutants have been discharged the DPW may require any
discharger to the city’s drainage system or waters of the US to conduct
specified sampling, testing, analysis, and other monitoring of its stormwater
discharges, and may specify the frequency and parameters of any such required
monitoring.
      (4)   The DPW may require the discharger to install monitoring equipment
as necessary at the discharger’s expense. The facility’s sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to
measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.
      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
discharger at the written or verbal request of the city inspector and shall not
be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
discharger.
      (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city inspector access to the
discharger’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Search warrants. If the city inspector has been refused access to any
part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter or any state or federal discharge permit, limitation or requirement, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this
chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, then the city inspector may seek issuance
of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 785, passed 6-2-2020)
§ 54.08 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (A)   Warning notice. When the DPW finds that any person has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any order issued
hereunder, the DPW may serve upon that person either a verbal warning notice or
a copy of the inspection report, with expected corrective actions.
Investigation and/or resolution of the matter in response to the warning notice
in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations
occurring before or after receipt of the warning notice. Nothing in this
division (A) shall limit the authority of the DPW to take any action, including
emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a
warning notice.
   (B)   Notification of violation. When the DPW finds that any person has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any order
issued hereunder, the Code Enforcement Officer may serve upon that person a
written notice of violation. Within 5 days of the receipt of this notice, the
alleged violator shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer an explanation of
the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention of
reoccurrence thereof along with a plan of specific actions for compliance or
shall complete specific actions for compliance. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall have discretion to determine the amount of time needed for completion of
specific action for compliance if the latter option is chosen. If the alleged
violator denies that any violation occurred and/or contends that no corrective
action is necessary, an explanation of the basis of any such denial or
contention shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer within 5 days of
receipt of the notice. The Code Enforcement Officer shall make a determination
within 1 day on the validity of the claim and shall notify the alleged
violator. Upon a denial of the claim, the alleged violator shall have 5 days to
complete specific action for compliance. Submission of an explanation and/or
plan in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations
occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this
section shall limit the authority of the Code Enforcement Officer to take any
action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without
first issuing a notice of violation.
   (C)   Stop work order. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer finds that any
operator of a construction site has violated or continues to violate any
provision of this chapter the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a “stop work
order”. This order will be posted at the construction site with a copy
delivered to the operator. All work at the site should cease until all
violations are immediately corrected, and documentation is presented to the
Code Enforcement Officer or his representative stating the violation will not
re-occur or changes to the SWPPP have been made. Upon receipt of the
documentation, a notice to proceed will be issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer or his/her representative. Issuance of a “stop work” order shall not be
a deterrent against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
violator.
   (D)   Consent order. The Code Enforcement Officer may enter into consent
orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with any person responsible for noncompliance with
any provision in this chapter or any order issued hereunder. Such documents may
include specific action to be taken by the person to correct the noncompliance
within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the
same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to divisions
(E), (F), and (G) of this section and shall be judicially enforceable.
   (E)   Show cause hearing. The Code Enforcement Officer may order any person
who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or
any order issued hereunder, to appear before the Code Enforcement Officer and
show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall
be served on the alleged violator specifying the time and place for the
hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a
request that the alleged violator show cause why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at
least 10 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized
representative of the alleged violator. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant
to the rights and procedures specified in this chapter. A show cause hearing
shall not be a deterrent against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the alleged violator.
   (F)   Compliance orders. When the Code Enforcement Officer finds that any
person has violated or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or
any order issued hereunder, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue an order to
the violator directing that the violator come into compliance with a specified
time limit. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address
the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the
city’s drainage system and waters of the US. A compliance order may not extend
the deadline for compliance established by a state or federal standard or
requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the person of liability for
any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance
order shall not be a deterrent against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the violator.
   (G)   Remediation, abatement and restoration orders. When the Code
Enforcement Officer finds that a person has violated or continues to violate,
any provision of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, and that such
violation has adversely affected the city’s drainage system, the waters of the
US, or any other aspect of the environment, the Code Enforcement Officer may
issue an order to the violator directing him/her to undertake and implement any
appropriate action to remediate and/or abate any adverse effects of the
violation upon the city, the waters of the US, or any other aspect of the
environment, and/or to restore any part of the city, the waters of the US, or
any other aspect of the environment that has been harmed. Such remedial,
abatement, and restoration action may include, but not be limited to:
monitoring, assessment, and evaluation of the adverse effects and determination
of the appropriate remedial, abatement, and/or restoration action; confinement,
removal, cleanup, treatment and disposal of any discharged or released
pollution or contamination; prevention, minimization, and/or mitigation of any
damage to the public health, welfare, or the environment that may result from
the violation; restoration or replacement of city property or natural resources
damaged by the violation. The order may direct that the remediation, abatement,
and/or restoration be accomplished on a specified compliance schedule and/or be
completed within a specified period of time. An order issued under this
division (G) does not relieve the violator of liability for any violation,
including any continuing violation. Issuance of an order under this division
(G) shall not be a deterrent against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against any responsible party.
   (H)   Emergency cease and desist orders. 
      (1)   When the Code Enforcement Officer finds that any person has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any order
issued hereunder, or that the person’s past violations are likely to recur, and
that the person’s violation(s) have caused or contributed to an actual or
threatened discharge to the city or waters of the US which reasonably appears
to present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons or to the environment, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue an order
to the violator directing it immediately to cease and desist all such
violations and directing violator to:
         (a)   Immediately comply with all ordinance requirements; and
         (b)   Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
      (2)   Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under this
division (H) shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering
discharge. In the event of a discharger’s failure to immediately comply
voluntarily with the emergency order, the Code Enforcement Officer may take
such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the city’s
drainage system or waters of the US, and/or endangerment to persons or to the
environment, including immediate termination of a facility’s water supply sewer
connection, or other municipals utility services. The Code Enforcement Officer
may allow the person to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer that the period of
endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated
against the discharger under this chapter. A person that is responsible, in
whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall
submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful
discharge and the measure taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Code
Enforcement Officer within 2 days of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance
of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a deterrent against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator.
   (I)   “Red tags”. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer finds that any
operator of a construction site has violated or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, or any order issued thereunder, the Code Enforcement
Officer may order that a “red tag” be issued to the operator, posted at the
construction site, and distributed to all city departments and divisions whose
decisions affect any activity at the site. Unless express written exception is
made by the Code Enforcement Officer, the “red tag” shall prohibit any further
construction activity at the site and shall bar any further inspection or
approval by the city associated with a building permit, grading permit,
subdivision plat approval, site development plan approval, or any other city
approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to issue occupancy
at the site. Issuance of a “red tag” order shall not be a deterrent against, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator.
(Ord. 785, passed 6-2-2020)
§ 54.09 RIGHT TO RECONSIDERATION, HEARING AND APPEAL.
   (A)   Reconsideration and hearing.
      (1)   Any person subject to a compliance order under §
54.08(F), a remediation, abatement, or restoration order under §
54.08(G), an emergency cease and desist order under §
54.08(H), or a red tag order under §
54.08(I) of this chapter may petition the DPW to reconsider the basis for his/
her order within 30 days of the affected person’s notice of issuance of such an
order.
      (2)   Failure to submit a timely written petition for reconsideration
shall be deemed to be a waiver of any further right to administrative
reconsideration or review of the order.
      (3)   In its petition, the petitioning party must indicate the provisions
of the order objected to, the reasons for the objection(s), any facts that are
contested, the evidence that supports the petitioner’s view of the facts, any
alternative terms of an order that the petitioner would accept, and whether the
petitioning part requests a hearing on its petition.
      (4)   The effect of any compliance order under §
54.08(F), remediation, abatement, or restoration order under §
54.08(G), and any red tag order under §
54.08(I) shall be stayed pending the DPW’s reconsideration of the petition, any
hearing thereon, unless the DPW expressly makes a written determination to the
contrary. The effectiveness of any emergency cease and desist order under §
54.08(H) shall not be stayed pending the DPW’s reconsideration, or any hearing
thereon, unless the DPW expressly and in writing stays his/her emergency order.
      (5)   Within 10 days of the submittal of a petition for reconsideration,
the DPW shall either:
         (a)   Grant the petition and withdraw or modify the order accordingly;
         (b)   Deny the petition, without hearing if no material issue of fact
is raised; or
         (c)   If a hearing has been requested and a material issue of fact has
been raised, set a hearing on the petition.
      (6)   Written notice of any hearing set by the DPW pursuant to division
(A)(5) above, shall be served on the petitioning party personal or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days prior
to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of
the petitioning party.
      (7)   (a)   The DPW may himself/herself conduct the hearing and take
evidence, or he/she may designate any employee of the city or any specially-
designated attorney or engineer to:
            1.   Issue in the name of the city notices of hearing requesting
the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence
relevant to any matter involved in the hearing;
            2.   Take evidence;
            3.   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the DPW for
action thereon.
         (b)   At any hearing held pursuant to this division (A)(7), testimony
taken shall be under oath and recorded. Any party is entitled to present his/
her case or defense by oral or documentary evidence and to conduct such cross-
examination as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. A
transcript will be made available to any party to the hearing upon payment of
the usual charges thereof.
      (8)   After the DPW has reviewed the evidence, he/she shall either: (1)
grant the petition; (2) deny the petition; or (3) grant the petition in part
and deny it in part. The DPW may modify his/her order as is appropriate based
upon the evidence and arguments presented at the hearing and his/her action on
the petition. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate
may be issued.
   (B)   Appeal.
      (1)   Any person whose petition for reconsideration by the DPW has not
been granted in its entirety and who remains adversely affected by the DPW’s
order, or who is subject to an order of the DWP issued following a show cause
hearing under §
54.08(E), may appeal the action of the DWP to the City Council by filing a
written appeal with the City Council within 10 days of the person’s notice of
the DPW adverse action on the petition for reconsideration, or within 10 days
of the person’s notice of the issuance of the order following the show cause
hearing, as the case may be.
      (2)   Failure to submit a timely written appeal to the City Council shall
be deemed to be a waiver of further administrative review.
      (3)   In its written appeal to the City Council, the appealing party
shall indicate the particular provisions of the order objected to, the
particular determinations of the DWP that are contested, the reasons that the
DPW’s order and/or determinations that are contested, and any alternative order
that the appealing party would accept.
      (4)   The effect of the DPW’s order, as issued or modified, shall not be
stayed pending the appeal to the City Council, unless the City Council
expressly so states.
      (5)   Within 30 days of the submittal of a written appeal to the City
Council, the City Council shall hear and consider the appeal in open meeting.
The appellant shall be notified at least 3 days in advance of the date and time
of the City Council meeting at which the appeal will be heard and considered.
      (6)   The appellant shall have the right to public appearance before the
City Council to present oral and written statements in support of his/her
appeal. If the City Council wishes to consider testimony of witnesses or other
evidence beyond that in the record of any hearing before the DPW the City
Council may remand the matter to the DPW for the taking of additional testimony
or other evidence.
      (7)   Upon consideration of any written and oral statements made to the
City Council, as well as the record made before the DPW, the City Council shall
act on the appeal by affirming, vacating, or modifying the order of the DPW,
and/or by remanding the matter to the DPW for further action.
      (8)   Following final action by the City Council on the appeal, any
adversely affected party may challenge such action by the City Council in an
appropriate court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 785, passed 6-2-2020)
§ 54.10 JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (A)   Civil remedies.
      (1)   Whenever it appears that a person has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter that related to:
         (a)   The preservation of public safety, relating to the materials or
methods used in construction of any structure or improvement of real property;
         (b)   The preservation of public health or to the fire safety of a
building or other structure or improvement;
         (c)   The establishment of criteria for land subdivision or
construction of buildings including street design;
         (d)   Dangerous, damaged, or deteriorated structures or improvements;
         (e)   Conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation, or
other matter that creates breeding and living places for insects and rodents;
or
         (f)   Point source effluent limitations or the discharge of a
pollutant, other than from a nonpoint source, in the city’s drainage system.
         The city may invoke other city codes, as amended, and petition the
State District Court or the County Court of Law of Collin, through the City
Attorney, for either the injunctive relief specified in division (A)(2)(a)
below, or the civil penalties specified in division (A)(3) below, or both the
specified injunctive relief and civil penalties.
      (2)   Pursuant to City Code, as amended, the city may obtain against the
owner or the operator of a facility a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, that:
         (a)   Prohibits any conduct that violates any provision of this
chapter that relates to any matter specified in divisions (A)(1)(a)-(f) above;
or
         (b)   Compels the specific performance of any action that is necessary
for compliance with any provision of this chapter that relates to any matter
specified in divisions (A)(1)(a)-(f) above.
      (3)   Pursuant to City Code, as amended, the city may recover a civil
penalty of not more than $1,000 per day for each violation of any provision of
this chapter that relates to any matter specified in divisions (A)(1)(a)-(f)
above, if the city proves that:
         (a)   The defendant was actually notified of the provisions of the
ordinance; and
         (b)   After the defendant received notice of the ordinance provisions,
the defendant committed acts in violation of the ordinance or failed to take
action necessary for compliance with the ordinance.
   (B)   Criminal penalties.
      (1)   Any person who has violated any provision of this chapter, or any
order issued hereunder, shall be strictly liable for such violation regardless
of the presence or absence of a culpable mental state, except as expressly
provided herein, and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more
than $1,000 per violation per day, or any greater fine authorized by state
statute.
      (2)   Any person who has knowingly made any false statement,
representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or
other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this
chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or who has falsified, tampered with, or
knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $500
per violation, per day, or any greater fine authorized by state statute.
      (3)   In determining the amount of any fine imposed hereunder, the court
shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited
to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of
the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation, corrective
actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, the knowledge,
intent, negligence, or other state of mind of the violator, and any other
factor as justice requires.
   (C)   Civil suit under the Texas Water Code. Whenever it appears that a
violation or threat of violation of any provision of this chapter, as amended,
or any rule, permit, or order of the Texas Water Commission, has occurred or is
occurring within the jurisdiction of the City of Parker, the city may have a
suit instituted in a state district court through its city attorney for the
injunctive relief or civil penalties or both against the person who committed
or is committing or threatening to commit the violation.
   (D)   Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for this chapter are not
exclusive of any other remedies that the city may have under state or federal
law or other city ordinances. The city may take any, all, or any combination of
these actions against a violator. The city is empowered to take more than 1
enforcement action against any violation. These actions may be taken
concurrently.
(Ord. 785, passed 6-2-2020)
§ 54.11 POST CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER CONTROLS.
   (A)   Option for new construction/post construction. In lieu of divisions
(B)-(F) below, the owner of any stormwater feature may pay an amount determined
by the department heads to be deposited in a fund maintained by the city for
future construction of a stormwater feature of the city’s choosing and in a
location of the city’s choosing.
   (B)   Ownership. The owner of any stormwater feature shall have full
responsibility for maintenance activities so that the stormwater feature
remains in good working order. The owner could include a homeowners’
association or it could include the city; whoever owns the property once all
construction operators have relinquished control of the property (see CGP for
notice of termination).
      (1)   The maintenance activities shall be performed according to the
below guidelines with the first applicable item to serve as the prevailing
guideline.
         (a)   Documents submitted to and reviewed by the city and filed at the
county with the property that establish the maintenance activities for the
stormwater feature, if available.
         (b)   The manufacturer’s recommended maintenance activities if the
stormwater feature was manufactured.
         (c)   Generally accepted maintenance activities prescribed
specifically for the area, if available.
         (d)   Generally accepted maintenance activities.
      (2)   Maintenance activities resulting in the following are prohibited:
         (a)   Increased erosion potential;
         (b)   Decreased bank stability;
         (c)   Increased flooding potential;
         (d)   Increased pollutants;
         (e)   Unnecessary disturbance of vegetation and riparian areas; or
         (f)   Increased proliferation of invasive species.
   (C)   Notice of violation for new development or re-development.
      (1)   In the event any owner, tenant, agent or person responsible for or
claiming or having supervision or control over real property governed by this
chapter fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the city, by and
through its Code Enforcement Officer or designee shall give a notice of
violation to such owner. Such notice shall be given in any of the following
ways:
         (a)   Personally to the owner in writing;
         (b)   By letter addressed to the owner at the owner’s address as
recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which
the property is located; or
         (c)   If personal service cannon be obtained:
            1.   By publication in the city’s official newspaper at least once;
            2.   By posting notice on or near the front door of each building
on the property to which the violation related; or
            3.   By posting a notice to a placard attached to a stake driven
into the ground on the property to which the violation relates, if the property
contains no buildings.
      (2)   If the city mails a notice to the owner in accordance with division
(C)(1) above, the United States Postal Service returns the notice as “refused,”
“unclaimed,” or if the address required by division (C)(1) was used and the
notice is returned as “not deliverable as addressed” (or an equivalent
marking), the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is
considered as delivered.
      (3)   In a notice provided under this section, the city may inform the
owner by regular mail and a posting on the property that if the owner commits
another violation of the same kind or nature on or before the anniversary of
the date of the notice, the city, without further notice, may correct the
violation at the owner’s expense and assess the expense against the property or
issue citations. If a violation covered by a notice under this division occurs
within 1 year, and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an
ownership change, then the city, without notice, may take any action permitted
in division (D) below and assess its expenses as provided in division (E)
below.
   (D)   Citations, work or improvements by the city; charges against owner. If
the owner fails or refuses to comply with the demand for compliance in the
notice within 10 days of such notice, the city may:
      (1)   Issue citations as provided; and
      (2)   Do the work or make the improvement(s) required, pay for the work
done or improvement(s) made and charge the expenses to the owner of the
property as provided herein. The property owner will have 20 days to reimburse
the city from the completion date of such work to abate the violation(s) at the
property.
   (E)   Assessment of expenses; lien.
      (1)   In the event the owner fails or refuses to pay such expenses
charged to the owner, within 20 days after the abatement work is completed, a
lien may be obtained. The lien and any other expenses incurred by the city may
be filed against the property.
      (2)   To obtain a lien, the city must file a statement of the expenses
incurred to correct the condition of the real property with the County Clerk of
the county in which the property is located. The statement must also state the
name of the owner, if known, and the legal description of the property. The
lien attaches upon filing of the statement with the County Clerk.
      (3)   The city’s lien shall be a prior lien on such property, second only
to tax liens and liens for street improvements. The lien amount shall include
simple interest, which shall accrue at the rate of 10% annually on the date the
expenses were incurred by the city. The city may bring suit for foreclosure to
recover the expenditures and the interest due.
   (F)   Right of entry; inspection. The owner shall grant the city a right of
entry in the event that the DPW or the Code Enforcement Officer has reason to
believe it has become necessary to inspect, monitor, maintain, repair,
reconstruct, or discontinue the use of stormwater features and/or structure
BMPs; however, in no case shall the right of entry, of itself, confer an
obligation on the city to assume responsibility for the stormwater feature and/
or structural BMPs.
      (1)   Where an owner has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the city will be permitted to enter without
unreasonable delay for the purposes of performing his/her responsibilities.
      (2)   The city shall have the right to set up on the owner’s property, or
require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and
or metering of the owner’s operations.
      (3)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
owner at the written or verbal request of the city and shall not be replaced.
The cost of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner.
      (4)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to the owner’s
premises shall be a violation of this section.
(Ord. 785, passed 6-2-2020)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Traffic-control devices
   
70.02   Driving safety course; fees
Traffic Rules
   
70.15   Stop signs
   
70.16   Prima facie maximum speed limits
   
70.17   Thru truck traffic prohibited
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The City Chief of Police or his or her duly authorized representative
shall have the duty of erecting or installing upon, over, along, or beside any
highway, street, or alley signs, signals, and other traffic-control devices to
direct or warn traffic in accord with the provisions of this section and other
traffic ordinances and laws. All traffic-control devices shall conform with the
State Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices for Streets and Highways, vol.
I and II, and shall be uniform and be located, so far as practicable, according
to the directions shown in that manual, throughout the city. All traffic-
control devices which are consistent with that manual and state law and this
section shall be official traffic-control devices.
   (B)   Whenever the Chief of Police has erected and installed any official
traffic-control device, signal, or sign at any location in the city or has
caused the same to be done under his or her direction, the Chief of Police
shall file a report with the City Secretary, in writing and signed officially
by the Mayor, stating the type of traffic-control device, sign, or signal and
when and where the same was erected or installed. The City Secretary shall file
and maintain this report among the official papers of his or her office.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to disobey the directions of any
official traffic-control device unless directed so to do by a peace officer,
subject to the exceptions granted to the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle.
   (D)   In any prosecution for a violation of this section or any traffic
ordinance of the city, proof that any traffic-control device, sign, signal, or
marking was actually in place on any street shall constitute prima facie
evidence that the same was installed by the city’s Chief of Police pursuant to
the authority of this section and of the ordinance directing the installation
of that device, sign, signal, or marking.
(Ord. 382, passed 7-11-1995)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.02 DRIVING SAFETY COURSE; FEES.
   (A)   The Municipal Court of the city may, pursuant to provisions of
amendment to the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, being Tex. Trans.
Code, Ch. 601, require the person requesting a driving safety course to pay a
fee set by the Court in an amount that does not exceed $10, including any
special fees authorized by statute or municipal ordinance to cover the cost of
administering the course.
   (B)   Pursuant to the authority in the State Motor Vehicle Safety
Responsibility Act, being Tex. Trans. Code, Chapter 601, the Municipal Court
shall require the payment of a $10 fee before dismissing proceedings in that
Court, based on a charge of a person’s failure to maintain financial
responsibility as defined in the State Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Act.
   (C)   Pursuant to the authority in the State Motor Vehicle Act, being Tex.
Trans. Code, Ch. 601, the Municipal Court shall require the payment of a $10
fee before dismissing proceedings in that Court, based on the charge of a
person’s failure to display a valid driver’s license as defined in the State
Motor Vehicle Act.
(Ord. 308, passed 11-24-1987)
TRAFFIC RULES
§ 70.15 STOP SIGNS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall have the authority to place and maintain
stop signs whenever he or she deems it necessary for the regulation of traffic
of this city or under state law.
   (B)   All stop signs shall conform to the manual and specifications as
approved by the State Highway Commission.
   (C)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer, every driver of a
vehicle approaching an intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, in the event
there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none,
then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view
of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection.
   (D)   All stop signs heretofore placed or erected by the city which are in
use for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic are hereby
affirmed, ratified, and declared to be the official control devices, provided
they are not inconsistent with the provisions of state law.
   (E)   In any prosecution for a violation of this section, proof that any
stop sign was actually in place on any street shall constitute prima facie
evidence that the same is installed by the Chief of Police pursuant to the
authority of this section.
(Ord. 229, passed 7-17-1979)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.16 PRIMA FACIE MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS.
   The following prima facie maximum speed limits hereafter indicated for motor
vehicles are hereby determined and declared to be reasonable and safe, and such
maximum speed limits are hereby fixed at the rate of speed indicated for motor
vehicles traveling upon the named streets and highways, or parts thereof. No
motor vehicle shall be operated along or upon said portions of said named
streets or highways within the corporate limits of the city, in excess of the
speeds now set forth in the following limits:
   (A)   Twenty-five miles per hour along and upon the following streets:
Andover Drive
Ascot Court
Ashford Court
Audubon Drive
Barrington Drive
Beechwood Court
Belvedere Drive
Berwich Lane
Bolin School Road
Bozeman Road
Bracknell Drive
Bryce Drive
Camden Drive
Cheshire Lane
Cheswick Court
Cheyenne Drive
Chilton Court
Church Lane
Cimmaron Circle
Corinth Chapel Road
Corsham Drive
Cox Farm Estate
Creekside Court
Devon Drive
Dublin Park Drive
Dumont Court
Dunnaway Crossing
Eastgate Lane
Edgewater Court
Elaine Drive
Elisa Lane
Englenook Drive
Erin Lane
Forest Bend Drive
Frenzel Drive
Glenmore Drive
Golden Pond Circle
Greenhill Court
Hathaway Drive
Havenhurst Court
Holbrook Circle
Jeffrey Drive
Kara Lane
Kensington Court
Kingston Court
Laila Drive
Leena Drive
Lost Hollow Court
Ludlow Lane
Margaux Drive
McCreary Creek Lane
Meadow Glen Road
Meadow Ridge
Middleton Drive
Northridge Parkway
Norwick Drive
Overbrook Drive
Overton Drive
Parker Village Drive
Pecan Orchard Drive
Pembroke Court
Rathbone Drive
Ravensthorpe Drive
Ridgemore Drive
Salisbury Drive
Savannah Circle
Sheffield Court
Silverton Drive
Southridge Parkway
Stafford Drive
Stoney Oak Court
Sycamore Lane
Tamsworth Court
Tennyson Court
Vista Ridge
Warwick Way
Wessex Court
Westfiled Drive
Weston Court
Windomere Court
Windomere Drive
   (B)   Thirty miles per hour along and upon the following streets:
Bluffs Lane
Bois D’Arc Lane
Boulder Drive
Brookwood Drive
Copperhill Circle
Countryside Drive
Curtis Road
Donihoo Lane
Donna Lane
Dublin Creek Circle
Dublin Creek Lane
Dublin Road
Estados Drive
Estate Lane
Glen Meadows Drive
Gray Lane
Gregory Lane
Hackberry Lane
Lewis Lane
Mary Court
Moss Ridge Circle
Moss Ridge Road
Old Gate Lane
Parrent Court
Pecan Bend
Poco Drive
Ramsey Court
Ranchview Court
Red Oak Circle
Reserve Court
Ricks Court
Ridgeview Drive
Rolling Knolls Drive
Saddle Trail
Shady Knolls Drive
Springhill Estates Drive
St. Lawrence Court
Virginia Place
Wagonwheel Drive
Whitestone Drive
Willow Point Circle
Willow Ridge Drive
Windmill Creek Drive
Woodcreek Circle
   (C)   Thirty-five miles per hour along and upon the following streets:
      (1)   Betsy Lane (also known as County Road 240, also known as CR-240);
      (2)   Chaparral Drive; and
      (3)   McCreary Road (also known as County Road 245, also known as CR-
245).
   (D)   Fifty miles per hour along and upon the following streets:
      West Lucas Road (East), 5800 block to 6700 block.
   (E)   Parker Road East (FM 2514):
      (1)   From the 3900 block (Sycamore Lane) to 6300 block (Hogge Road), a
maximum speed of 45 miles per hour; and
      (2)   From the 6300 block (Hogge Road) to 7600 block (Bois-D-Arc Lane), a
maximum speed of 55 miles per hour.
   (F)   FM 2551 (also known as Dillehay Drive and Hogge Drive):
      (1)   Parker Village Drive south to E. Parker Road, a maximum speed of 45
miles per hour; and
      (2)   From 4100 block (Parker Road) to 3200 block (McWhirter Road), a
maximum speed of 45 miles per hour.
   (G)   No motor vehicle shall be operated along and upon Farm-to-Market (FM)
Highway No. 2514 within the corporate limits of the city in excess of speeds
now set forth in Exhibit “A” attached to Ord. 809, passed 1-11-2022.
(Ord. 584, passed 12-13-2005; Am. Ord. 758, passed 3-20-2018; Am. Ord. 771,
passed 12-4-2018; Am. Ord. 809, passed 1-11-2022) Penalty, §
70.99
§ 70.17 THRU TRUCK TRAFFIC PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this
section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Terms not defined herein
shall be construed in accordance with customary usage.
      AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY TRUCKS. Fire department trucks, police trucks,
public ambulances for which permits have been issued by the State Board of
Health, emergency trucks of municipal departments or public service
corporations as are designated or authorized by the governing body of an
incorporated city, private trucks operated by volunteer firemen or certified
emergency medical volunteers while answering a fire alarm or responding to a
medical emergency, and trucks owned by the state or by a political subdivision
engaged in emergency utility repair or electric, water, or wastewater services.
      LIGHT TRUCK. Any truck with a manufacturer’s rated carrying capacity of
two thousand (2,000) pounds or less, including trucks commonly known as pickup
trucks, panel delivery trucks, and carryall trucks.
      PROOF OF ROUTE. A written verification of pick-ups, deliveries, or
destinations which may include a log book, delivery slip, shipping order, bill
or any other document which identifies and specifies the date, address, and
name of the person requesting or directing the pick-up or delivery and the
destination of the pick-up or delivery.
      TRUCK. Any motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property, including “truck tractors,” “road tractors,”
“trailers,” semi-trailers,” “pole trailers,” and “special mobile equipment” as
those terms are defined in the Texas Transportation Code.
   (B)   Thru truck traffic.
      (1)   Regulation. A person commits an offense of the person operates a
truck upon a public street designated as a no thru truck street.
      (2)   Affirmative defenses. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution
under this section if:
         (a)   The truck was an authorized emergency truck;
         (b)   The truck was as bus or light truck; or
         (c)   The truck:
            1.   Was being driven to or from home or to fulfill a local
commercial obligation to a buyer or seller at a given destination, evidenced by
a bill or sale or invoice; and
            2.   The public street was the only route to such destination.
(Ord. 801, passed 6-1-2021) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever in this title an act is prohibited or is made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in this
title the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared
to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is otherwise provided in this code of
ordinances, the violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500;
provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty
provided for the same or a similar offense of the laws of the state.
      (2)   Each day a violation of this code or of any ordinance continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §
70.01 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction in the
Municipal Court of the city, shall be subject to a fine in an amount not to
exceed the sum of $200 for each offense.
(Ord. 382, passed 7-11-1995)
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §
70.15 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction in
Municipal Court, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $200 for each
offense.
   (D)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §
70.16 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined in an amount not more than $200 for each offense plus court and
state costs.
(Ord. 229, passed 7-17-1979; Am. Ord. 584, passed 12-13-2005)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Temporary parking prohibitions authorized
   
71.02   Parking for purpose of sale prohibited; towing; disposition
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 TEMPORARY PARKING PROHIBITIONS AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, with the written consent of the Mayor, may post
sections of the public rights-of-way within the city with “No Parking” signs,
or language substantially similar to same, on a temporary basis, in those areas
that meet 1 or more of the following criteria:
      (1)   The portion of the public right-of-way so posted shall have
constituted a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens
of the city as a result of the parking of motor vehicles within the public
right-of-way, primarily as a result of periodic public or private events,
parties, or gatherings at 1 or more locations near the right-of-way so posted;
or
      (2)   Those rights-of-way which, because of a public emergency,
construction, or other threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the
citizens of the city, shall constitute an emergency, or special condition,
requiring temporary parking regulations to be imposed by the city.
   (B)   The parking regulations described above in division (A) shall be
effective for not more than 10 days following the effective date of the Mayor’s
written approval. The regulations may be renewed and extended for those 10-day
periods as are reasonably necessary under the circumstances.
(Ord. 462, passed 6-8-1999)
Penalty, see § 71.99
§ 71.02 PARKING FOR PURPOSE OF SALE PROHIBITED; TOWING; DISPOSITION.
   (A)   Vehicles for sale; prohibited near or along major thoroughfares.
      (1)   No person shall park on public or private property a motor vehicle,
boat trailer, recreational vehicle, or camper (collectively called “vehicle” or
“vehicles”) having displayed thereon any writing indicating that vehicle is for
sale which is visible from any thoroughfare. This section does not prohibit the
occasional display for sale by the registered owner of a vehicle on private
property owned by that individual.
         (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
            OCCASIONAL DISPLAY. No private property may be used for display of
vehicles for sale for more than 14 consecutive days of any 180-day period
without a permit issued by the city.
         (b)   A violation of this section shall constitute a Class C
misdemeanor. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a vehicle parked
in an area having both a certificate of occupancy issued by the city for the
sale of vehicles and a license from the State Department of Transportation for
the sale of vehicles at that location.
      (2)   In addition, the Mayor or his or her designee, or the Police Chief
of the city, without consent of the owner or operator of a vehicle parked in
violation of this section, is authorized to cause the vehicle and any property
on or in the vehicle to be removed and stored at a vehicle storage facility at
the owner’s or operator’s expense if:
         (a)   The owner or operator of the vehicle has received actual notice
that the vehicle is in violation of this section and that it will be towed and
stored at the vehicle owner’s or operator’s expense if it is not removed; or
         (b)   A conspicuous notice has been attached to the vehicle’s front
windshield or, if the vehicle has no front windshield, to a conspicuous part of
the vehicle, stating:
            1.   That the vehicle is parked in violation of this section;
            2.   That the vehicle will be towed and stored at the expense of
the owner or operator if the vehicle is not removed from the area by a
specified time and date, that time and date not being sooner than 12 hours
after the notice is attached to the vehicle; and
            3.   A telephone number that is answered 24 hours a day to enable
the owner or operator of the vehicle to locate the vehicle.
      (3)   In addition to the requirements of divisions (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b)
of this section, a notice must be mailed on the next business day after the
vehicle is towed for a vehicle registered in this state, and no later than the
fourteenth calendar day after the vehicle is towed for a vehicle registered
outside this state, to the owner of the vehicle by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the last address shown for the owner according to the
vehicle registration records of the State Department of Transportation or, if
the vehicle is registered in another state, the appropriate agency of that
state, stating:
         (a)   A description of the vehicle;
         (b)   That the vehicle was parked in violation of this section, with a
description of the location where it was parked;
         (c)   That the vehicle was towed and stored at the expense of the
owner or operator of the vehicle; and
         (d)   A telephone number that is answered 24 hours a day to enable the
owner or operator to locate the vehicle.
      (4)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         BUSINESS DAY. A Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday,
excluding any holiday observed by the city when city administrative offices are
closed.
   (B)   Procedure for towing and storing vehicles.
      (1)   A towing company under contract with the city and that is insured
against liability for property damages incurred in towing a vehicle, and after
receiving authorization from the City Police Department, may, without the
consent of an owner or operator of a vehicle, remove and store the vehicle, and
any property on or in the vehicle, at a vehicle storage facility at the expense
of the owner or operator, if the towing company has received a written
statement from the Mayor or his or her designee that:
         (a)   The vehicle is parked in violation of this section; and
         (b)   The owner or operator of the vehicle has received actual notice
that the vehicle is in violation of this section, or a conspicuous notice has
been attached to the vehicle for the required period of time in compliance with
division (A)(2) of this section.
      (2)   No later than the fifth calendar day after taking the vehicle into
custody for a vehicle registered in this state and no later than the fourteenth
calendar day after the vehicle is taken into custody for a vehicle registered
outside this state, the towing company shall mail a written notice by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the last address shown for the owner and
lienholder, if any, according to the vehicle registration records of the State
Department of Transportation or, if the vehicle is registered in another state,
the appropriate agency of that state, stating:
         (a)   A description of the vehicle;
         (b)   That the towing company is in possession of the vehicle as a
result of it being towed;
         (c)   A description of where the vehicle was towed from and when it
was towed to the towing company’s storage facility;
         (d)   That the city authorized the tow;
         (e)   The name and telephone number of the towing company and the
address where the vehicle is stored and where it may be reclaimed;
         (f)   That the vehicle may be reclaimed upon presentation of proof of
ownership and payment of towing, storage, and notification fees;
         (g)   The amount of the towing, storage, and notification fees; and
         (h)   That if the vehicle remains at the storage facility for 20 days
or more after the date of the notice, unclaimed, the towing company will
declare it to be abandoned. The failure to reclaim the vehicle shall be deemed
a waiver of the owner’s and lienholder’s right, title, and interest in the
vehicle and their consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public auction to be
held on or after a specified date.
      (3)   (a)   Notice by publication in a newspaper of general circulation
in the city is sufficient notice under division (B)(2) of this section, if:
            1.   The identity of the last registered owner cannot be
determined;
            2.   The registration has no address for the owner; or
            3.   The determination with reasonable certainty of the identity
and address of all lienholders is impossible.
         (b)   The notice of publication must be published in the same period
and contain the same information required by division (B)(2) of this section.
The publication may contain a list of more than 1 vehicle.
      (4)   An owner or operator of the vehicle shall be entitled to the rights
of owners of stored vehicles as set forth in Tex. Trans. Code, Chapter 685, as
amended, which chapter is incorporated herein by reference.
      (5)   A towing company which tows a vehicle under this section shall be
entitled to receive from the owner, operator, or lienholder the expense of
towing and storage of the vehicle, including the costs of notification. These
expenses shall be a priority lien against the vehicle and may be deducted from
the sale of the vehicle at a public auction.
      (6)   If the vehicle is not reclaimed by the owner or lienholder, by
paying the full expense of towing, storage, preservation, and notification
within 20 days after the date of notification provided in divisions (B)(2) and
(B)(3) of this section, then the owner and lienholder waive all rights and
interests in the vehicle and consent to the sale of the vehicle by public
auction. In that event, the towing company under contract with the city may
sell the vehicle at public auction.
      (7)   The purchaser of a vehicle at a public auction:
         (a)   Takes title free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership;
         (b)   Shall receive a sale receipt from the City Police Department;
and
         (c)   Is entitled to register the vehicle and receive a certificate of
title.
      (8)   The towing company under contract with the city, from and after it
is authorized to tow the vehicle by the City Police Department as provided in
division (B) of this section, shall be acting on behalf of the City Police
Department. The towing company is entitled to reimbursement from the proceeds
of the sale of a vehicle:
         (a)   The cost of the auction;
         (b)   The towing, preservation, and storage fees resulting from taking
the vehicle into custody; and
         (c)   The cost of notice and publication.
      (9)   After deducting the reimbursement allowed under division (B)(8) of
this section, the proceeds of the sale shall be held by the city for 90 days
for the owner or lienholder of the vehicle. After that time period, proceeds
unclaimed by the owner or lienholder shall be deposited in the city’s General
Fund.
(Ord. 428, passed 10-14-1997)
Penalty, see § 71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
penalties as provided in §
70.99 of this code.
   (B)   Any violation of the provisions of §
71.01 shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500, and each day the
violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 462, passed 6-8-1999)
   (C)   Any violation of the provisions of §
71.02 shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500, and each day the
violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 428, passed 10-14-1997)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ABANDONED AND JUNKED VEHICLES
      
91.   ALARM SYSTEMS
      
92.   ANIMALS
      
93.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
94.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
95.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
96.   RESERVED
      
97.   PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
      
98.   BICYCLES
CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED AND JUNKED VEHICLES
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Abandoned motor vehicles; removal and disposition
   
90.03   Junked vehicles; restrictions; removal and disposition
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that is inoperable and is left
unattended on public property for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that
has remained illegally on public property for a period of more than 48 hours,
or a motor vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent of
the owner or person in control of the property for more than 48 hours, or a
motor vehicle left unattended on the rights-of-way of any designated county,
state, or federal highway within this state in excess of 48 hours.
   JUNKED VEHICLE. A vehicle that is self propelled and:
      (1)   Does not have lawfully attached to it an un-expired license plate
or a valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and
      (2)   Is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded or
inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than 72 consecutive hours, if
the vehicle is on public property; or 30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on
private property.
(Ord. 193, passed 6-3-1975; Am. Ord. 591, passed 3-28-2006)
§ 90.02 ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES; REMOVAL AND DISPOSITION.
   (A)   The city is authorized to take into custody any abandoned motor
vehicle found on public or private property.
   (B)   The city or its duly appointed agent shall notify within 10 days by
certified mail, return receipt requested, the last known registered owner and
all lienholders of record that it has taken into custody an abandoned motor
vehicle. The notice shall be as prescribed by Tex. Trans. Code, § 683.012, as
amended, for abandoned motor vehicles. The notice shall specifically state, in
addition to the other requirements, that the failure of the owner or
lienholders to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle within the time
provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner and lienholders of all right,
title, and interest in the vehicle and their consent to the sale of the
abandoned motor vehicle at a public auction to be held by the city.
   (C)   (1)   If an abandoned motor vehicle has not been reclaimed within 20
days after the date of notice and payment of all towing, preservation, and
storage charges resulting from its impoundment, the city shall sell the
abandoned motor vehicle at a public auction. Proper notice of the public
auction shall be given, and, in the event a vehicle is to be sold in
satisfaction of a garagekeeper’s lien, the garagekeeper shall be notified of
the time and place of the auction. Notice given in accordance with the
requirements of this code, or the giving of notice of the sale of other types
of abandoned property, shall be sufficient to comply with the requirements of
this section.
      (2)   The city shall furnish a sales receipt for each vehicle to the
purchaser thereof at the public auction. The proceeds shall be applied first to
reimburse the city for the expenses of the auction, costs of towing,
preserving, and storing the vehicle, and all notice and publication costs, and
any remainder from the proceeds of the sale shall be held for the owner of the
vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days, and then shall be deposited in the
special fund which shall remain available for the payment of auction, towing,
preserving, storage, and all notice and publication costs which result from
placing other abandoned vehicles in custody, whenever the proceeds from a sale
of those other abandoned motor vehicles are insufficient to meet these expenses
and costs.
   (D)   The city is authorized to apply to the State Highway Department for
authority to sell, give away, or dispose of any abandoned vehicle in its
possession to a demolisher in accordance with the provisions of Tex. Trans.
Code, § 683.051, as amended.
(Ord. 193, passed 6-3-1975)
§ 90.03 JUNKED VEHICLES; RESTRICTIONS; REMOVAL AND DISPOSITION.
   (A)   All junked vehicles shall be stored within a building which has met
city building codes; otherwise the same is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
detrimental to the public welfare of the residents of the city.
   (B)   One junked vehicle shall be allowed on private property so long as its
location on the property complies with the requirements stated above in
division (A) of this section.
   (C)   The city, when desiring to remove and dispose of junked vehicles from
private property, public property, or public rights-of-way, shall comply with
the following procedures:
      (1)   A notice of not less than 10 days stating the nature of the public
nuisance on private property and that it must be removed and abated within 10
days and further that a request for a hearing must be made before the
expiration of that 10-day period, this notice to be mailed, by certified mail
with a 5-day return requested, must be sent to the owner or the occupant of the
private premises whereupon the public nuisance exists. If the notice is
returned undelivered by the U.S. post office, official action to abate the
nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than 10 days from the date of
the return.
      (2)   The requirements of division (C)(1) above shall apply to the case
of a public nuisance on public property or on a public right-of-way, and the
notice shall be sent to the owner or the occupant of the public premises, or to
the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way,
whereupon the public nuisance exists.
      (3)   Where a hearing is requested by the owner or occupant of the public
or private premises, or by the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to
the public right-of-way, on which such a vehicle is located, within 10 days
after service of notice to abate the nuisance, a public hearing, prior to the
removal of the vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance, must be held
before the Municipal Judge of the city. It shall be the responsibility of the
city prosecuting attorney to prosecute the case on behalf of the city, and,
should the Municipal Judge find that the vehicle is a public nuisance as
defined herein, he or she shall enter an order requiring the removal of the
vehicle or part thereof from the public or private property or public right-of-
way where it is situated, and that order shall include a description of the
vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of the
vehicle, if available at the site.
      (4)   The city shall give notice to the State Highway Department within 5
days after the date of removal of the vehicle, identifying the vehicle or part
thereof.
      (5)   The procedure set out in this section shall not apply to a vehicle
which is the only such vehicle located on the private property.
   (D)   Junked vehicles or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a
scrapyard, demolishers, or any suitable site.
(Ord. 193, passed 6-3-1975)
Statutory reference:
   Junked vehicles, see Tex. Trans. Code, §§ 683.071 et seq.
CHAPTER 91: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Registration required
   
91.03   Registration and false alarm fees
   
91.04   Registration for existing alarms
   
91.05   Responsibilities of alarm system owners
   
91.06   Intentional activation unlawful
 
   
91.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, §§ 214.191 et seq.
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM SYSTEM. A device or system that transmits a signal intended to summon
either the fire or the police emergency services of the city. The term includes
an alarm that emits an audible signal on the exterior of a structure. The term
does not include an alarm installed on a vehicle, unless the vehicle is used
for a habitation at a permanent site, or an alarm designed to alert only the
inhabitants within the premises.
   FALSE ALARM. An alarm notification responded to by a Police or Fire
Department within 30 minutes of the alarm notification and it is determined
from an inspection of the interior or exterior of the premises that the alarm
was false or there was no reasonable cause for the alarm.
(Ord. 358, passed 2-8-1994; Am. Ord. 813, passed 3-15-2022)
§ 91.02 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to install or operate a fire or police
alarm system in the city without registration of the alarm system by the owner
with the city prior to installation. A separate alarm registration is required
for each alarm site and each registration must be renewed annually. The city
must be notified of any changes in the registration information within 10 days
of the change. A new registration is required when a property is sold with an
installed alarm system.
(Ord. 358, passed 2-8-1994; Am. Ord. 813, passed 3-15-2022) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 REGISTRATION AND FALSE ALARM FEES.
   Registration fees and false alarm fees shall be set by the city through
adoption of a fee schedule, currently through Ordinance 799 and in the future
as it may be amended.
(Ord. 358, passed 2-8-1994; Am. Ord. 618, passed 1-22-2008; Am. Ord. 813,
passed 3-15-2022)
§ 91.04 REGISTRATION FOR EXISTING ALARMS.
   Alarm systems which are presently in operation but not yet registered with
the city must be registered within 90 days from the effective date of this
chapter.
(Ord. 358, passed 2-8-1994; Am. Ord. 813, passed 3-15-2022) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.05 RESPONSIBILITIES OF ALARM SYSTEM OWNERS.
   An owner of an alarm system must:
   (A)   Adjust or modify the sensory mechanism of his or her alarm system to
suppress false indications of force so that the alarm system will not be
activated by impulses due to:
      (1)   Transient pressure changes in water pipes;
      (2)   Flashes of light;
      (3)   Wind noise caused by the rattling or vibrating of doors or windows;
      (4)   Vehicular noise adjacent to the installation; and
      (5)   Other forces unrelated to actual emergencies.
   (B)   Maintain the premises containing an alarm system in a manner that
insures proper operation of the alarm system.
(Ord. 358, passed 2-8-1994; Am. Ord. 813, passed 3-15-2022) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 INTENTIONAL ACTIVATION UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally activate or cause to be
activated any alarm system without the existence of an emergency situation and
with the intent of causing the response of city Police and/or Fire Departments.
(Ord. 358, passed 2-8-1994; Am. Ord. 813, passed 3-15-2022) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Any person found liable of violating this chapter by a court of competent
jurisdiction shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined a sum not to
exceed $500. Each day that a provision of this chapter is violated shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 358, passed 2-8-1994; Am. Ord. 813, passed 3-15-2022)
CHAPTER 92: ANIMALS
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Rabies control
   
92.03   Wild, exotic, and vicious animals
   
92.04   Animals running at large; barking dogs
   
92.05   Sanitary conditions required
   
92.06   Humane treatment of animals required
 
   
92.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to adopt rabies ordinances, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, Ch.
826
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any living creature, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats,
horses, birds, fish, mammals, reptiles, insects, fowl, and livestock, but
specifically excluding human beings.
   ANIMAL CONTROL. The animal control function of the city.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any person or agency designated by the city to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   ANIMAL NUISANCE. Created when an animal:
      (1)   Runs uncontrolled;
      (2)   Molests or disturbs persons or vehicles by chasing, barking, or
biting;
      (3)   Attacks other animals;
      (4)   Damages property other than that of the owner or harborer;
      (5)   Barks, whines, howls, honks, brays, cries, or makes other noises
excessively;
      (6)   Creates noxious or offensive odors;
      (7)   Defecates upon any public place or upon premises not owned or
controlled by the owner or harborer unless promptly removed by the animal owner
or harborer; or
      (8)   Creates an insect breeding or attraction site due to an
accumulation of excreta.
   BITE. To be seized with the teeth or jaws so that a person or animal has
been nipped, gripped, wounded, or pierced and saliva of the biting animal has
contacted the resulting break or abrasion of the skin.
   CAT. Any live or dead cat (Felis catus).
   CONTROL or CONTROL OF AN ANIMAL. The same is on a leash not more than 8 feet
in length, is under voice control in the presence of a competent person, is on
or within a vehicle being driven or parked, or is within the property limits of
its owner or harborer or upon the premises of another person with the consent
of that person.
   CURRENTLY VACCINATED. Vaccinated and satisfying the following criteria:
      (1)   The animal must have been at least 3 months of age at the time of
vaccination;
      (2)   At least 30 days have elapsed since the initial vaccination; and
      (3)   No more than 36 months have elapsed since the most recent
vaccination.
   DOG. Any live or dead dog (Canis familiaris).
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Includes all species of animals commonly accepted as being
domesticated.
   HARBORING. The act of keeping or caring for an animal or of providing
premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter, or care for a period of
3 consecutive days.
   OWNER. Any person, firm, or corporation having title to any animal, or a
person who has, harbors, keeps, or causes or permits to be harbored or kept,
any animal in his or her care, or who permits an animal to remain on or about
his or her premises.
   PET ANIMAL. Includes dogs, rats, rabbits, rodents, birds, reptiles, and any
other species of animal that is sold or retained as a household pet, but shall
not include skunks, nonhuman primates, and any other species of wild, exotic,
or carnivorous animal that may be further restricted in this law.
   RUNNING AT LARGE. Not completely confined by a building, wall, or fence of
sufficient strength of construction to restrain the animal, or not on a leash
or held in the hands of the owner or keeper, or not under direct personal
supervision of the owner to the extent that the animal does damage public or
private property and does attack, charge, or otherwise disrupts the lawful use
of private or public property by third parties.
   STRAY ANIMAL. Any animal for which there is no identifiable owner or
harborer.
   VACCINATED. Properly injected with a rabies vaccine licensed for use in that
species by the U.S. Department of Agriculture and administered by a
veterinarian licensed to practice in this state.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any individual animal or any species that has on 1 or more
previous occasions, without provocation, attacked or bitten any person or other
animal, or any individual animal that the local health authority or supervisor
of animal control has reason to believe has a dangerous disposition, or any
species of animal that the local health authority or supervisor has reason to
believe has a dangerous disposition likely to be harmful to humans or other
animals.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any poisonous or dangerous reptile or any other species of
animal that commonly exists in a natural, unconfined state and is usually not
domesticated, including, but not limited to, foxes, opossums, raccoons,
squirrels, leopards, panthers, tigers, lions, lynx, unless certified for
medical, biological, herpetological, or other scientific research or study.
This definition shall apply regardless of state or duration of captivity.
(Ord. 414, passed 12-17-1996; Am. Ord. 625, passed 7-1-2008)
§ 92.02 RABIES CONTROL.
   (A)   Vaccinations. Every owner of a dog or cat 3 months of age or older
shall have that animal vaccinated against rabies. All dogs or cats vaccinated
at 3 months of age or older shall be revaccinated at 1 year of age and each
third year thereafter. Any person moving into the city from a location outside
of the city shall comply with this section within 30 days after having moved
into the city. If the dog or cat has inflicted a bite on any person or another
animal within the last 10 days, the owner of that dog or cat shall report the
fact to the veterinarian, and no rabies vaccine shall be administered until
after the 10-day observation period.
   (B)   Certificate of vaccination. Upon vaccination, the veterinarian shall
execute and furnish to the owner of the dog or cat, as evidence thereof, a
certificate upon a form furnished by the veterinarian. The veterinarian shall
retain a duplicate copy. This certificate shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the
vaccinated dog or cat;
      (2)   The date of vaccination;
      (3)   The type of rabies vaccine used;
      (4)   The year and number of the rabies tag; and
      (5)   The breed, age, color, and sex of the vaccinated dog or cat.
   (C)   Rabies tags. Concurrent with the issuance and delivery of the
certificate of vaccination referred to in division (B) of this section, the
owner of the dog or cat shall cause to be attached to the collar or harness of
the vaccinated dog or cat a metal tag, serially numbered to correspond with the
vaccination certificate number, and bearing the year of issuance, and the name
of the issuing veterinarian and his or her address. The owner shall cause the
collar or harness, with the attached metal tag, to be worn by his or her dog or
cat at all times.
   (D)   Duplicate tags. In the event of loss or destruction of the original
tag provided in division (C) of this section, the owner of the dog or cat shall
obtain a duplicate tag. Vaccination certificates (and tags) shall be valid only
for the animal for which each was originally issued.
   (E)   Proof. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or harbors a
vaccinated dog or cat to fail or refuse to exhibit his or her copy of the
certificate of vaccination upon demand to any person charged with the
enforcement of this chapter.
   (F)   Harboring unvaccinated animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to
harbor any dog or cat that has not been vaccinated against rabies, as provided
herein, or that cannot be identified as having a current vaccination
certificate.
   (G)   Animals exposed to rabies. Any person having knowledge of the
existence of any animal known to have been or suspected of being exposed to
rabies must immediately report that knowledge to the local health authority,
giving any information that may be required. For any animal known to have been
or suspected of being exposed to rabies, the following rules must apply:
      (1)   Animals having a current vaccination must be revaccinated
immediately and confined according to the method prescribed by the local health
authority for a period of not less than 90 days; and
      (2)   Animals not having a current vaccination should be humanely
destroyed. However, if the owner of such an animal elects, he or she may, at
his or her expense and in a manner prescribed by the local health authority,
confine the animal. This animal must be vaccinated immediately following
exposure and quarantined for not less than 6 months. A revaccination shall be
done 1 month prior to release from quarantine.
(Ord. 414, passed 12-17-1996; Am. Ord. 625, passed 7-1-2008) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 WILD, EXOTIC, AND VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   (1)   Prohibited wild animals. Prohibited wild animals include the
definition and regulations of the Tex. Health and Safety Code, subch. E,
entitled Dangerous Wild Animals, as set forth in Tex. Health and Safety Code,
§§ 822.101 through 822.116. The regulations of these sections, to the extent
legally permissible, are adopted by the city, and the violation of these
regulations is a violation of this section. The dangerous wild animals listed
in Tex. Health and Safety Code, Ch. 822 are prohibited in the city. The Tex.
Health and Safety Code sections cited above are adopted and incorporated by
reference as if fully set forth herein.
      (2)   Dangerous dogs. Tex. Health and Safety Code, §§ 822.041 through
822.047, subch. D, entitled Dangerous Dogs, are adopted as regulations of the
city by this section. Violation of these regulations is a violation of this
section. The Tex. Health and Safety Code sections cited above are adopted and
incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
      (3)   The provisions of Tex. Health and Safety Code, Ch. 822 are adopted
as they are effective on the date of Ordinance 697, and as they may hereafter
be amended.
   (B)    Prohibited animal does not mean a gerbil, hamster, guinea pig or
laboratory mouse or rat.
   (C)   Large animal.  
      (1)   A large animal is defined as any herbivorous grazing animal over
500 pounds body weight. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a large
animal on any premises except as follows, or to keep any large animal on any
premises in an unsanitary condition.
      (2)   The minimum lot size for large animals in 1.8 net acres. For each
lot, the portion of the lot in excess of one-half acre is determined to be the
net grazing area. A person may keep large animals in accordance with the
following:
         (a)   One large animal per one-half acre of net grazing area, when
each animal is provided a fully enclosed stall inside a barn, suitable for the
large animal’s care and feeding, accessible by the animal and not used for
storage or other use.
         (b)   One large animal per acre of net grazing area when no fully
enclosed stall is provided for the large animal.
         (c)   A special permit may be requested by applicants wishing to keep
animals with a minor variance from the terms of this division (C).
      (3)   Medium size animals. An owner may have up to 8 animals whose adult
body weight is between 200 and 500 pounds per acre of pasture, or other
permitted animal. Medium size animals includes llamas.
      (4)   Small size animals. An owner may have up to 8 animals whose adult
body weight is less than 200 pounds per acre of pasture. Small size animals
includes alpacas. Provided, however:
         (a)   Swine known as "pot bellied pigs" are limited to 2 per
residence.
         (b)   All other swine are prohibited, regardless of size.
      (5)   Cumulative regulations. The animal per acre restriction in this
chapter prohibits cumulative numbers of large, medium, and/or small animals on
the same acreage. Example: 2 acres of pasture may have 16 alpacas, but not 16
alpacas and 2 horses.
      (6)   Pastured animals. The foregoing regulations are relevant to
pastured and stabled animals.
(Ord. 414, passed 12-17-1996; Am. Ord. 560, passed 10-26-2004; Am. Ord. 625,
passed 7-1-2008; Am. Ord. 697, passed 8-6-2013) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE; BARKING DOGS.
   (A)   Running at large. It shall be unlawful for any dog or other animal
possessed, kept, or harbored, other than a cat, to run at large as is defined
in §
92.01 of this code.
   (B)   Public nuisance; barking. It shall be unlawful for any owner or
possessor of an animal to fail to exercise proper care and control of his or
her animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance, as that term is
defined in § 92.01 above. Excessive, continuous, or untimely barking, in a
manner to disturb the peace, or in a manner so as to materially disturb or
annoy persons in the neighborhood of ordinary sensibilities, is declared and
defined herein to be an unlawful public nuisance.
   (C)   Notice and complaints.
      (1)   Whenever any person shall complain in writing to the city that a
dog or dogs which habitually bark, howl, or yelp is being kept by any person in
the city, the city shall notify the owner of the dog(s) that a complaint has
been received and that the person should take whatever steps necessary to
alleviate the barking, howling, or yelping.
      (2)   Any person who believes this chapter is being violated may, in a
manner prescribed by law, file a complaint with the Municipal Court of the
city, where it shall be processed in the normal course of the Court’s business.
The Court is authorized to issue such writs and process as may be necessary to
hear the complaint.
(Ord. 414, passed 12-17-1996) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 SANITARY CONDITIONS REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owner or person in possession of animals shall keep yards, pens,
and enclosures in which the animals are confined in such a manner as not to
give off odors offensive to persons of ordinary sensibilities residing in the
vicinity or to breed or attract flies, mosquitoes, or other noxious insects, or
in any manner to endanger the public health or safety, or to create a public
nuisance.
   (B)   All persons keeping animals shall comply with the following
regulations:
      (1)   Manure and droppings shall be removed from pens, stables, yards,
cages, and other enclosures as necessary to maintain sanitary conditions and
handled or disposed of in a manner so as to keep the premises free of any
nuisances;
      (2)   Mound storage of droppings or manure between removals shall be
permitted only under conditions so as to protect against the breeding of flies
and to prevent migration of fly larvae (maggots) into the surrounding soil;
      (3)   Watering troughs or tanks shall be provided that are equipped with
adequate facilities for draining the overflow so as to prevent the breeding of
flies, mosquitoes, and other insects; and
      (4)   No putrescible material shall be allowed to accumulate on the
premises, and all such material used to feed that is unconsumed shall be
removed and disposed of by burial or other sanitary means.
(Ord. 414, passed 12-17-1996) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.06 HUMANE TREATMENT OF ANIMALS REQUIRED.
   The following requirements are established for pet and animal care and not
intended to contravene the provisions on animal cruelty as provided in the Tex.
Penal Code, Ch. 42.
   (A)   No owner shall fail to provide his or her animal(s) with sufficient
good wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather,
veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and
treatment.
   (B)   No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork,
or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate, or permit any dogfight,
cockfight, bullfight, or other combat between animals or between animals and
humans.
   (C)   No owner of an animal shall abandon the animal.
   (D)   Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic
animal, shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and
shall immediately report the injury or death to the animal’s owner; in the
event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, the operator shall at once
report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency.
   (E)   The use of steel jaw traps shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 414, passed 12-17-1996) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   The designated representative of the city may cite any person who
violates any provision of this chapter, and, if convicted in Municipal Court,
the person shall be fined not more than $500, and each and every day the
provisions of this chapter are violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 414, passed 12-17-1996)
CHAPTER 93: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Fireworks
   
93.01   Definitions
   
93.02   Fireworks prohibited
   
93.03   Fireworks a public nuisance
   
93.04   Applicability
   
93.05   Prosecution; not necessary to negative exceptions
Fire and Fireworks Control
   
93.20   Restrictions on permitted fires and fireworks
   
93.21   Enforcement
   
93.22   Burning and fireworks variance permits
 
   
93.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate fires, fireworks, see Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, § 342.003
FIREWORKS
§ 93.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIREWORKS. Includes any firecrackers, cannon crackers, skyrockets,
torpedoes, Roman candles, sparklers, squibs, fire balloons, star shell, gerbs,
or any other substance in whatever combination by any designated name intended
for use in obtaining visible or audible pyrotechnic display, and shall include
all articles or substances within the commonly accepted meaning of FIREWORKS
whether herein specially designated and defined or not.
   PERSON. Includes any natural person, association of persons, partnerships,
corporations, agent or officer of corporation, and shall also include all
warehousers, common and private carriers, bailees, trustees, receivers,
executors, and administrators.
(Ord. 244, passed 6-9-1981)
§ 93.02 FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful in the city for any person to manufacture, assemble,
store, transport, receive, keep, sell, offer, or have in his or her possession
with intent to sell, use, discharge, cause to be discharged, ignite, detonate,
fire, or otherwise set in action any fireworks of any description.
(Ord. 244, passed 6-9-1981)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.03 FIREWORKS A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   The presence of any fireworks within the jurisdiction of the city, in
violation of this subchapter, is hereby declared to be a common and public
nuisance. The Fire Marshal or other appointed representative is directed and
required to seize and cause to be safely destroyed any fireworks found within
the jurisdiction in violation of this subchapter, and any police officer of the
city or any other duly constituted peace officer is empowered to stop the
transportation of and detain any fireworks found being transported illegally,
and to seize and destroy any fireworks found stored illegally in any building
in the city. Notwithstanding any penal provision of this chapter, the City
Attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of the city or the Fire Marshal
or other appointed representative, or both, for injunctive relief as may be
necessary to prevent unlawful storage, transportation, keeping, or use of
fireworks within the jurisdiction of the city and to aid the Fire Marshal or
appointed representative in the discharge of his or her duties and to
particularly prevent any person from interfering with the seizure and
destruction of such fireworks, but it shall not be necessary to obtain any such
injunctive relief as a prerequisite to that seizure and destruction. The Fire
Marshal or other appointed representative is hereby authorized to enter any
building where the unlawful presence of fireworks is suspected in order to
inspect the same for the presence of fireworks.
(Ord. 244, passed 6-9-1981)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.04 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter shall be applicable and in force throughout the territory of
the city within its corporate limits.
(Ord. 244, passed 6-9-1981)
§ 93.05 PROSECUTION; NOT NECESSARY TO NEGATIVE EXCEPTIONS.
   In any prosecution for any violation of this subchapter, it shall not be
necessary for the prosecution to negative any provision or exception, but the
same may be raised by the defendant by way of defense.
(Ord. 244, passed 6-9-1981)
FIRE AND FIREWORKS CONTROL
§ 93.20 RESTRICTIONS ON PERMITTED FIRES AND FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Permitted fires.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn rubbish, trash, waste,
leaves, grass, lumber, or any other combustible material in or on any street or
alley or on any lot within 250 feet of any structure in the city.
      (2)   It shall be lawful to burn the aforementioned material in
containers approved by the Fire Marshal or other person designated by the City
Council so long as the container is located at least 50 feet from any
structure.
      (3)   The foregoing requirements shall not apply to social fires
(barbecues, campfires, and the like) so long as those fires are small and are
at all times attended and supervised by a responsible party.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful to use or allow to be used or exploded, any
fireworks within the city, within 250 feet of any structure.
   (B)   Precautionary measures.
      (1)   Containers, as used above, shall be designed in such a manner as to
be completely covered and containing a top to prevent sparks or flames from
escaping from the container.
      (2)   All permitted fires shall, at all times, be attended by a
responsible party who shall have fire extinguishing equipment readily available
at all times.
(Ord. 201, passed 5-4-1976)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.21 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Fire Marshal, or any appointed representative, may prohibit any
permitted fires and use of fireworks which he or she deems to be hazardous to
public safety or health.
(Ord. 201, passed 5-4-1976)
§ 93.22 BURNING AND FIREWORKS VARIANCE PERMITS.
   (A)   Any person desiring a burning or fireworks permit, which shall act as
a variance to §
93.20 above, shall apply to the City Secretary or appointed representative for
that permit.
   (B)   The City Secretary or appointed representative shall have the
authority to issue or to deny the requested permit based upon:
      (1)   A showing of necessity for the variance; and
      (2)   A showing that the burning or the fireworks will present no safety
hazard to the community.
(Ord. 201, passed 5-4-1976)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   Any person who shall manufacture, assemble, store, transport, receive,
keep, sell, offer for sale, or have in his or her possession with intent to
sell any fireworks shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $200 for each
offense. If the fireworks be separately wrapped or packaged, the doing or
omitting to do any act prohibited by §§
93.01 et seq. or this division (B) shall be a separate offense as to each
separately wrapped or separately packed fireworks. Each day that a violation of
this division or §§
93.01 et seq. shall continue with respect to any package of fireworks shall
constitute a separate offense. Any person who shall use, discharge, cause to be
discharged, ignite, detonate, fire, or otherwise set in action any fireworks
shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $200. Any parent or guardian of
any minor child below the age of 14 who permits or allows that minor child to
use, discharge, ignite, detonate, fire, or otherwise set in action any
fireworks shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $200.
(Ord. 244, passed 6-9-1981)
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
93.20 et seq. shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
assessed a fine not to exceed $100.
(Ord. 201, passed 5-4-1976)
CHAPTER 94: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
Nuisances
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Nuisances enumerated
   
94.03   Nuisances prohibited; standards; defenses; permits
   
94.04   Abatement procedure
 
   
94.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate and abate nuisances, see Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, Chapter
217
NUISANCES
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE. A place where:
      (1)   The condition that is maintained is one upon which the possessor
knew or should have known that small children would likely frequent the place
and play about it;
      (2)   The condition was one which the possessor knew, or should have
known, involved unreasonable risk of death or bodily harm to children;
      (3)   The child, because of its tender years, did not realize the risk
involved in exposing itself to the condition; and
      (4)   The utility, if any, to the possessor of eliminating the condition
was slight as compared to the probability of injury.
   BRUSH. All trees or shrubbery under 7 feet in height which are not
cultivated, maintained, or cared for by persons owning or controlling the
premises on which the trees or shrubbery are growing.
   NUISANCE. Includes, but is not limited to, whatever is dangerous to human
life or health, whatever renders the ground, the water, or the air or the food
a hazard or injurious to human life or health, or that is offensive to the
senses, or that is or tends to become detrimental to the public health.
   OBJECTIONABLE, UNSIGHTLY, OR UNSANITARY MATTER OF WHATEVER NATURE. All
uncultivated vegetable growth, objects, and matter not included within the
meaning of the other terms defined in this section, which are liable to produce
or tend to produce disease or an unhealthy, unwholesome, or unsanitary
condition on the premises or within the general locality where the growth,
objects, or matter is situated, including, without limitation, the accumulation
of stagnant water, carrion, filth, impure or unwholesome matter, weeds in
excess of 12 inches, rubbish, and brush.
   RUBBISH. All garbage, trash or refuse, discarded or useless articles,
discarded clothing or textiles of all sorts, and in general all litter and
other things usually included within the meaning of the term.
   WEEDS. Uncultivated vegetable growth or matter, including grasses, which has
grown to a height of more than 12 inches or which, regardless of height, has
become an unwholesome or decaying mass or breeding place for mosquitoes or
vermin.
(Ord. 553, passed 1-20-2004)
§ 94.02 NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
   The following acts, commissions, omissions, conditions, or deeds by any
person shall be and hereby are declared to be a nuisance:
   (A)   The act of allowing to exist any full or overflowing privy, vault,
cesspool, septic tank, garbage can, container, or other receptacle for filth,
waste, garbage, and human or animal excrement upon any premises owned or
controlled by any person, or the failure to maintain in proper condition any
cesspool, septic tank, or other sewage or septic system;
   (B)   The act of allowing to be pumped the contents of cesspools or septic
tanks so as to flow over, seep up, pool, or otherwise exist on any premises
without proper pretreatment for sanitation;
   (C)   The act of allowing any imperfect or faulty trap, sink, or water
closet, or any other drainage appliance or fixture, to exist in any house or
building within the city from which there shall arise any foul or offensive gas
or odor;
   (D)   The act of casting, draining, throwing, or causing to be cast,
drained, thrown, or distributed into any public street or highway, gutter,
alley, or other public grounds within the city any kitchen water, water from
exhaust pipes, laundry water, air conditioners or other wastewater, slops,
swill, or liquid filth, or any other similar unsanitary matter;
   (E)   The act of keeping or causing to be kept any animals in pens or
enclosed areas upon any premises owned or controlled by a person in a manner so
as to produce foul, obnoxious, or other offensive odors or smells to persons
living in the vicinity of the premises;
   (F)   (1)   The act of failing to keep, or the permitting to remain in a
condition or manner, any stable, stall, shed, or apartment, or any yard or
appurtenance, in which any animal(s) shall be kept, on any premises owned or
controlled by any person, in which manure or liquid discharge of the animals
shall be collected and accumulate:
         (a)   Which constitutes a breeding place for flies, mosquitoes, or
other harmful or disease- carrying insects; or
         (b)   Which is producing foul, obnoxious, or other offensive odors or
smells to persons living in the vicinity of the premises.
      (2)   Provided, that nothing in this division (F) shall be so construed
as to include manure deposits upon private property for the purpose of
cultivation or to be used as fertilizer so long as that fertilizer does not
otherwise constitute a nuisance under this subchapter.
   (G)   (1)   The act of keeping or maintaining of a pool, pond, water
retention areas, or other accumulation of water upon any premises owned or
controlled by any person:
         (a)   Which is unwholesome, impure, stagnant;
         (b)   Which constitutes a breeding place for flies, mosquitoes, or
other harmful or disease- carrying insects; or
         (c)   Which produces or is capable of producing foul, obnoxious, or
other offensive odors or smells to persons living in the vicinity of the
premises.
      (2)   Nothing in this division (G) shall be construed as to require the
removal, drainage, or cleaning of naturally occurring pools, ponds, water
retention areas, and accumulation of water upon any premises owned or
controlled by any person, unless same constitutes a nuisance under this
subchapter.
   (H)   The act of failing or refusing by any owner, operator, agent, or
driver of any truck, trailer, or other vehicle that is or has been used for the
hauling of any livestock, animals, or fowls, which contains manure, excreta, or
liquid discharge and which is parked in or on any highway, road, street, alley,
lot, tract of land, or other premises, either public or private, to move that
truck, trailer, or other vehicle, when notified by the city, to such a location
as will not disturb the inhabitants of the city by the reason of the foul,
obnoxious, or other offensive odor, gases, or fumes caused by the contents of
the truck, trailer, or other vehicle;
   (I)   The act of failing or refusing to act by any person owning or
controlling any premises to keep, maintain, and preserve the premises free and
clear from all garbage, trash, discarded building materials, and other debris;
   (J)   The act of allowing paper, plastic, bottles, tires, discarded lumber,
rocks, junk, or other trash or debris to accumulate or remain on any premises
by a person owning or controlling the premises:
      (1)   In such a manner as to create a harborage or breeding place for
rats, vermin, or insects;
      (2)   In such a manner as to be offensive or injurious to the public
health; or
      (3)   In such a manner:
         (a)   As to be unpleasant and disagreeable in sight; or
         (b)   As to produce foul, obnoxious, or other offensive odors, gases,
or fumes, to persons living in the vicinity of the premises, to persons who may
be in a public place or public right-of-way, or to persons who file an official
complaint with the city.
   (K)   The act of allowing or permitting on any premises owned or controlled
by such person the emission of music, sound or other noise in a continuous, or
for extended periods of time, in such a manner as to disturb persons living in
the vicinity of the premises. It shall be presumed to be a violation of this
subchapter if the continuous or extended periods of time produce sound or other
noise at the property line of such property in excess of:
      (1)   Seventy-five decibels, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
      (2)   Sixty-five decibels, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and midnight.
      (3)   Fifty-five decibels, between the hours of midnight and 1:00 a.m.
      (4)   Forty-five decibels, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   (L)   The act of creating, maintaining, or allowing on premises owned by, or
subject to a person’s control:
      (1)   The continuous, or for extended periods of time in such a manner as
to disturb persons living in the vicinity of the premises, operation of motors,
or the running or driving of motorized units, including, but not limited to,
all-terrain vehicles of either 3 or 4 wheels, motorcycles, go-carts, golf
carts, cars, trucks, or any other form of motorized or self-propelled vehicle.
It shall be presumed to be a violation of this subchapter if those continuous
or extended periods of operation, either with an individual motorized unit, or
in the aggregate with other motorized units at the same time, produce a noise
or sound at the property line of the property as follows: 75 decibels between
the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., or 65 decibels between the hours of 11:
00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
      (2)   The act of operating a motorized unit(s) so as to produce dust,
dirt, or other airborne particles, which individually or in the aggregate with
other motorized units at the same time substantially interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of adjacent properties;
      (3)   The act of operating a motorized unit(s) described above, either
individually or in the aggregate with other motorized units at the same time,
so as to pollute the air at the property line with noxious or offensive odors,
gases, smoke, or vapors, or which produce material discomfort and annoyance to
those residing in the vicinity, or which injure their health or property; or
      (4)   Any combination of noise, dust, and pollution emanating from a
property as the result of operation of 1 or more motorized units shall also
constitute a nuisance if these factors are present on a continuous basis, or
for extended periods of time, causing material discomfort and annoyance to
those residing in the vicinity, or which injures their health or property.
   (M)   The ownership, operation, or existence of a track, path, motocross
practice area, or other area which is designed for, or which is used by persons
operating motorized units in a manner which results in a violation of division
(L) of this section is prohibited;
   (N)   The act of allowing the accumulation of carrion, filth, or other
impure or unwholesome matter of any kind on premises owned by, or subject to a
person’s control;
   (O)   The act of allowing to exist on developed areas of premises owned by
or subject to a person’s control, weeds which have grown to a height of more
than 12 inches or which, regardless of height, have become an unwholesome or
decaying mass or breeding place for mosquitoes, insects, or vermin;
   (P)   The act of allowing to exist on premises owned by or subject to a
person’s control the accumulation of rubbish, or other unsightly,
objectionable, or unsanitary matter;
   (Q)   All common and public nuisances defined by Tex. Civ. Prac. & Rem.
Code, Chapter 125, within the authority and jurisdiction of the city and its
Municipal Court are hereby adopted as regulated nuisances by the city, in
accordance with that statute;
   (R)   Any and all elements of the offense of disorderly conduct within the
authority and jurisdiction of the city and its Municipal Court pursuant to Tex.
Penal Code, Chapter 42, are hereby adopted and prohibited by this subchapter;
and
   (S)   The act, or the failure to act, resulting in an attractive nuisance on
property owned or subject to a person’s control.
   (T)   The possessor and/or owner of property adjacent to a public roadway in
the city shall keep the owner or possessor's property, and the property within
the public right-of-way, or public easement, abutting the pavement and/or
traveled portions of the public roadway, free and clear of high grass and
weeds, and other objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary manner of whatever
nature. Unsightly or unsanitary matter of whatever nature shall include,
without limitation, grass, weeds, brush or other living material in excess of
12 inches in height. Property owners and possessors adjacent to public roadways
shall also be responsible for removal of brush and other objectionable
unsightly or unsanitary matter and shall be responsible for mowing of the grass
in such Bar Ditches and the Parkway. It shall be unlawful for any owner or any
occupant of any property within the city to suffer or permit limbs, brush, and
other vegetation, existing above a public street to hang lower than 15 feet
above the public street pavement, gravel, or other street surface. This
provision shall not apply to city owned open space, parks, nature, or trail
areas, nor shall it apply to those portions of property under active
cultivation of crops.
   (U)   The failure to comply, without waiver, with all city drainage and
storm water ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. 553, passed 1-20-2004; Am. Ord. 571, passed 6-28-2005; Am. Ord. 750,
passed 7-11-2017; Am. Ord. 786, passed 11-19-2019) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.03 NUISANCES PROHIBITED; STANDARDS; DEFENSES; PERMITS.
   (A)   The foregoing nuisances are prohibited within the city. The standard
required for a nuisance would be that its effect upon the person complaining of
the nuisance is a person of normal or ordinary sensibilities. The foregoing
nuisances shall be presumed in violation of this subchapter if it is shown that
they take place within a single-family (SF), single-family transitional (SFT),
or planned residential development (PRD) zoning district within the city, or
that they have occurred within 2,500 feet of any home, school, or church
existing in an SF, SFT, or PRD zoning district of the city. Any act described
in §
94.02 shall also include the failure to take action to abate or terminate a
nuisance.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a complaint filed pursuant to §
94.02(K) of this code that the property on which the alleged nuisance occurred
was an activity expressly authorized pursuant to a special use permit for the
property.
   (C)   A permit (a “553 permit”) to conduct activity which otherwise would be
prohibited by this subchapter may be issued by the Mayor on written application
to the city and payment of a filing fee containing information on the proposed
date, time, place, and description of the activity. The person(s) making the
application shall be personally subject to any violations of this subchapter
which occur as a result of the activity occurring in a manner exceeding the
limits established by permit. No permit issued under this division (C) shall be
valid for more than a 12-hour time period. A permit for an activity proposed
for a longer time period, or for more than 3 separate 12-hour periods, shall
require Council approval. Permits described in this division (C) are not
required of owners of property described in division (B).
(Ord. 553, passed 1-20-2004; Am. Ord. 750, passed 7-11-2017) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.04 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Notice to owner. Should the city health officer or other designated
representative determine that a nuisance exists on any lot or parcel of real
estate within the city, written notice shall be given to the owner of the lot
upon which the nuisance exists. The notice shall identify the nuisance,
identify the property upon which the nuisance exists, and direct the owner to
take action as the city deems reasonable, appropriate, and necessary to remove
the nuisance. The notice shall be delivered personally to the owner in writing,
by letter addressed to the owner at the owner’s address as recorded in the
records of the County Appraisal District, or, if personal service cannot be
obtained, by publication at least once in the city’s official newspaper, by
posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property
to which the violation relates, or by posting the notice on a placard attached
to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation
relates, if the property contains no buildings.
   (B)   Notice not required. The notice described in division (A) above is not
required in the event such notice has been issued to an owner in the preceding
6-month period for the same, or similar type of nuisance on the same property,
or contiguous or adjacent property owned by the same owner. A nuisance which
has been noticed, abated, and reappears during the 6-month period does not
require additional notice. Where additional notice is not required, a citation
may be immediately issued to the owner, or to any other person committing the
acts, commissions, omissions, conditions, or deeds declared to be a nuisance in
§
94.02.
   (C)   Abatement by city. If the owner fails or refuses to remove the
nuisance within 7 days following notice as provided in division (A) of this
section, the city may do or cause to be done that which will abate the public
nuisance, and may pay therefor, and charge the expenses incurred in doing the
work or having the work done or improvements made to the person who owns that
lot or building. If the work is done or improvements made at the expense of the
city, then the expenses shall be assessed on the real estate or lot for which
the expense was incurred. In a notice provided under division (A) of this
section, the city may inform the owner by regular mail and a posting on the
property that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature
that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first
anniversary date of the notice, the city without further notice may correct the
violation at the owner’s expense and assess the expense against the property.
If a violation covered by the notice occurs within the 1-year period, and the
city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then
the city without further notice may cause the work to be done or make the
improvements required, and pay for the work done and improvements made and
charge the expenses to the owner as otherwise provided herein.
   (D)   Collection of expenses. The Mayor, City Administrator, or city
official designated by the Mayor shall file a statement of expenses giving the
name of the owner, if known, the amount of the expense, the date on which the
work was done, and the legal description of the premises upon which the work
was done or improvements made, with the County Clerk. The city shall have a
privileged lien on the lot or real estate upon which the work was done, or
improvements made, to secure the expenditures so made, in accordance with Tex.
Health & Safety Code, Chapter 342, which lien shall be second only to tax liens
or liens for street improvements, and which amount shall bear interest at the
rate of 10% per annum, from the date of payment by the city. For any such
expense and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of
the lien may be had in the name of the city, and the statement of expenses so
made, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount
expended for the work or improvements.
(Ord. 553, passed 1-20-2004; Am. Ord. 649, passed 2-2-2010)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation (collectively referred to as
“person”) violating any of the provisions of §§
94.01 et seq. shall be subject to the penalty as provided herein, and upon
conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $2,000 for each
offense; and each and every day the violation shall continue shall be deemed to
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 553, passed 1-20-2004)
CHAPTER 95: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
95.01   Sale of personal property on public ways prohibited
Construction in Public Rights-of-Way
   
95.15   Purpose; title
   
95.16   Scope
   
95.17   Definitions
   
95.18   Municipal authorization required
   
95.19   Administration and enforcement
   
95.20   Construction obligations
   
95.21   Conditions of use
   
95.22   Insurance requirements
   
95.23   Indemnity
   
95.24   Remedies
   
95.25   Conflict with other laws
 
   
95.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.01 SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY ON PUBLIC WAYS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, firm, corporation, or
organization by or through any representative, agent, officer, or employee, to
sell or offer for sale any personal property of any kind or nature on or within
any public right-of-way, street, or highway within the corporate limits of the
city, except as may be specifically provided by ordinance, franchise agreement,
or other specific written permission granted by the City Council.
(Ord. 238, passed 7-15-1980)
Penalty, see § 95.99
CONSTRUCTION IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
§ 95.15 PURPOSE; TITLE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to:
      (1)   Assist in the management of facilities placed in, on, or over the
public rights-of-way in order to minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual
impact, and other adverse effects, and the costs to the citizens resulting from
the placement of facilities within the public rights-of-way;
      (2)   Govern the use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way;
      (3)   Assist the city in its efforts to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare;
      (4)   Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way
held in public trust by the city;
      (5)   Preserve the physical integrity of the streets and highways;
      (6)   Control the orderly flow of vehicles and pedestrians;
      (7)   Keep track of the different entities using the public rights-of-way
to prevent interference between them;
      (8)   Assist on scheduling common trenching and street cuts; and
      (9)   Protect the safety, security, appearance, and condition of the
public rights-of-way.
   (B)   This subchapter may be referred to as the “construction in the public
rights-of-way ordinance.”
(Ord. 480, passed 3-21-2000)
§ 95.16 SCOPE.
   This subchapter applies to all persons that place facilities in, on, or over
public rights-of-way.
(Ord. 480, passed 3-21-2000)
§ 95.17 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Parker, Texas. The term CITY also includes the designated
agent of the city.
   CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The City Administrator of the city or the City
Administrator’s designee.
   DIRECTION OF THE CITY. All ordinances, laws, rules, resolutions, and
regulations of the city that are not inconsistent with this subchapter and that
are now in force or may hereafter be passed and adopted.
   FACILITIES. Any and all of the wires, cables, fibers, duct spaces, manholes,
poles, conduits, underground and overhead passageways, and other equipment,
structures, plants, and appurtenances, and all associated physical equipment
placed in, on, or under the public rights-of-way.
   PERSON. A natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association,
partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock
company or association, and other such entity.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the
municipality has an interest. The term does not include the airwaves above a
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY with regard to wireless telecommunications.
(Ord. 480, passed 3-21-2000)
§ 95.18 MUNICIPAL AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person seeking to place facilities on, in, or over the public
rights-of-way shall first file an application for a construction permit with
the city and shall abide by the terms and provisions of this subchapter
pertaining to use of the public rights-of-way.
   (B)   This subchapter does not constitute or create authority to place,
reconstruct, or alter facilities in, on, or over the public rights-of-way, and
that authority must be obtained by separate instrument or by operation of other
laws.
   (C)   Any person with a current, unexpired consent, franchise, agreement, or
other authorization from the city (“grant”) to use the public rights-of-way
that is in effect at the time this subchapter takes effect shall continue to
operate under and comply with that grant until the grant expires or until it is
terminated by mutual agreement of the city and the person, or is terminated as
otherwise provided for in law.
   (D)   (1)   In order for the city to know which persons own facilities in
the public rights-of-way within the city, each person who owns facilities shall
register with the city and provide the following information at a minimum:
         (a)   The person’s name;
         (b)   The current name, address, and telephone number(s) of a contact
employed by and with decision-making authority for the person and who is
available 24 hours per day; and
         (c)   Furnish the city with a city street map marked in such a manner
as to evidence which streets the person has placed facilities (not including
boxes and other appurtenances), and updated annually in accordance with §
95.20(B)(12).
      (2)   Each person shall update and keep current his or her registration
with the city at all times.
(Ord. 480, passed 3-21-2000)
Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.19 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The City Administrator shall administer and enforce compliance with
this subchapter.
   (B)   A person shall report information related to the use of the public
rights-of-way that the City Administrator requires in the form and manner
reasonably prescribed by the City Administrator.
   (C)   The City Administrator shall report to the City Council upon the
determination that a person has failed to comply with this subchapter.
(Ord. 480, passed 3-21-2000)
Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.20 CONSTRUCTION OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   A person is subject to reasonable police power regulation of the city
to manage its public rights-of-way in connection with the construction,
expansion, reconstruction, maintenance, or repair of facilities in the public
rights-of-way, pursuant to the city’s rights as a custodian of public property,
based upon the city’s historic rights under state and federal laws.
   (B)   These regulations include, but are not limited to, the following.
      (1)   At the city’s request, a person shall furnish the city accurate and
complete information relating to the construction, reconstruction, removal,
maintenance, and repair of facilities performed by the person in the public
rights-of-way.
      (2)   A person shall be required to place certain facilities within the
public rights-of-way underground absent a compelling demonstration by the
person that, in any specific instance, this requirement is not reasonable,
feasible, or is it equally applicable to other similar users of the public
rights-of-way.
      (3)   A person shall perform excavations and other construction in the
public rights-of-way in accordance with all applicable city requirements,
including the Engineering Division Detailed Standards for Public Right-of-Way
Construction (“Detailed Standards”), as may be revised from time to time in
accordance with the city’s police powers, and the obligation to use trenchless
technology whenever commercially economical and practical and consistent with
obligations on other similar users of the public right-of-way. The city shall
waive the requirement of trenchless technology if it determines that the field
conditions warrant the waiver, based upon information provided to the city by
the person. All excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way
shall be conducted so as to minimize interference with the use of public and
private property. A person shall follow all reasonable construction directions
given by the city in order to minimize any such interference.
      (4)   (a)   A person must obtain a permit, as reasonably required by
applicable city codes, prior to any excavation, construction, installation,
expansion, repair, removal, relocation, or maintenance of the person’s
facilities. A construction permit is not required for routine maintenance that
does not require excavation of the public rights-of-way or which does not block
traffic lanes or sidewalks during peak traffic periods from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 3:30 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. on weekdays, or for more than 2 hours during
any non-peak traffic period between 9:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m.; however, any
construction standards in the Detailed Standards shall remain applicable. Once
a permit is issued, the person shall give to the city a minimum of 48 hours’
notice (which could be at the time of the issuance of the permit) prior to
undertaking any of the above listed activities on its facilities in, on, or
under the public rights-of-way. The failure of the person to request and obtain
a permit from the city prior to performing any of the above listed activities
in, on, or over any public right-of-way, except in an emergency as provided for
in division (B)(11) below, will subject the person to a stop-work order from
the city and enforcement action pursuant to the city code of ordinances. If the
person fails to act upon any permit within 90 calendar days of issuance, the
permit shall become invalid, and the person will be required to obtain another
permit, unless extended for good cause by the city.
         (b)   A person required to obtain a permit from the city in the
paragraph above shall place a refundable cost deposit with the city as follows:
            1.   Routine maintenance: $500;
            2.   Minor construction (defined as excavation, construction,
installation, expansion, repair, removal, relocation, or maintenance involving
a section, or aggregate total of sections, of 500 yards or less, in any 1-week
period): $1,000; or
            3.   Major construction (required when a person is otherwise
required to obtain a permit under this section, or any other section of this
subchapter): $2,000.
      (5)   When a person completes construction, expansion, reconstruction,
removal, excavation, or other work, the person shall promptly restore the
public rights-of-way in accordance with applicable city requirements. A person
shall replace and properly re-lay and repair the surface, base, irrigation
system, and landscape treatment of any public rights-of-way that may be
excavated or damaged by reason of the erection, construction, maintenance, or
repair of the person’s facilities within 30 calendar days after completion of
the work in accordance with existing standards of the city in effect at the
time of the work, unless extended by the city for good cause.
      (6)   Upon failure of a person to perform any such repair or replacement
work, and 5 days after written notice has been given by the city to the person,
and in the event repairs have not been initiated during that 5-day period, the
city may repair the portion of the public rights-of-way as may have been
disturbed by the person, its contractors, or agents. Upon receipt of an invoice
from the city, the person will reimburse the city in accordance with the
Detailed Standards within 30 calendar days from the date of the city invoice.
      (7)   Should the city reasonably determine, within 1 year from the date
of the completion of the repair work, that the surface, base, irrigation
system, or landscape treatment requires additional restoration work to meet
existing standards of the city, a person shall perform the additional
restoration work to the satisfaction of the city, subject to all city remedies
as provided herein.
      (8)   Notwithstanding the foregoing in division (B)(7), if the city
determines that the failure of a person to properly repair or restore the
public rights-of-way constitutes a safety hazard to the public, the city may
undertake emergency repairs and restoration efforts, after emergency notice has
been provided, to the extent reasonable under the circumstances, and the person
failed to respond within the reasonable time specified by the city. A person
shall promptly reimburse the city in accordance with the Detailed Standards for
all costs incurred by the city within 30 calendar days from the date of the
city invoice.
      (9)   A person shall furnish the city with the application for the
construction permits, construction plans, and maps showing the location and
proposed routing of new construction or reconstruction at least 5 business days
before beginning construction or reconstruction that involves an alteration to
the surface or subsurface of the public rights-of-way unless otherwise extended
by the city. A person may not begin construction until the location of new
facilities and proposed routing of the new construction or reconstruction and
all required plans and drawings have been approved in writing by the city,
which approval will not be unreasonably withheld, taking due consideration of
the surrounding area and alternative locations for the facilities and routing.
         (a)   All plans submitted to the city shall be submitted both in paper
form and in electronic form in a format acceptable to the city (such as dxf
files and the like).
         (b)   Within 20 days of the completion of any use of the right-of-way
by a person for which a permit is required under this subchapter, the person
shall submit as-built plans to the city, in paper and electronic form.
      (10)   If the City Administrator declares an emergency with regard to the
health and safety of the citizens and requests by written notice the removal or
abatement of facilities, a person shall remove or abate the person’s facilities
by the deadline provided in the City Administrator’s request. The person and
the city shall cooperate to the extent possible to ensure continuity of
service. If the person, after notice, fails or refuses to act, the city may
remove or abate the facility, at the sole cost and expense of the person,
without paying compensation to the person and without the city incurring
liability for damages.
      (11)   Except in the case of customer service interruptions and imminent
harm to property or person (“emergency conditions”), a person may not excavate
the pavement of a street or public rights-of- way without first complying with
city requirements. The City Administrator or designee shall be notified as
promptly as possible regarding work performed under emergency conditions, and
the person shall comply with the requirements of city standards for the
restoration of the public rights-of-way.
      (12)   On an annual basis as of January 31 of each year, the city street
map in §
95.18(D) shall be updated with any new facilities from the previous year.
      (13)   The city may require reasonable bonding requirements of a person,
as are required of other entities that place facilities in the public rights-
of-way. The City Administrator or his or her designee may waive or reduce the
bonding requirements in a nondiscriminatory, competitively neutral manner,
taking into consideration both that the person has furnished the city with
reasonable documentation to evidence adequate financial resources substantially
greater than the bonding requirements, and has demonstrated in prior right-of-
way construction activity, prompt resolution of any claims and substantial
compliance with all required applicable building codes and ordinances.
      (14)   In determining whether any requirement under this section is
unreasonable or unfeasible, the City Administrator or his or her designee shall
consider, among other things, whether the requirement would subject the person
or persons to an unreasonable increase in risk or service interruption, or to
an unreasonable increase in liability for accidents, or to an unreasonable
delay in construction or in availability of its services, or to any other
unreasonable technical or economic burden.
(Ord. 480, passed 3-21-2000; Am. Ord. 618, passed 1-22-2008)
Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.21 CONDITIONS OF USE.
   (A)   In the exercise of governmental functions, the city has first priority
over all other users of the public rights-of-way. The city reserves the right
to lay sewer, gas, water, and other pipe lines or cables and conduits, and to
do underground and overhead work, and attachments, restructuring, or changes in
aerial facilities in, across, along, over, or under a public street, alley, or
public rights-of-way occupied by a person, and to change the curb, sidewalks,
or the grade of streets.
   (B)   The city shall assign the location in or over the public rights-of-way
among competing users of the public rights-of-way with due consideration to the
public health and safety considerations of each user type, and to the extent
the city can demonstrate that there is limited space available for additional
users, may limit new users, as allowed under state or federal law.
   (C)   If the city authorizes abutting landowners to occupy space under the
surface of any public street, alley, or public rights-of-way, the grant to an
abutting landowner shall be subject to the rights of the previously authorized
user of the public rights-of-way. If the city closes or abandons a public
right-of- way that contains a portion of a person’s facilities, the city shall
close or abandon that public right-of- way subject to the rights of the person.
   (D)   If the city gives written notice, a person shall, at its own expense,
temporarily or permanently, remove, relocate, change, or alter the position of
the person’s facilities that are in the public rights-of- way within 120 days,
except in circumstances that require additional time as reasonably determined
by the city based upon information provided by the person. For projects
expected to take longer than 120 days to remove, change, or relocate, the city
will confer with the person before determining the alterations to be required
and the timing thereof. The city shall give notice whenever the city has
determined that removal, relocation, change, or alteration is reasonably
necessary for the construction, operation, repair, maintenance, or installation
of a city governmental public improvement in the public rights-of-way. This
section shall not be construed to prevent a person’s recovery of the cost of
relocation or removal from private third parties who initiate the request for
relocation or removal, nor shall it be required if improvements are solely for
beautification purposes without prior joint deliberation and agreement with the
person.
   (E)   If the person fails to relocate facilities in the time allowed by the
city in this section, the person may be subject to liability to the city for
that delay and as set forth in the city code or ordinance now or hereafter
enacted.
   (F)   Notwithstanding anything in division (D) of this section, the City
Administrator and a person may agree in writing to different time frames than
those provided above if circumstances reasonably warrant such a change.
   (G)   A person may trim trees in or over the public rights-of-way for the
safe and reliable operation, use, and maintenance of its facilities. All tree
trimming shall be performed in accordance with standards promulgated by the
city. Should the person, its contractor or agent, fail to remove the trimmings
within 24 hours, the city may remove the trimmings or have them removed, and
upon receipt of a bill from the city, the person shall promptly reimburse the
city for all costs incurred within 30 calendar days. A person shall not be
responsible for tree trimming or removal, except as to the work required to
construct, maintain, or restore utility service.
   (H)   A person shall temporarily remove, raise, or lower its aerial
facilities to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures, if the
city gives written notice of not less than 48 hours. The expense of these
temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party or parties requesting and
benefitting from the temporary rearrangements. The person may require
prepayment or prior posting of a bond from the party requesting the temporary
move.
(Ord. 480, passed 3-21-2000)
Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.22 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A person shall obtain and maintain insurance in the amounts reasonably
prescribed by the city with an insurance company licensed to do business in
this state acceptable to the city. A person shall furnish the city with proof
of insurance at the time of the request for construction permits. The city
reserves the right to review the insurance requirements and to reasonably
adjust insurance coverage and limits when the City Administrator determines
that changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the claims history of the
industry or the person require adjustment of the coverage. For purposes of this
section, the city will accept certificates of self-insurance issued by the
state or letters written by the person in those instances where the state does
not issue such letters, which provide the same coverage as required herein.
However, for the city to accept these letters, the person must demonstrate by
written information that it has adequate financial resources to be a self-
insured entity as reasonably determined by the city, based on financial
information requested by and furnished to the city. The city’s current
insurance requirements are described in Exhibit A attached to Ord. 480.
   (B)   The person shall furnish, at no cost to the city, copies of
certificates of insurance evidencing the coverage required by this section to
the city. The city may request the deletion, revision, or modification of
particular policy terms, conditions, limitations, or exclusions, unless the
policy provisions are established by a law or regulation binding the city, the
person, or the underwriter. If the city requests a deletion, revision, or
modification, a person shall exercise reasonable efforts to pay for and to
accomplish the change.
   (C)   An insurance certificate shall contain the following required
provisions:
      (1)   Name the city and its officers, employees, board members, and
elected representatives as additional insureds for all applicable coverage;
      (2)   Provide for 30 days’ notice to the city for cancellation, non-
renewal, or material change; and
      (3)   Provide that notice of claims shall be provided to the City
Administrator by certified mail.
   (D)   The person shall file and maintain proof of insurance with the City
Administrator. An insurance certificate obtained in compliance with this
section is subject to city approval. The city may require the certificate to be
changed to reflect changing liability limits. A person shall immediately advise
the City Attorney of actual or potential litigation that may develop which may
affect an existing carrier’s obligation to defend and indemnify.
   (E)   An insurer has no right of recovery against the city. The required
insurance policies shall protect the person and the city. The insurance shall
be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies.
   (F)   The policy clause “Other Insurance” shall not apply to the city if the
city is an insured under the policy.
   (G)   The person shall pay premiums and assessments. A company which issues
an insurance policy has no recourse against the city for payment of a premium
or assessment. Insurance policies obtained by a person must provide that the
issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the
city in connection with damage covered by the policy.
(Ord. 480, passed 3-21-2000)
Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.23 INDEMNITY.
   (A)   To the extent authorized by law, each person placing facilities in the
public rights-of-way shall agree to, promptly defend, indemnify, and hold the
city harmless from and against all damages, costs, losses, or expenses:
      (1)   For the repair, replacement, or restoration of the city’s property,
equipment, materials, structures, and facilities which are damaged, destroyed,
or found to be defective as a result of the person’s acts or omissions; and
      (2)   From and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of
action, and judgments for the following, arising out of, incident to,
concerning, or resulting from the negligent or willful acts or omissions of the
person, its agents, employees, or subcontractors, in the performance of
activities pursuant to this subchapter:
         (a)   Damage to or loss of the property of any person (including, but
not limited to, the person, its agents, officers, employees, and
subcontractors, the city’s agents, officers, and employees, and third parties);
or
         (b)   Death, bodily injury, illness, disease, loss of services, or
loss of income or wages to any person (including, but not limited to, the
agents, officers, and employees of the person, the person’s subcontractors, and
the city, and third parties).
   (B)   This indemnity provision shall not apply to any liability resulting
from the negligence of the city, its officers, employees, agents, contractors,
or subcontractors.
   (C)   The provisions of this indemnity are solely for the benefit of the
city and are not intended to create or grant any rights, contractual or
otherwise, to any other person or entity.
(Ord. 480, passed 3-21-2000)
§ 95.24 REMEDIES.
   The city may institute all appropriate legal action to prohibit any person
from knowingly using the public rights-of-way unless the person has complied
with the terms of this subchapter.
(Ord. 480, passed 3-21-2000)
Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.25 CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS.
   This subchapter shall be construed in accordance with the city code(s) in
effect on the date of passage of this subchapter to the extent that the code(s)
are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the
United States or this state, subject to the city’s ongoing authority to adopt
reasonable regulations to manage its public rights-of-way, pursuant to §§
95.20 and
95.21 or as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. 480, passed 3-21-2000)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   Any person, firm, corporation, or organization violating any of the
provisions of §
95.01 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction in the
Municipal Court of the city, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum
of $200 for each offense; and each and every day the offense shall continue
shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 238, passed 7-15-1980)
   (C)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions or
terms of §§
95.15 et seq. shall be subject to the same penalty as provided for in this code
of ordinances, as heretofore amended, and upon conviction shall be punished by
a fine not to exceed the sum of $2,000 for each offense; and each and every day
the violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 480, passed 3-21-2000)
CHAPTER 96: RESERVED
CHAPTER 97: PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
Section
   
97.01   Compensation of members
   
97.02   Meetings
   
97.03   Voting and quorum
   
97.04   Attendance of City Administrator
   
97.05   Places; alternates; duties of officers
   
97.06   Powers and duties
   
97.07   Subcommittees
   
97.08   Short title
   
97.09   Definitions
   
97.10   Enforcement
   
97.11   Unlawful acts
   
97.12   Use of commercial vehicles
   
97.13   Parking vehicles
   
97.14   City-sponsored events
   
97.15   Park facilities
   
97.16   Damages and cost of services
 
   
97.99   Penalty
§ 97.01 COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.
   Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 608, passed 2-27-2007; Am. Ord. 766, passed 8-20-2019)
§ 97.02 MEETINGS.
   The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chair at the date, time and
place designated by the Chair, with all members of the Commission notified at
least 7 days in advance. All meetings must be posted and open to the public.
(Ord. 608, passed 2-27-2007; Am. Ord. 658, passed 10-5-2010; Am. Ord. 688,
passed 10-30-2012; Am. Ord. 766, passed 8-20-2019)
§ 97.03 VOTING AND QUORUM.
   All questions presented for a vote of the Parks and Recreation Commission
shall be decided by a simple majority of those present. A meeting may not be
held unless a majority of the members are in attendance.
(Ord. 608, passed 2-27-2007; Am. Ord. 766, passed 8-20-2019)
§ 97.04 ATTENDANCE OF CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   The City Administrator or his/her designee may be in attendance at
Commission meetings as required by the City Council. The City Administrator may
have other members of the staff in attendance at Commission meetings when
required or requested by the Commission. The City Administrator may participate
in meetings to provide staff assistance, reports and recommendations as
requested by the Commission.
(Ord. 608, passed 2-27-2007; Am. Ord. 766, passed 8-20-2019)
§ 97.05 PLACES; ALTERNATES; DUTIES OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   Places.
      (1)   The Parks and Recreation Commission for the city shall consist of 5
members appointed by a majority of the City Council. Each member shall serve in
a place designated by the Council. Places 1, 3, and 5 shall have 2-year terms,
expiring November 30 in odd years. Places 2 and 4 shall have 2-year terms,
expiring November 30 in even years. All terms commence on December 1 of the
even or odd year assigned that Place.
      (2)   There are no term limits for appointees.
      (3)   Division (A)(1) notwithstanding, a Commission member appointed to
serve in a designated Place continues in that Place through November 30 of the
even or odd year term for that Place. All members of the Commission continue to
serve until their successors are appointed and qualified; save and except when
a member resigns, in writing. Such resignation shall be effective the date of
its receipt by the City Secretary.
   (B)   Alternates. A majority of the City Council may appoint 1, 2, 3, or 4
alternates to the Parks and Recreation Commission. The terms of the alternates
will be 1-year terms. An alternate may be reappointed at the discretion of the
Council. Regardless of the term assigned to the alternate, the City Council may
remove an alternate with or without cause at any time. Terms of alternates
commence December 1 of each year. All alternates continue to serve until their
successors are appointed and qualified; save and except when an alternate
resigns in writing.
   (C)   Duties. The duties of the officers of the Parks and Recreation
Commission shall be as follows:
      (1)   Chair. The Chair shall preside at all meetings when he or she is
present. The Chair shall implement or cause to have implemented any practice or
procedure in the calling of meetings, conduct of meetings, or reporting of
activities that he or she considers in the best interest of the Commission and
shall so inform the City Council or consult with the City Council when
necessary or desirable. It shall be the responsibility of the Chair to request
from the City Administrator support activity needed from the city. It shall be
the responsibility of the Chair to submit reports to the City Council, when
necessary or requested, relative to such matters as Commission activity,
participation by members, and any other matters deemed significant relative to
the Commission’s functions. The Chair may represent the Parks and Recreation
Commission at public functions.
      (2)   Vice-Chair. The Vice-Chair shall assist the Chair in directing the
total affairs of the Commission. In the absence of Chair, the Vice-Chair shall
assume all duties of the Chair.
      (3)   Secretary. The Secretary shall take minutes and maintain the books
and records of the Commission.
      (4)   The Commission will provide a quarterly report to the City Council
as requested. The Commission does not have an independent budget. All
expenditures are to be reviewed and approved by the City Administrator or
Mayor, or their designee.
(Ord. 608, passed 2-27-2007; Am. Ord. 658, passed 10-5-2010; Am. Ord. 683,
passed 9-4-2012; Am. Ord. 688, passed 10-30-2012; Am. Ord. 766, passed 8-20-
2019)
§ 97.06 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission shall have the following powers and perform the following
duties:
   (A)   Advisory capacity to Council. The primary role of the Commission shall
be to advise the Council regarding the city land known as the Preserve,
adjacent to City Hall. It shall act only in an advisory capacity to the City
Council in all matters pertaining to nature areas, trails, open space,
historical areas, public gardens, and public activity, collectively referred to
as recreation, shall acquaint itself with and make a continuous study and
inspection of the complete "open spaces plan" [or "nature plan"] of the city;
and shall advise with the City Council from time to time as to the present and
future maintenance, operation, planning, acquisition, development, enlargement
and use policy of the city open space property.
   (B)   Recommend standards. It shall recommend the adoption of standards on
areas, facilities, program and financial support.
   (C)   Review, maintenance of master planning guide: review of services and
needs. The Commission shall periodically review all recreation services that
exist or that may be needed and interpret the needs of the public to the City
Council and City Administrator. In the conduct of the above activities, the
Commission shall, at the request of the City Council, hold public hearings
provided notice is published in the official city newspaper at least 10 days
prior to such public hearing.
   (D)   Rules and regulations for conduct of business. It shall follow the
rules and regulations prescribed by the City Council for the conduct of its
business.
   (E)   Other recommendations to Council. It shall make any other
recommendations to the City Council regarding recreation matters that it
considers advisable, or which are requested by the City Council.
   (F)   Solicitations. It may solicit for the city gifts, revenues, bequests
or endowments of money or property as donations or grants from persons, subject
to the prior approval and acceptance by the City Council. All funds are the
property of the city, to be accepted and/or expended by the City Council.
   (G)   Reports. It shall cause to have reports prepared as required on any
aspect of the program or facilities. No such reports shall be made available to
other than Commission members and City Council members without action by the
Commission in a formal meeting.
(Ord. 608, passed 2-27-2007; Am. Ord. 766, passed 8-20-2019)
§ 97.07 SUBCOMMITTEES.
   (A)   Appointment. The Parks and Recreation Commission, by a majority vote
of the quorum present at any regular or special meeting, may appoint such
members and citizens as reasonable and prudent to subcommittees to serve the
purposes of the Parks and Recreation Commission.
   (B)   Termination. These committees may be dissolved in a like manner, or by
the City Council.
(Ord. 608, passed 2-27-2007; Am. Ord. 766, passed 8-20-2019)
§ 97.08 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be commonly known and cited as the "Parks and Recreation
Commission Ordinance."
(Ord. 608, passed 2-27-2007; Am. Ord. 766, passed 8-20-2019)
§ 97.09 DEFINITIONS.
   For purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARK. An open space, a park, or any other area in the city owned or used by
the city, and devoted to active or passive recreation, including all planted
expressways, parkways, and right-of-ways maintained by the city.
   RECREATION. Lawful activities pertaining to nature areas, trails, open
space, historical areas, and public gardens.
   VEHICLE. Any conveyance employing wheels, track-laying devices, runners,
fans, or propellers, whether motor-powered, animal-drawn, or self-propelled.
The term shall include trailers of any size, kind or description. Exceptions
are made for baby carriages and vehicles in the service of the city.
(Ord. 608, passed 2-27-2007; Am. Ord. 722, passed 1-20-2015)
§ 97.10 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Officials. The City Administrator, park attendants designated by the
City Administrator, and Police Department shall, in connection with their
duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Ejectment. The City Administrator, park attendants designated by the
City Administrator, and any member of the Police Department shall have the
authority to eject from the park any person acting in violation of this
chapter.
   (C)   Seizure of property. The Police Department shall have the authority to
seize and confiscate any unlawful items or other contraband for which seizure
is authorized under the laws of the State of Texas.
(Ord. 608, passed 2-27-2007; Am. Ord. 722, passed 1-20-2015)
§ 97.11 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   Within the limits of any city park, or designated city open space, it
shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the acts hereinafter specified,
except as may be otherwise provided:
      (1)   No motorized vehicles, except for wheelchairs for the disabled, are
allowed in any park, trail, or sidewalk, except within designated parking
areas.
      (2)   To damage, move, alter, cut, break, injure, deface, or disturb any
tree, shrub, plant, rock, building, cage, pen, monument, fence, bench,
equipment, or other structure, apparatus or property, or to pluck, pull up,
cut, take, or remove any shrub, bush, plant or flower, or to mark or write
upon, paint, or deface in any manner, any building, monument, fence, bench,
equipment or other structure;
      (3)   To cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand, gravel,
or fertilizer;
      (4)   To make or kindle a fire except in picnic stoves, braziers, fire
pits, or designated areas provided for that purpose;
      (5)   To place, abandon, or leave garbage, cans, bottles, papers, or
other refuse in any park except in proper waste receptacles;
      (6)   To participate or engage in any activity in any park area when such
activity will create a danger to the public or may be considered a public
nuisance;
      (7)   To camp overnight, without written permission of the City
Administrator or Mayor;
      (8)   To possess or consume any alcoholic beverage;
      (9)   To disturb in any manner any picnic, meeting, service, concert,
exercise, or exhibition;
      (10)   To distribute, post, place, or erect any advertising, handbill,
circular, bill, notice, paper, or other advertising device;
      (11)   To sell or offer for sale any food, drinks, confections,
merchandise, or services.
      (12)   To place or dump any trash, refuse, solid waste, grass clippings,
leaves, or other objectionable or unsightly matter in any park; and/or
      (13)   To conduct or participate in any tournament, camp, or organized
sporting activity which has not been specifically authorized by the City
Administrator or Mayor or which conflicts with a scheduled activity or event
authorized by the City Administrator or Mayor.
      (14)   To carry a firearm, except those persons who are peace officers or
are duly licensed by the State of Texas to carry a concealed handgun in
accordance with the provisions of the Texas Concealed Handgun License Laws, as
amended.
      (15)   To discharge firearms, fireworks, BB guns, air guns, bow and
arrow, sling shots, blow guns, rockets, or paint ball guns.
      (16)   To swim, bathe, wade in or pollute the water of any fountain,
pond, lake or stream.
      (17)   To remain, stay or loiter in the area of the park between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. inclusive, every day of the week.
      (18)   To enter into/onto the wooden structure in the Preserve known as
the “Barn,” including its loft, stairs, roof; and/or all other structures or
areas as restricted by signage.
      (19)   To park or operate any truck-tractor, trailer, semitrailer, pole-
trailer in a park facility parking lot at any time.
      (20)   For the owner or person with possession or custody of a domestic
animal to allow the animal to defecate in the park without immediate removal
and disposal of such feces in proper waste receptacles.
      (21)   To discard, abandon, litter, or break any glass container. No
glass beverage containers are permitted in the park.
      (22)   To advertise, solicit, and/or conduct a business in the park in
any manner that either creates a disturbance to other park guests, or displaces
other park guests in the park, or involves more than 2 representatives of the
business, or which occurs for more than 1 hour in any 3-day period.
      (23)   To use or operate any gas operated remote controlled airplanes;
boat, car, drone or other motorized, model device, including radio-controlled
devices such as helicopters; parasail, hang glider or hot air balloons, in any
manner that either creates a disturbance to other park guests, or displaces
other park guests in the park.
      (24)   To use or operate mechanical or amplified music, sound or voice.
   (B)   One or more of the rules above may be waived for good cause, in
advance, by the city, upon written request by an applicant.
(Ord. 608, passed 2-27-2007; Am. Ord. 722, passed 1-20-2015) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.12 USE OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES AND THE LIKE.
   All vehicles used for the purpose of transporting freight and merchandise,
or brick, stone or gravel, and all those commonly known as floats, moving
wagons, express or delivery wagons are prohibited from entering upon or being
driven through any of the public parks of the city, except by special
permission of the Mayor or city administrator subject to appropriate conditions
and safeguards.
(Ord. 608, passed 2-27-2007)
Penalty, see § 97.99
§ 97.13 PARKING VEHICLES.
   No vehicle shall be driven over or across the curbs, sidewalks, grass or
lawn within any park area unless signs permit. Parking is to be done in areas
set aside for this purpose only. In areas having no parking set aside, all
parking will take place outside of the boundary or curbline, where existing.
Where parking stalls have been designated, all vehicles shall be parked on such
lots within and between the lines designating a single vehicle parking space
and not otherwise. Where parking lots or areas within public parks of the city
have been designated for head-in parking to front on a visible parking line
without delineated single vehicle spaces, the front of the vehicle shall be
placed on the parking line and as near as practicable to the side of the last
parked vehicle in line. No vehicle shall be parked or left behind any other
vehicle in the parking line or back of such parking line in any manner so as to
obstruct, block or hinder ingress or egress from the line. Officers of the
Police Department of the city shall issue to violators of this section traffic
tickets or notices to answer to charges in the manner prescribed by the
applicable ordinances and the case shall proceed in accordance with such
applicable sections. Where a vehicle is parked or left in violation of this
section in such a manner as to obstruct or block traffic, and the owner or
operator of the vehicle cannot be found, police officers of the city may move
the vehicle so that traffic will not be impeded. No variation to the
requirements of this section shall be allowed except by special permit issued
by the City Administrator.
(Ord. 608, passed 2-27-2007)
Penalty, see § 97.99
§ 97.14 CITY-SPONSORED EVENTS.
   City sponsored events or use of park facilities may be exempt from all or a
portion of the provisions of §
97.11 as is reasonably necessary for operation of event.
(Ord. 608, passed 2-27-2007; Am. Ord. 722, passed 1-20-2015)
§ 97.15 PARK FACILITIES.
   (A)   Use of park facilities for group-sponsored events and games must be
prescheduled with and approved by the City Administrator or Mayor.
   (B)   The City Administrator or Mayor shall have the authority to issue
special permits, grant exceptions, or waivers to any of the terms of §
97.13 for authorized events and activities.
   (C)   No person shall advertise an event, meeting or activity or the time,
permitted hours, or usage of an event, meeting, or activity to be held or
conducted in a park facility unless such event, meeting or activity and
advertisement of such event, meeting, or activity and the time, permitted
hours, or usage has been approved by the City Administrator or Mayor.
(Ord. 608, passed 2-27-2007)
Penalty, see § 97.99
§ 97.16 DAMAGES AND COST OF SERVICES.
   The person, group, organization or entity reserving the use of a park
facility shall be responsible for all damages to city property and for the cost
of any park maintenance services, emergency or public safety services including
police and fire, provided to, at or dispatched to the park facility as a result
of such person's, group's or the organization's misuse, improper or unlawful
use of the park facility.
(Ord. 608, passed 2-27-2007)
Penalty, see § 97.99
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter or of the Code of Ordinances, as amended hereby, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of $500 for each offense and each and
every day said violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 608, passed 2-27-2007; Am. Ord. 722, passed 1-20-2015)
CHAPTER 98: BICYCLES
Section
   
98.01   Definitions
   
98.02   Bicycle helmet required
   
98.03   Health condition exemptions
   
98.04   Civil actions
 
   
98.99   Penalty
§ 98.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED BICYCLE HELMET. A head covering designed to protect the head that
meets or exceeds the requirements of standard Z-90.4 set by the American
Nationals Standard Institute (ANSI) or the Snell Foundation, or a subsequent
nationally recognized standard for helmet performance as the city may adopt.
   BICYCLE. Every device propelled solely by human power upon which a person or
persons may ride, having 2 tandem wheels, either of which is 8 inches or more
in diameter, or 3 wheels, any of which is more than 20 inches in diameter.
BICYCLE shall include any child-seat, trailer, side-car, or other device
attached to a bicycle. For purposes of this chapter, BICYCLE shall include
electric-assisted bicycles and electric motor foot scooters. A device meeting
the definition of a bicycle shall be considered a bicycle notwithstanding the
fact that training wheels are affixed to the device.
   BICYCLE HELMET. See APPROVED BICYCLE HELMET.
   CHILD. A person under the age of 16 years.
   GUARDIAN. A person legally responsible for the care and management of a
person under the age of 16 years. GUARDIAN shall include the parent, a person
with legal custody, a person with temporary custody, or a person who is
temporarily caring for the child.
   PUBLIC AREA. The public roadways, trails, bicycle paths, parks, public
property, public rights-of-way, and publicly owned facilities within the city
limits of the City of Parker, Collin County, Texas.
(Ord. 634, passed 10-14-2008)
§ 98.02 BICYCLE HELMET REQUIRED.
   (A)   A child riding a bicycle, including a child as a passenger on a
bicycle or a person in tow of a bicycle, upon any public area, shall wear an
approved bicycle helmet which shall be worn over the head and equipped with
either a neck or chin strap that shall be fastened securely while the bicycle
is in motion.
   (B)   No person shall transport a child on a bicycle or in tow of a bicycle
upon any public area, unless the child is wearing an approved bicycle helmet
over the head and equipped with either a neck or chin strap that shall be
fastened securely while the bicycle is in motion. Each child transported in
violation of this division shall be considered a separate offense chargeable to
the person in control of the bicycle.
   (C)   The guardian of a child is responsible for requiring that the child
under his or her care wears an approved bicycle helmet while bicycling, or
riding as a passenger on a bicycle or in tow of a bicycle, in any public area,
and that the child has the neck or chin strap of the helmet fastened securely.
Each child not wearing an approved bicycle helmet in violation of this section
shall be considered a separate offense chargeable to the parent or guardian.
   (D)   It is a defense to this section for a person wearing an unapproved
bicycle helmet that the helmet was furnished in conjunction with his or her
lease of the bicycle by a person engaged in the business of leasing bicycles
and that the helmet was fastened securely while bicycling.
   (E)   The guardian of a person under the age of 16 years shall not knowingly
allow, or fail to take reasonable steps, to prevent that person from operating
or riding on a bicycle or other cycle not powered by a motor on a public
highway, bicycle path or any right-of-way or publicly owned facilities under
the jurisdiction of the City of Parker, unless that person is wearing an
approved bicycle helmet fastened securely.
(Ord. 634, passed 10-14-2008)
§ 98.03 HEALTH CONDITION EXEMPTION.
   (A)   A person is not required to wear a helmet if the person has in its
immediate possession a health exemption identification prescribed by this
section.
   (B)   The City Administrator shall provide a health exemption identification
to a person with a written statement from a licensed physician that sets forth
the person's health condition and explains why the condition prevents the
person from wearing a helmet.
   (C)   The City Administrator shall establish procedures to implement this
section.
(Ord. 634, passed 10-14-2008)
§ 98.04 CIVIL ACTIONS.
   (A)   The City Council adopts this chapter to encourage bicycle safety
through the use of helmets.
   (B)   The City Council does not intend this chapter to be used in a manner
to prejudice a person, child, or parent in a civil action arising out of a
bicycle accident.
(Ord. 634, passed 10-14-2008)
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person performs an act prohibited
by this chapter or fails to perform an act required by this chapter.
   (B)   An offense under this chapter is a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a
fine not to exceed:
      (1)   $20 on a first conviction; and
      (2)   $40 on a subsequent conviction.
   (C)   The municipal court may dismiss a charge against a person for an
offense under this chapter on receiving proof that the defendant acquired a
helmet meeting the helmet standards of this chapter for the person who was
operating or riding a bicycle in violation of §
98.02 on or before the 30th day after the citation was issued.
(Ord. 634, passed 10-14-2008)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
CHAPTER 110: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Permit required; exemptions
   
110.03   [Reserved]
   
110.04   Permit application
   
110.05   Fees
   
110.06   Application review; permit issuance
   
110.07   Denial of permit
   
110.08   Permit expiration
   
110.09   Exhibition of permit
   
110.10   Transfer prohibited
   
110.11   Entry upon posted premises; trespass
   
110.12   Hours of solicitation
   
110.13   Permit revocation; grounds
   
110.14   Notice and hearing
   
110.15   Appeals
   
110.16   Enforcement
   
110.17   Claim of exemption
 
   
110.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Sale of personal property on public ways prohibited, see §
95.01
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHARITABLE. Includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service,
health, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, cultural, or fraternal, either
actual or purported, holding determination letter from the Internal Revenue
Service of 501(c)3 or 501(c)4 status, being 26 U.S.C. §§ 501(c)3 and 501(c)4.
   CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The City Administrator of this city.
   CONTRIBUTIONS. Includes the words alms, money, subscription, property, or
donations under the guise of a loan of money or property.
   PEDDLER. Any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in
the city, not having been invited by the occupant thereof, carrying or
transporting goods, wares, merchandise, or personal property of any nature and
offering the same for sale. This definition also includes any person who
solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as
part of the scheme to evade the provisions of this chapter.
   PEDDLING. Includes all activities ordinarily performed by a “peddler” as
indicated under the definition in this section.
   PERSON. A natural person or any firm, corporation, association, club,
society, or other organization.
   SOLICITATION. Includes all activities ordinarily performed by a “solicitor”
as indicated under the definition in this section.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who goes upon premises of any private residence in the
city, not having been invited by the occupant thereof, for the purpose of
taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise,
or personal property of any nature for future delivery, or for services to be
performed in the future. This definition also includes any person who, without
invitation, goes upon private property, to request contribution of funds or
anything of value, or sell goods or services for political, charitable,
religious, or other noncommercial purposes.
(Ord. 459, passed 5-11-1999)
§ 110.02 PERMIT REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person 18 years of age or older to engage
in peddling or solicitation activities within the city without first obtaining
a permit issued by the city.
   (B)   Provided, however, that the following are exempted from the provisions
of this section:
      (1)   Any solicitation made upon premises owned or occupied by an
organization upon whose behalf the solicitation is made;
      (2)   Any communication by an organization soliciting contributions
solely from persons who are members of the organization at the time of the
solicitation;
      (3)   Any solicitation in the form of a collection at a regular meeting,
assembly, or service of a charitable organization;
      (4)   Any solicitation for the relief of any individual specified by name
at the time of the solicitation where the solicitor represents in each case
that the entire amount collected shall be turned over to the named beneficiary;
      (5)   Any solicitation by or for a volunteer fire department with
principal facilities and equipment located in the city; and
      (6)   Any solicitation by the Parker Women’s Club for charitable purposes
in the city.
(Ord. 459, passed 5-11-1999)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.03 [RESERVED]
§ 110.04 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every person subject to the provisions of this chapter shall file with
the city an application in writing on a form furnished by the city.
   (B)   This application shall provide the following information:
      (1)   The date of birth, address, and identification of the applicant, to
be provided through the applicant’s driver’s license, articles of incorporation
(for sponsors), or other legally recognized form of identification;
      (2)   The names, addresses, and driver’s license numbers or other form of
legally recognized form of identification of all persons who may act as agent
or employee of the applicant;
      (3)   A brief description of the business or activity to be conducted or
goods to be sold;
      (4)   If employed, the name, address, and telephone number of the
employer; or if acting as an agent, the name, address, and telephone number of
the principal who is being represented; with credentials in written form
establishing the relationship and the authority of the employee or agent to act
for the employer or principal, as the case may be;
      (5)   The length of time for which the right to peddle or solicit is
desired;
      (6)   The applicant’s state sales and use tax permit number, if required
by law in order to conduct the proposed business, or proof of exemption if none
is required;
      (7)   If a vehicle is to be used, the make, model, color, and license
number shall be provided;
      (8)   Whether the applicant, upon sale or order, shall demand, receive,
or accept deposit or total payment in advance of final delivery; and
      (9)   Felony convictions of any solicitors, their agents, or employees,
who may be soliciting within the city.
(Ord. 459, passed 5-11-1999)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.05 FEES.
   A fee of $75 for all peddlers and solicitors, except those of charitable
purposes for which the fee is $25, shall be paid prior to the issuance of a
permit. When any solicitor or peddler shall engage in an activity through 1 or
more agents or employees, in addition to the fee for the applicant, a permit
fee shall be paid for each agent or employee so engaged, and the fee shall
entitle the agent or employee to a permit for the same term and upon the same
conditions as that of the primary permit. No permit fee shall be refunded.
(Ord. 459, passed 5-11-1999)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.06 APPLICATION REVIEW; PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, the City Administrator, or authorized
representative, shall review the application as deemed necessary to ensure
compliance with §
110.04.
   (B)   The City Administrator, or authorized representative, shall endorse
his or her approval on the application and shall, upon payment of the
prescribed fee, issue the required permit to the applicant.
   (C)   The permit shall show the name, address, and driver’s license number
of the permittee, the class of permit issued, the kind of goods or services to
be sold or delivered, the date of issuance, and the length of time that the
permit will be in effect. The permit will also show the permit number.
(Ord. 459, passed 5-11-1999)
§ 110.07 DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Upon the City Administrator or authorized representative’s review of
the application, the City Administrator or representative may refuse to issue a
permit to the applicant for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   The location and time of solicitation or peddling would endanger
the safety and welfare of the solicitors, peddlers, or their customers;
      (2)   An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information
on the application;
      (3)   There is no proof as to the authority of the applicant to serve as
an agent to the principal; or
      (4)   The applicant has been denied a permit under this chapter within
the immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show to the
satisfaction of the City Administrator or representative that the reasons for
the earlier denial no longer exist.
   (B)   The City Administrator or authorized representative’s disapproval and
reasons for disapproval shall be noted on the application, and the applicant
shall be notified that his or her application is disapproved and that no permit
will be issued.
(Ord. 459, passed 5-11-1999)
§ 110.08 PERMIT EXPIRATION.
   All permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire 6
months from the date of issuance, unless an earlier expiration date is noted on
the permit.
(Ord. 459, passed 5-11-1999)
§ 110.09 EXHIBITION OF PERMIT.
   Every person required to obtain a permit under the provisions of this
chapter shall exhibit the permit when requested to do so by any prospective
customer, city employee, or police officer.
(Ord. 459, passed 5-11-1999)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.10 TRANSFER PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person other than the permittee to use or
exhibit any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 459, passed 5-11-1999)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.11 ENTRY UPON POSTED PREMISES; TRESPASS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or unlicensed,
while conducting the business of a solicitor or peddler, to enter upon any
residential premises in the city where the owner, occupant, or person legally
in charge of the premises has posted, at the entry to the premises, or at the
entry to the principal building on the premises, a sign bearing the words “No
Peddlers,” “No Solicitors,” or words of similar import.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall authorize any solicitor or peddler to
commit the offense of trespass, as defined in the Tex. Penal Code, Ch. 30. Any
offense of trespass shall be a violation of this chapter, and grounds for
revocation of the permit.
(Ord. 459, passed 5-11-1999)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.12 HOURS OF SOLICITATION.
   No person, while conducting the activities of a solicitor or peddler,
whether licensed or unlicensed, shall enter upon any private property, knock on
doors, or otherwise disturb persons in their residences between the hours of 8:
00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(Ord. 459, passed 5-11-1999)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.13 PERMIT REVOCATION; GROUNDS.
   Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the City
Administrator, or authorized representative, after notice and hearing, for any
of the following reasons:
   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for a permit;
   (B)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made by the permittee in
the course of conducting solicitation or peddling activities;
   (C)   Conducting solicitation or peddling activities contrary to the
provisions contained in this chapter; or
   (D)   Conducting peddling or solicitation activities in such a manner as to
create a public nuisance, constitute breach of peace, trespass, or endanger the
health, safety, or general welfare of the public.
(Ord. 459, passed 5-11-1999)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.14 NOTICE AND HEARING.
   Notice of a hearing for revocation of a permit issued under this chapter
shall be provided in writing and shall set forth specifically the grounds for
the proposed revocation and the time and place of the hearing. Notice shall be
mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at the address shown on the permit
application or at the last known address of the permittee.
(Ord. 459, passed 5-11-1999)
§ 110.15 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the City
Administrator or authorized representative to deny, suspend, or revoke a permit
applied for under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal
that action or decision to the Mayor within 15 days after the notice of the
action or decision has been mailed to the person’s address as shown on the
permit application form, or to his or her last known address.
   (B)   An appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Administrator or
authorized representative a written statement setting forth the grounds for the
appeal.
   (C)   The City Administrator or authorized representative shall transmit the
written statement to the Mayor within 10 days of its receipt, and the Mayor
shall set a time and place for a hearing of the appeal.
   (D)   A hearing shall be set not later than 20 days from the date of receipt
of the appellant’s written statement.
   (E)   Notice of time and place of the hearing shall be given to the
appellant in the same manner as provided for the mailing of notice of action or
decision.
   (F)   The decision of the Mayor on the appeal shall be final and binding on
all parties concerned.
(Ord. 459, passed 5-11-1999)
§ 110.16 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to require any
peddler or solicitor who is not known by that officer to be duly permitted, to
produce his or her permit, and to enforce the provisions of this chapter
against any person found to be violating the same.
(Ord. 459, passed 5-11-1999)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.17 CLAIM OF EXEMPTION.
   Any person claiming to be legally exempt from the regulations set forth in
this chapter, or from the payment of a permit fee, shall cite to the City
Administrator or authorized representative the statute or other legal authority
under which exemption is claimed and shall present to the City Administrator or
authorized representative proof of qualification for that exemption.
(Ord. 459, passed 5-11-1999)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   (1)   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000 for each offense, and
each and every day the violation shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
      (2)   In addition to any criminal enforcement, the city or any individual
may pursue any available civil remedies deemed appropriate and necessary.
(Ord. 459, passed 5-11-1999)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Discharge of firearms
   
130.02   Carrying concealed weapons
   
130.03   Contributing to delinquency of a minor; parental responsibility
 
   
130.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Unlawful deposit of trash, see §
53.01
§ 130.01 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
   (A)   Discharging firearms unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to
discharge or cause to be discharged any firearm, as defined by Tex. Penal Code,
§ 46.01(3), including blank shells or cartridges, within the corporate limits
of the city.
   (B)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   A licensed peace officer when acting in the performance of his or
her official duties;
      (2)   Upon prior notification to the City Police Department, the use of
blank cartridges is permitted for theatrical productions, as a signal for
ceremonial or athletic purposes, or by military organizations of this country
or this state; or
      (3)   Those circumstances where the use of deadly force is justified
under Tex. Penal Code, §§ 9.31 through 9.43, and for protection of property and
against predators, wild animals, or stray and marauding animals.
(Ord. 346, passed 7-14-1992)
Penalty, see § 130.99
Statutory reference:
   General authority to regulate discharge of firearms, see Tex. Loc. Gov’t
Code, § 229.001
§ 130.02 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a peace officer, to
carry a concealed handgun, weapon, or prohibited weapon into any city building
or facility, regardless of whether or not the person is duly licensed by the
state to carry a concealed handgun.
   (B)   A person who violates a provision of this section shall be immediately
removed from the city building or facility.
(Ord. 395, passed 12-12-1995)
Penalty, see § 130.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate concealed weapons, see Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, § 229.001
§ 130.03 CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY OF A MINOR; PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Finding of necessity. The City Council finds that offenses against
federal laws, the statutes of the state, and the ordinances of the city by
minors under the age of 17 years are increasing at an alarming rate; that in a
great many of the cases, a lack of proper supervision and control of the minor
child by his or her parents or guardian is evident; that the increasing problem
of criminal offenses by children will not be solved by sanctions imposed upon
the children alone but that it is necessary that sanctions be imposed upon
parents whose neglect of their duty to properly supervise and control their
children is a proximate cause of the delinquency of those children.
   (B)   Contributing to neglect or delinquency of children. Any parent, legal
guardian, or other person having the care or custody of a minor child under the
age of 17 years who shall by any act, or by lack of supervision and control
over that minor child, encourage, contribute toward, cause, or tend to cause
that minor child to commit any delinquent or criminal act shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 137, passed 5-1-1972)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of §
130.01 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be
fined an amount not to exceed $2,000 for each offense; and each and every day
the offense is continued, and each and every time an offense takes place after
being informed of the violation by any peace officer of this state, shall
constitute a new and separate offense.
(Ord. 346, passed 7-14-1992)
   (C)   A person who violates a provision of §
130.02 is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine
not to exceed $500.
(Ord. 395, passed 12-12-1995)
   (D)   Any person found guilty of a misdemeanor under the terms of §
130.03 shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than
$200.
(Ord. 137, passed 5-1-1972)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
151.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
152.   DANGEROUS BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
      
153.   SIGN CONTROL
      
154.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
155.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
         
APPENDIX: ATTACHMENTS
      
156.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
150.01   Comprehensive Plan and Land Use Map adopted
   
150.02   Planning and Zoning Commission
   
150.03   Annexation Map and Annexation Plan adopted
 
   
150.99   Penalty
§ 150.01 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND LAND USE MAP ADOPTED.
   The Comprehensive Plan and Land Use Map, filed herewith, entitled
“Comprehensive Plan, 1987-2002,” and “Land Use Map, 1987-2002,” respectively,
as they may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by the city,
except that all references to the office/neighborhood district, including part
III, § 9.5, are hereby deleted and the Plan and Map shall be reproduced without
any reference to an office/neighborhood service district and the renumbering of
sections and pages should be made where appropriate. The Plan and Map are
intended to be an important guide to the city when it considers future zoning
and annexation requests, when subdivision plats and site plans are considered,
and when decisions are made concerning the location and size of future roads
and utilities. The Plan and Map should be reviewed periodically, but at least
every 5 years, to ensure that the Plan is compatible with changing conditions,
if any, in the city.
(Ord. 300, passed 1-13-1987; Am. Ord. 410, passed 11-19-1996; Am. Ord. 721,
passed 3-3-2015)
§ 150.02 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Places. The Planning and Zoning Commission for the city shall consist
of 5 members appointed by a majority of the City Council. Each member shall
serve in a place designated by the Council. Places 1, 3, and 5 shall have two-
year terms commencing December 1 and expiring in odd numbered years on November
30. Places 2 and 4 shall have two-year terms commencing December 1 and expiring
in even numbered years on November 30. Upon the passage of this section, the
Council may designate, or redesignate, current members, and/or any members to
be appointed, into each place, with the appropriate provisions as to the
fulfillment of any unexpired terms. Unless otherwise designated by the City
Council, the Commission member serving in a designated place upon the passage
of this section continues in that place through November 30 of the even, or
odd, year for that place. All members of the Commission continue to serve until
their successors are appointed and qualified; save and except when a member
resigns, in writing. Such resignation shall be effective the date of its
receipt by the City Secretary.
   (B)   Alternates. A majority of the City Council may appoint 1, 2, or 3
alternates to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The terms of the alternates
will be one-year terms, unless specifically set at the time of the appointment
of the alternate as a two-year term. An alternate may be reappointed at the
discretion of the Council. Regardless of the term assigned to the alternate,
the City Council may remove an alternate with or without cause at any time.
Terms of alternates commence December 1 and expiring November 30. All
alternates continue to serve until their successors are appointed and
qualified; save and except when a member resigns in writing. Alternate members
shall be classified as members for all purposes other than regular voting.
   (C)   Officers. The City Council shall select members of the Planning and
Zoning Commission to serve as Chairman, Vice Chairman, and Secretary. An
Assistant Secretary, who need not be a member of the Commission, may also be
appointed. Each member of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be a
resident citizen of the city, and shall possess all qualifications necessary to
register to vote in a municipal election of the city.
   (D)   Quorum. Any 3 members (including alternate members) shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business. The affirmative vote of a majority of
those attending any meeting at which there is a quorum present shall be
necessary to pass any motion, recommendation or resolution of the Commission.
   (E)   Duties generally.
      (1)   The Commission shall, from time to time, either at its discretion
or as requested by the City Council, submit its reports, plans and
recommendations for the orderly growth, development and welfare of the city in
accordance with Tex. Local Gov’t Code Article 211.007.
      (2)   The Commission shall also perform other duties as may be presented
by the Council, ordinance or state law, as follows:
         (a)   To recommend the boundaries of the various districts and
appropriate regulations to be enforced therein under the Comprehensive Zoning
Ordinance, the ordinances of the city or the laws of the state, to the City
Council and to recommend approval or denial of zoning changes, and regulations
under this chapter, the ordinances of the city or the laws of the state.
         (b)   To hear, recommend or determine any matter relating to zoning,
planning or subdivision control as may be specified or required under the
Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, the ordinances of the city, or the laws of the
state.
         (c)   To exercise such duties and powers as may be now or hereafter
conferred by the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, the ordinances of the city, or
applicable laws of the state.
         (d)   To determine the classification of any use, new or otherwise not
listed or identified within the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance for the purpose
of establishing the appropriate zoning district into which such use should be
placed, the applicability of the parking standards, or any other regulations of
the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance may be applied to such use.
   (F)   Advisory opinions. All actions by the Planning and Zoning Commission
are advisory in nature to the City Council. The City Council does specifically
reserve and require that final approval of preliminary and final plats require
City Council action. The City Council may, in any zoning or plat review,
specifically delegate final approval of any specific action on specific zoning
and/or plat applications, such as landscape, drainage, trail, thoroughfare, or
other specific plans, to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (G)   Removal from office; vacancies. Any member of the Commission may be
removed from office for any cause deemed by the City Council to be sufficient
for removal of the member. If a vacancy should exist in the Commission
membership due to removal from office, resignation, death, refusal or inability
to serve, the City Council shall appoint a new member to fill the vacancy for
the unexpired term.
   (H)   Attendance. Three consecutive absences that are not excused by the
Commission, or the absence of a regular member from more than 25% of the
meetings in any six-month period, shall cause the Commission to review the
attendance record of the member and make a recommendation to the City Council
on the need, or lack of need, to appoint a replacement member.
   (I)   Meetings.
      (1)   All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public, subject
to the Texas Open Meetings Act, Tex. Gov’t Code, Chapter 551. The Commission
shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each
question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep
record of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
filed in the office of the Planning Department and shall be a public record.
The City Secretary shall be the custodian and possessor of the record and
minutes of the Commission.
      (2)   Meetings of the Commission may be held as often as necessary to
conduct the business coming before the Commission at the call of the
Chairperson and at such other times as the Commission may determine.
(Ord. 557, passed 7-13-2004)
§ 150.03 ANNEXATION MAP AND ANNEXATION PLAN ADOPTED.
   (A)   Annexation Map. The map identified in Exhibit A attached to Ord. 791,
as it may be amended from time to time, is approved.
      (1)   The map includes the following:
         ANNEXATION MAP. A map that illustrates the boundaries of the
municipality and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
      (2)   A copy of the map shall be kept in the office of the secretary or
clerk of the city. A copy of the map shall also be kept in the office of the
City Engineer.
      (3)   (a)   If the city annexes territory, the map shall be immediately
corrected to include the annexed territory. The map shall be annotated to
indicate:
            1.   The date of annexation;
            2.   The number of the annexation ordinance, if any; and
            3.   A reference to the minutes or municipal ordinance records in
which the ordinance is recorded in full.
         (b)   If the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction is expanded or
reduced, the map shall be immediately corrected to indicate the change in the
city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction. The map shall be annotated to indicate:
            1.   The date the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction was changed;
            2.   The number of the ordinance or resolution, if any, by which
the change was made; and
            3.   A reference to the minutes or municipal ordinance or
resolution records in which the ordinance or resolution is recorded in full.
   (B)   Public view. The map shall be readily available for viewing at City
Hall.
   (C)   Annexation Plan.
      (1)   This section ratifies and approves the Annexation Plan of the city,
which is:
         “No annexation is planned which would require the type and nature of
the annexation plan required by Local Government Code section 43.052. The City
plans only to proceed under Subchapter C-1, ANNEXATION PROCEDURE FOR AREAS
EXEMPTED FROM MUNICIPAL ANNEXATION PLAN.”
      (2)   The provisions of this division (C) shall be posted on the city
website as the Annexation Plan of the city.
(Ord. 791, passed 5-19-2020; Am. Ord. 826, passed 9-20-2022)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which no
other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
CHAPTER 151: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
Regulatory Codes; Building Permits
   
151.01   Title
   
151.02   Codes adopted
   
151.03   Building Official
   
151.04   Building permit
   
151.05   Certificate of occupancy
Structures; Regulations and Restrictions
   
151.20   Maximum structure height
   
151.21   Wind energy generators
   
151.22   Broadcast towers
Residential Construction; Requirements and Regulations
   
151.35   House numbers required
   
151.36   Automatic fire extinguishing systems
   
151.37   Swimming pools; construction and maintenance
 
   
151.99   Penalty
REGULATORY CODES; BUILDING PERMITS
§ 151.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “city building code.”
(Ord. 477, passed 11-16-1999)
§ 151.02 CODES ADOPTED.
   (A)   The standards and requirements set forth in the following codes shall
hereafter be required by this section in the city, and these codes are adopted
regulating the construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal,
demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment use, height, area, and maintenance
of all buildings or structures within the corporate limits of the city. Copies
of these codes shall be maintained in the office of the Building Official of
the city or the City Secretary’s office.
   (B)   The above-mentioned codes are as follows:
      (1)   The International Building Code, 2000 edition with regional
amendments;
      (2)   The International Residential Code, 2000 edition with regional
amendments;
      (3)   The International Fire Code, 2000 edition with regional amendments;
      (4)   The International Plumbing Code, 2000 edition with regional
amendments;
      (5)   The International Mechanical Code, 2000 edition with regional
amendments;
      (6)   The International Fuel Gas Code, 2000 edition with regional
amendments;
      (7)   The National Electrical Code, 1999 edition with regional
amendments; and
      (8)   The International Energy Conservation Code, 2000 edition.
   (C)   The city hereby adopts the Life Safety Code, 1997 edition, as
published by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), together with the
additions, deletions, and amendment herein adopted amendments hereinafter
contained, as the Life Safety Code of the city, the same as though that code of
the city, the same as though that code were copied at length herein.
(Ord. 477, passed 11-16-1999; Am. Ord. 516, passed 12-11-2001; Am. Ord. 524,
passed 8-27-2002)
§ 151.03 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   The office of Building Official is hereby established by the city. The
Building Official shall have the duties of conducting all inspections for the
construction of buildings and structures, and refurbishing and remodeling of
same, to ensure that the buildings and structures comply with the ordinances of
the city. If the Building Inspector determines that the building code of the
city has been violated, and if, after reasonable notice, the violation has not
been corrected, then the Building Inspector will issue a citation for the
violation in the form of a complaint by the city based on the violation and
cause same to be prosecuted in the Municipal Court of the city.
(Ord. 477, passed 11-16-1999)
Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.04 BUILDING PERMIT.
   (A)   Application for building permit. All persons desiring to construct,
refurbish, remodel, or improve any building or structure within the corporate
limits of the city shall make application for a building permit for that
structure with the City Secretary. All applications for building permits shall
be accompanied by a site plan in duplicate together with those additional
copies as the City Secretary determines to be necessary for review by other
administrative officers and agencies; shall be drawn to scale, showing the
actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and
location of the building on the lot already existing, if any, and the location
and dimensions of proposed buildings, structures, or alterations. Any
application shall include other information as lawfully may be required by the
City Secretary, including existing or proposed uses of the building or
structure and land, conditions existing on the lot, and other matters as may be
necessary to determine conformance with the city’s zoning and subdivision
control regulations in
Chapter 155 and
156 of this code, and provide for the enforcement of these regulations.
   (B)   Issuance of building permits. Building permits are to be issued by the
City Secretary upon the approval of the City Building Official. All new
construction of buildings, structures, fixed or movable, remodeling of same,
swimming pools, mobile homes, prefabricated structures, portable buildings,
outbuildings, and all other buildings or structures within the corporate limits
of the city must comply with this chapter; and a building permit will be issued
only when that compliance is assured. No placement, construction, remodeling,
refurbishment, or construction of any kind of any building or structure may be
commenced prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(Ord. 477, passed 11-16-1999)
Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.05 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   In order to ensure that all new construction and the use of all
existing structures comply with the city building code, a certificate of
occupancy shall be required in accordance with the following rules.
      (1)   Application for certificate of occupancy. Any person who proposes
to use a building or structure located within the city, after the effective
date of this subchapter, shall file an application for a certificate of
occupancy in the office of the City Secretary on forms provided by the City
Secretary. Upon approval by the Building Official of the city, a certificate of
occupancy shall be issued stating that the building and proposed use of a
building comply with
Chapter 151,
155, and
156 of this code. A permanent record of all certificates shall be kept on file
in the office of the City Secretary.
      (2)   Certificate to establish new use of property. No vacant land or
building shall be occupied or used by any person, except for agricultural
purposes, until a certificate of occupancy has been issued in accordance with
this section.
      (3)   Time of application and issuance. A person desiring a certificate
of occupancy shall apply for it at the time that an application for a building
permit is made; and the certificate of occupancy shall be issued within 10 days
after the erection or structural alteration of a building or structure has been
completed in conformity with the applicable ordinances of the city.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PERSON. A person, a corporation, a nonprofit corporation, a partnership,
a joint venture, an association, or any other legal entity.
(Ord. 477, passed 11-16-1999)
Penalty, see § 151.99
STRUCTURES; REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS
§ 151.20 MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT.
   The maximum building height of any antenna, tower, windmill, wind energy
generator, structure, flagpole, or other object, whether constructed on site or
otherwise, shall be 50 feet above ground level. Exceptions to this rule are
limited to any state or federal laws which specifically exempt these structures
from local height regulations, or any local, state, or federal regulations
which require a maximum height of 50 feet or less.
(Ord. 510, passed 9-4-2001)
Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.21 WIND ENERGY GENERATORS.
   (A)   Special use permit. A special use permit is not required for the
installation of a single wind energy generator in accordance with this section
on a single residential lot. For all other proposed installations of wind
energy generators, including but not limited to installations of more than 1
wind energy generator on a residential lot, or installations on nonresidential
lots, a special use permit is required in accordance with divisions (B) and (C)
below. The installation of a single wind energy generator on a residential lot
may be constructed upon applying for and receiving a building permit, subject
to applicable inspections, in accordance with the provisions of divisions (C)
and (D), below.
   (B)   Application information required. An applicant shall prepare and file
an application for a special use permit for the construction and installation
of a wind energy generator. The application shall include the information
required in division (C), and shall be supplemented by additional information,
if any, as requested or required by the Planning and Zoning Commission during
its review of the special use permit, or the City Council, prior to or during
its deliberations. Wind energy generators have a unique nature as a result of
their movement, size, public safety, and noise. The City Council may deny the
application for a wind energy generator which may meet the technical
requirements set forth below if the wind energy generator is proposed to be
located in an area of the city which will unreasonably encroach upon the rights
of the homeowners and landowners in the area.
   (C)   Application requirements. An application for a wind energy generator
shall include the following:
      (1)   Detailed construction plans, with elevation drawings to scale,
showing the proposed location of the wind energy generator. Drawings shall show
all structures existing and proposed on the tract of land, together with all
structures on neighboring tracts within an area 2.5 times the total height
(mast plus rotor) of the proposed tower;
      (2)   The applicant’s engineer’s statement of the engineering standards
applied to the installation, construction and operation of the wind energy
generator. The plans will be engineered and bear the professional engineer’s
seal. The plans will include copies of:
         (a)   All manufacturer’s statements and warranties of the proposed
wind energy generator;
         (b)   The engineer’s analysis of the proposed wind energy generator’s
safety and performance with respect to extreme weather conditions experienced
in the north Texas area, including ice storms, high winds, lightning, and
similar conditions;
      (3)   Plans and specifications for any necessary related equipment,
buildings, wiring, or other construction necessary or ancillary to the proposed
wind energy generator;
      (4)   The applicant is also to pay all legal, engineering, and building
inspection fees incurred in the review and construction of the wind energy
generator, if any. If the special use permit is approved, the applicant pays
applicable building and inspection fees.
   (D)   Minimum and maximum requirements for wind energy generators. A wind
energy generator shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   The maximum mast height is 60 feet above grade (ground level);
      (2)   If it is a roof mounted wind energy generator, the maximum mast
height shall not exceed 60 feet above grade;
      (3)   The rotors may not extend lower than 20 feet above ground level
when operating;
      (4)   There may not be more than 1 wind energy generator per acre of
land;
      (5)   The setback is not less than 1.25 times the height of the
generating structure and rotor at its highest point from all boundary lines or
easements on the property. The wind energy generator may not be located in the
front yard (between the front building line and the front property line) of any
lot;
      (6)   Wind energy generators may not create noise greater than that
permitted by the nuisance ordinance (§§
94.01 et seq.), as measured on the dB(A) scale, at the boundary lines of the
tract, at any wind velocity, and must otherwise comply with the nuisance
ordinance;
      (7)   Wind energy generators may not have lights, reflective features, or
paint that is not expressly required by FAA regulations for warning or notice
to air traffic. Those features which are required, if any, shall meet the
minimum FAA requirements. Subject to FAA regulations, strobe lights, reflective
paint, and “warning” paint schemes, such as red and white stripes, are
prohibited. Subject to receiving a permit from the city for another color, all
wind energy generator masts and rotors shall be dull gray or dull green in
color;
      (8)   Wind energy generators must be secured and protected to prohibit
access or climbing by unauthorized persons;
      (9)   Wind energy generators must be in compliance with all state and
federal law, including those regulations of the State Public Utility
Commission, Federal Aviation Administration, and the Federal Communications
Commission. It must also be in compliance with the building and electrical
codes, and local ordinances and construction codes, adopted by the city;
      (10)   Wind energy generators must be for the purpose of generation of
electrical power for use on the tract or lot on which the wind energy generator
is constructed only. Transmission of electrical power across the property lines
of the tract or lot shall constitute commercial use, requiring a zoning change;
and
      (11)   Wind energy generators must comply with those additional
requirements in the special use permit (if required by this section) as may be
required by the City Council as necessary to preserve and protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city.
(Ord. 667, passed 5-3-2011)
Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.22 BROADCAST TOWERS.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      BROADCAST TOWER. Any tower supporting 1 or more antennae that transmit or
receive any portion of an electromagnetic spectrum for which a federal
communication license is required for its operation.
   (B)   Building and special use permits required. No broadcast tower may be
erected within the city limits of the city without the owner or erector of the
tower first obtaining a building permit from the city and obtaining the
granting of a special use permit for the tower.
   (C)   Restrictions on number. No more than 1 broadcast tower may be erected
on any tract of land containing 5 acres or less total surface area.
   (D)   Restrictions on height. No broadcast tower may be erected at a height
greater than 75 feet unless a variance to this height restriction is granted
upon sufficient presentation to the city of appropriate plans and
specifications certified by a licensed structural engineer of the state.
   (E)   Setback requirements. All broadcast towers must be set back from all
property lines of at least 1.5 times the maximum height of the tower.
   (F)   Restriction against interference with radio and television reception.
No broadcast tower shall be operated in a manner so as to interfere in any
manner with the reception of commercial television and radio programming
normally and regularly received into the homes of the citizens of the city.
   (G)   Exemption. Broadcast towers owned or operated by the city for the
purpose of providing radio communications for the city’s Fire or Police
Department are exempt from the requirements of this section.
(Ord. 264, passed 11-15-1983; Am. Ord. 359, passed 2-8-1994)
Penalty, see § 151.99
RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION; REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS
§ 151.35 HOUSE NUMBERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   All residences within the city limits of the city shall post their
city assigned house number visible from the street no later than July 31, 1989
and shall maintain the visible number so as to be seen from a distance of no
less than 100 feet from the street.
   (B)   Any person living at a residence for a period of 10 days or longer
shall be a responsible party who can receive citation or complaint. However,
should the residence be vacant, the owner as recorded by the County Clerk’s
Office shall be the responsible party any time after the tenth day of vacancy.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      RESIDENCE. Any structure that is designed or is used as sleeping
facilities overnight.
   (D)   The house number may be posted in a way so that any reasonable person
could identify that property as being the one that the number is assigned. It
can be posted on a fence, a placard, post, or other means of the resident’s
choosing. It may also be placed on the mail box or post and meet the provisions
of this section only if that mail box clearly identifies that residence and
only that residence.
   (E)   This section is not a substitute or exemption from the requirements of
posting designated numbers by the U.S. postal service.
(Ord. 322, passed 5-9-1989)
Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.36 AUTOMATIC FIRE EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS.
   Each residential unit with living space in excess of 5,250 square feet to
have a building permit issued and constructed after the effective date of this
section shall have an automatic sprinkler system installed which conforms to
the applicable codes and standards referenced in this section. The exceptions
are as follows:
   (A)   Fire flow. Residences which are provided with adequate fire flow as
required in Table No. A-III-A-I of the Uniform Fire Code (1997 Ed.) and any
amendment thereto; or
   (B)   New home construction.  
      (1)   All residences to be constructed after the date of this section on
lots platted prior to the effective date of this section are required to
install automatic fire sprinkler systems if the living space in the house
exceeds the following:
         (a)   Lots platted and/or building permits issued prior to June 24,
2003 - 6,000 square feet;
         (b)   Building permits issued between June 24,2003 and September 13,
2005 - 4,500 square feet;
         (c)   Lots platted and/or building permits issued on and after
September 13, 2005 - 5,250 square feet.
      (2)   The term PLATTED means City Council approval of a preliminary plat.
      (3)   The minimum square footage requirement is for residential living
space, exclusive of non- air-conditioned areas of the home, such as garage
space.
      (4)   The term BUILDING PERMIT includes those for residential structures
on both platted and unplatted lots and non-agricultural structures in areas
zoned Special Activities (SA).
   (C)   Additions to existing homes. All homes constructed prior to the
effective date of this section which have not previously been required to
install automatic sprinkler systems shall install an automatic sprinkler system
throughout the home if the home becomes in excess of 6,000 square feet with the
lawful construction of a new addition to the home.
(Ord. 534, passed 4-15-2003; Am. Ord. 543, passed 6-24-2003; Am. Ord. 577,
passed 9-20-2005; Am. Ord. 626, passed 7-8-2008)
Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.37 SWIMMING POOLS; CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Pool location. All swimming pools installed on residential property
within the city shall conform to the following requirements.
      (1)   All setback and side yard requirements shall be measured to the
edge of the water surface of the pool.
      (2)   Side yard requirements shall be as follows:
         (a)   Lots of less than 1 acre: 15 feet; or
         (b)   Lots of 1 acre and greater: 30 feet.
      (3)   Rear setback requirements shall be as follows:
         (a)   Lots of less than 1 acre: 15 feet; or
         (b)   Lots of 1 acre and greater: 30 feet.
      (4)   The pool shall be located to the rear of the rear building line of
the principal residence; provided, however, in the event the principal
residence is irregular shaped, such as an L- or U-shaped home, a portion of the
pool may be inside (to the front of the lot) the rear building line, so long as
the pool is screened from the street by the principal residence.
      (5)   All pool equipment shall be screened from the street and adjoining
properties, with screening materials approved by the city at the time of
application for a building permit. All pool equipment shall be located in the
side or rear yard of the residence, behind the front building line.
      (6)   All provisions relative to construction of swimming pools contained
in the building, plumbing, electrical, and other codes adopted by the city
shall be complied with in the construction of any pool, decking, equipment, and
required fencing.
   (B)   Permits. A building permit must be obtained for the construction of
swimming pools within the city. Plans for the pool, developed in conformity
with this section, proposed screening materials for the equipment, and a filing
fee established by the city shall be required prior to the issuance of a
building permit.
(Ord. 517, passed 1-8-2002)
Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of §§
151.01 et seq. of this code shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor, and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,000. Each
day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense punishable by the same
fine.
(Ord. 477, passed 11-16-1999; Ord. 516, passed 12-11-2001; Ord. 524, passed 8-
27-2002)
   (C)   Any person, firm, company, partnership, corporation, or association
violating any provision of §
151.20 of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined an amount of $1,000 for each violation; and
each and every day that the provisions of those sections are violated shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 510, passed 9-4-2001)
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or
terms of §
151.21 shall be subject to the same penalty as provided for in the
Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the city, as heretofore amended, and upon
conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $2,000 for each
offense; and each and every day such violation shall continue shall be deemed
to constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 667, passed 5-3-2011)
   (E)   Any person who shall violate any provisions of §
151.22 of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 for each
day of violation.
(Ord. 264, passed 11-15-1983)
   (F)   Any person violating any provisions of §
151.35 of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $200. Each and
every 24-hour period in which a violation takes place shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 322, passed 5-9-1989)
   (G)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of §
151.36 of this code shall be subject to the same penalty as provided for in
this chapter, as heretofore amended, and upon conviction shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed the sum of $2,000 for each offense; and each and every day
the violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 534, passed 4-15-2003; Ord. 543, passed 6-24-2003)
   (H)   Any person, firm, company, partnership, corporation, or association
violating any provision of §
151.37 of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined an amount of $1,000 for each violation; and
each and every day that the provisions of that section are violated shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 517, passed 1-8-2002)
CHAPTER 152: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
Section
   
152.01   Definitions
   
152.02   Public nuisance declared
   
152.03   Standards for building use and occupancy
   
152.04   Duties of Building Official or Fire Marshal
   
152.05   Public hearing; correction of violations
   
152.06   Additional authority to secure substandard building
   
152.07   Application
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS STRUCTURES, AND SUBSTANDARD STRUCTURES, also
referred to jointly as DANGEROUS STRUCTURES.
      (1)   Dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and a
hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare;
      (2)   Regardless of its structural condition, unoccupied by its owners,
lessees, or other invitees and unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent
that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a
place of harborage or could be entered or used by children;
      (3)   Boarded up, fenced, or otherwise secured in any manner if:
         (a)   The building constitutes a danger to the public even though
secured from entry; or
         (b)   The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent
unauthorized entry or use of the building in the manner described by division
(2) of this definition.
      (4)   Not in compliance with the city building codes, including but not
limited to the building code, plumbing code, electrical code, or any other code
adopted by the city, or applicable codes, orders, or statutes of the county, or
the state, the city may order its securing, repair, removal, or demolition.
(Ord. 505, passed 5-29-2001)
§ 152.02 PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED.
   All dangerous structures within the terms of §
152.01 of this code are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and the city
may require the vacation, relocation of occupants, securing, repair, removal,
or demolition of the dangerous structure as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 505, passed 5-29-2001)
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.03 STANDARDS FOR BUILDING USE AND OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   The following standards shall be followed by the Building Official,
Fire Marshal, and the City Council, in the event the City Council chooses to
act as a Building Commission, or the Building Commission, in the event the City
Council chooses to appoint a Building Commission. The standards shall be used
under the terms of this chapter to order the securing, repair, removal, or
demolition of a dangerous structure.
      (1)   The continued use and occupancy of a building is prohibited if the
condition of the building is described in §
152.01 above.
      (2)   If the building or structure is not in compliance with the city
building codes, including but not limited to the building code, plumbing code,
electrical code, or any other code adopted by the city, or applicable codes,
orders, or statutes of the county, or the state, the city may order its
securing, repair, removal, or demolition.
      (3)   In the event a structure found to be dangerous can be reasonably
and promptly repaired in order that it will not exist in violation of this
chapter, the city may order the repair of the building.
      (4)   If the structure is in a condition so as to make it dangerous to
the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be
ordered to be vacated.
      (5)   In any case where a structure is found, after notice and hearing,
to be 50% or more damaged, decayed, or deteriorated from its original
condition, or if the building is in a condition to make it dangerous to the
health, safety, morals, or general welfare of its occupants, the city may order
it demolished, subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DEMOLISHED. Includes the cleaning of the property and the removal of all
debris and trash.
(Ord. 505, passed 5-29-2001)
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.04 DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL OR FIRE MARSHAL.
   The duties of the Building Official or Fire Marshal under this chapter shall
be as follows:
   (A)   Inspect or cause to be inspected annually all public buildings,
schools, halls, churches, or other structures as may be deemed necessary for
the purpose of determining whether any conditions exist which render those
places dangerous structures;
   (B)   Inspect any residential, commercial, or other building, wall, or
structure about which complaints are filed by any person to the effect that a
building, wall, or structure is or may be existing in violation of this
chapter;
   (C)   Inspect any building, wall, or structure reported by the Fire or
Police Department of the city as probably existing in violation of the terms of
this chapter;
   (D)   Send a notice in writing, by certified mail, or in person, to the
owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent, and for all other persons having an
interest in the building or structure as shown by the city’s tax roll or the
deed records of the County Clerk, of any building or structure alleged to be a
dangerous building or structure, stating a public hearing will be held to
determine whether the building complies with the standards set forth in this
chapter, as follows:
      (1)   The name and address of the owner and the affected property;
      (2)   The property address or legal description;
      (3)   A description of the hearing, including the time and place;
      (4)   A description of the building or structure deemed a nuisance;
      (5)   A statement of the particulars which make the structure substandard
as defined in this chapter; and
      (6)   A statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee will be
required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be
required to comply with this chapter and the time it will take to reasonably
perform the work.
   (E)   If a building is found by the Building Commission at the public
hearing to be in violation of the standards set forth in this chapter, file a
copy of the notice required by division (D) above in the official public
records of real property for the county;
   (F)   Appear at all hearings conducted by the City Council in its capacity
as Building Commission and testify as to the conditions of dangerous buildings;
and
   (G)   In the event, after notice and hearing, the structure is found to be
dangerous, place the following notice on the structure:
“This building has been found to be a dangerous building by the City of Parker.
This notice is to remain on this structure until this structure is repaired,
vacated, or demolished in accordance with the notice which has been sent to the
owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or agent of this building, and all other
known persons having an interest in said building as shown by the Deed Records
in the office of the County Clerk of Collin County, Texas. It is unlawful to
remove this notice until such notice is complied with.”
(Ord. 505, passed 5-29-2001)
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.05 PUBLIC HEARING; CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The City Council may by separate ordinance create a Building
Commission for the city, and may, by resolution, appoint a chairperson and
members thereof. In the event the city chooses not to create a Building
Commission, then the City Council may, pursuant to this chapter, act as the
Building Commission under this chapter, as follows.
   (B)   (1)   Notice of public hearing. Notice of the hearing may be issued by
the Fire Marshal or Building Official as set forth in §
152.04(D) above. If mailed, notice shall be deemed received by the addressee 5
days after placement of the notice in the U.S. mail, in a properly addressed,
postpaid envelope. Certified mail which is returned to the city “refused” or
“unclaimed” shall be deemed received by the addressee. Notice shall be mailed,
or delivered, to the owner(s), lienholder(s), or mortgagee(s) not less than 21
days prior to the date and time of the public hearing. The city may also
publish the notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, in
addition to written notice. Newspaper notice shall be published not less than
10 days prior to the public hearing.
      (2)   Public hearing. Testimony from the City Building Official, the City
Fire Marshal, and other fact witnesses may be presented regarding the condition
of the building. The owner, lienholder, or mortgagee, or other fact witnesses
may testify as to the condition of the building, the scope of any work that may
be required to comply with this chapter, the time it will take to reasonably
perform the work, and any other matter deemed relevant by the City Council.
      (3)   Findings from public hearing. The City Council, acting as in its
capacity as the Building Commission, shall make written findings of fact from
testimony offered, and shall determine whether or not the building or structure
constitutes a dangerous structure or building, or substandard building,
pursuant to the terms of this chapter. In the event the City Council finds that
the structure is in violation of this chapter, and does therefore constitute a
nuisance, the City Council may order that the building be vacated, secured,
repaired, removed, or demolished by the owner within a reasonable time as set
forth below. The city also may order the occupants be relocated within a
reasonable time. If the owner does not take action within the allotted time,
the city may vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the building or relocate the
occupants at the expense of the owner.
      (4)   Ordered action; notice. After the public hearing, if a building is
found in violation of standards set out in this chapter, the city may order
that the building be vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished by the
owner within a reasonable time as provided by this section. The city also may
order that the occupants be relocated within a reasonable time. If the owner
does not take the ordered action within the allotted time, the city shall make
a diligent effort to discover each mortgagee and lienholder having an interest
in the building or in the property on which the building is located. The city
shall send to each identified mortgagee and lienholder a notice containing:
         (a)   An identification, which is not required to be a legal
description, of the building and the property on which it is located;
         (b)   A description of the violation of city standards that is present
at the building; and
         (c)   A statement that the city will vacate, secure, remove, or
demolish the building or relocate the occupants of the building if the ordered
action is not taken within a reasonable time.
      (5)   Alternative procedure. As an alternative to the procedure
prescribed in division (B)(4), the city may make a diligent effort to discover
each mortgagee and lienholder before conducting the public hearing and may give
them a notice of and an opportunity to comment at the hearing. In addition, the
city may file notice of the hearing in the official public records of real
property in the county in which the property is located. The notice must
contain the name and address of the owner of the affected property if that
information can be determined, a legal description of the affected property,
and a description of the hearing. The filing of the notice is binding on
subsequent grantees, lienholders, or other transferees of an interest in the
property who acquire that interest after the filing of the notice, and
constitutes notice of the hearing on any subsequent recipient of any interest
in the property who acquires that interest after the filing of the notice. If
the city operates under this division, the order issued by the city may specify
a reasonable time as provided by this section for the building to be vacated,
secured, repaired, removed, or demolished by the owner or for the occupants to
be relocated by the owner, and an additional reasonable time as provided by
this section for the ordered action to be taken by any of the mortgagees or
lienholders in the event the owner fails to comply with the order within the
time provided for action by the owner. Under this division, the city is not
required to furnish any notice to a mortgagee or lienholder other than a copy
of the order in the event the owner fails to timely take the ordered action.
      (6)   Filing and publication. Within 10 days after the date that the
order is issued, the city shall:
         (a)   File a copy of the order in the office of the Municipal
Secretary or Clerk; and
         (b)   Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the area in
which the building is located a notice containing:
            1.   The street address or legal description of the property;
            2.   The date of the hearing;
            3.   A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and
            4.   Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be
obtained.
      (7)   Mailed notice. After the hearing, the city shall promptly mail by
certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of the order to the owner of
the building and to any lienholder or mortgagee of the building. The city shall
use its best efforts to determine the identity and address of any owner,
lienholder, or mortgagee of the building. If a notice is mailed according to
this division and the U.S. postal service returns the notice as “refused” or
“unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice shall
be deemed as delivered.
      (8)   Correction required. If a building or structure is in violation of
the requirements of this chapter, the city shall require the owner, lienholder,
or mortgagee of the building to, within 30 days:
         (a)   Secure the building from unauthorized entry; or
         (b)   Repair, remove, or demolish the building, unless the owner or
lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be
performed within 30 days.
      (9)   Time extension. If the city allows the owner, lienholder, or
mortgagee more than 30 days to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the
city shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and
performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee
to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the
work is being performed, as determined by the hearing official. The hearing
official shall be the chair of the Building Commission, or, in the absence of
the Building Commission, the Mayor or the Mayor’s designee.
      (10)   Time limit; exception. The city may not allow the owner,
lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 days to repair, remove, or demolish the
building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order, unless
the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee:
         (a)   Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the
hearing; and
         (b)   Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be
completed within 90 days because of the scope and complexity of the work.
      (11)   Progress reports; surety. If the city allows the owner,
lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 days to complete any part of the work
required to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the city shall require
the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the
city to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules established for
commencement and performance of the work. The order may require that the owner,
lienholder, or mortgagee appear before the hearing official or the hearing
official’s designee to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules. If the
owner, lienholder, or mortgagee owns property, including structures or
improvements on property, within the municipal boundaries that exceeds $100,000
in total value, the city may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to
post a cash or surety bond in an amount adequate to cover the cost of
repairing, removing, or demolishing a building under this division. In lieu of
a bond, the city may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to provide a
letter of credit from a financial institution or a guaranty from a third party
approved by the city. The bond must be posted, or the letter of credit or third
party guaranty provided, not later than the thirtieth day after the date the
city issues the order.
      (12)   Burden of proof. In a public hearing to determine whether a
building complies with the standards set out in an ordinance adopted under this
section, the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has the burden of proof to
demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to comply with the
ordinance and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work.
      (13)   Uncorrected condition; remedies. If the building is not vacated,
secured, repaired, removed, or demolished, or the occupants are not relocated,
within the allotted time, the city may vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the
building or relocate the occupants at its own expense. This division does not
limit the ability of a city to collect on a bond or other financial guaranty
that may be required by division (B)(11) above.
      (14)   Expenses; lien. If a city incurs expenses under division (B)(13)
above, the city may assess the expenses on, and the city has a lien against,
unless it is a homestead as protected by the State Constitution, the property
on which the building was located. The lien is extinguished if the property
owner or another person having an interest in the legal title to the property
reimburses the city for the expenses. The lien arises and attaches to the
property at the time the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the
office of the County Clerk in the county in which the property is located. The
notice must contain the name and address of the owner if that information can
be determined with a reasonable effort, a legal description of the real
property on which the building was located, the amount of expenses incurred by
the city, and the balance due.
      (15)   Privileged lien. If the notice is given and the opportunity to
relocate the tenants of the building or to repair, remove, or demolish the
building is afforded to each mortgagee and lienholder as authorized by
divisions (B)(4), (B)(5), or (B)(7) above, the lien is a privileged lien
subordinate only to tax liens.
      (16)   Hearing. A hearing under this section may be held by a civil
municipal court.
      (17)   Effort. A city satisfies the requirements of this section to make
a diligent effort, to use its best efforts, or to make a reasonable effort to
determine the identity and address of an owner, a lienholder, or a mortgagee if
the city searches the following records:
         (a)   County real property records of the county in which the building
is located;
         (b)   Appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which
the building is located;
         (c)   Records of the Secretary of State;
         (d)   Assumed name records of the county in which the building is
located;
         (e)   Tax records of the city; and
         (f)   Utility records of the city.
(Ord. 505, passed 5-29-2001)
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.06 ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY TO SECURE SUBSTANDARD BUILDING.
   (A)   The city has established in this chapter minimum standards for the use
and occupancy of buildings in the city regardless of the date of their
construction. The city reserves the right to adopt additional ordinances as
necessary, if any, to carry out this section.
   (B)   The city may secure a building the city determines:
      (1)   Violates the minimum standards; and
      (2)   Is unoccupied or is occupied only by persons who do not have a
right of possession to the building.
   (C)   Before the eleventh day after the date the building is secured, the
city shall give notice to the owner by:
      (1)   Personally serving the owner with written notice;
      (2)   Depositing the notice in the U.S. mail addressed to the owner at
the owner’s post office address;
      (3)   Publishing the notice at least twice within a 10-day period in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the building is located
if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner’s post office address is
unknown; or
      (4)   Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building if
personal service cannot be obtained and the owner’s post office address is
unknown.
   (D)   The notice must contain:
      (1)   An identification, which is not required to be a legal description,
of the building and the property on which it is located;
      (2)   A description of the violation of the municipal standards that is
present at the building;
      (3)   A statement that the city will secure or has secured, as the case
may be, the building; and
      (4)   An explanation of the owner’s entitlement to request a hearing
about any matter relating to the city’s securing of the building.
   (E)   The city shall conduct a hearing at which the owner may testify or
present witnesses or written information about any matter relating to the
city’s securing of the building if, within 30 days after the date the city
secures the building, the owner files with the city a written request for the
hearing. The city shall conduct the hearing within 20 days after the date the
request is filed.
   (F)   A city has the same authority to assess expenses under this section as
it has to assess expenses under Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, § 214.001(f). A lien is
created under this section in the same manner that a lien is created under Tex.
Loc. Gov’t Code, § 214.001(n) and is subject to the same conditions as a lien
created under that section.
   (G)   The authority granted by this section is in addition to that granted
by Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, § 214.001.
(Ord. 505, passed 5-29-2001)
§ 152.07 APPLICATION.
   This chapter is hereby adopted as an ordinance of the city, and the
provisions contained herein shall apply to all dangerous structures as herein
defined, which are now in existence or which may hereafter become dangerous in
the jurisdiction of the city, as defined in this chapter.
(Ord. 505, passed 5-29-2001)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   Any person, firm, company, partnership, corporation, or association
violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined an amount of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each violation; and each and every day that
the provisions of this chapter are violated shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
(Ord. 505, passed 5-29-2001)
CHAPTER 153: SIGN CONTROL
Section
   
153.01   Purpose
   
153.02   Application jurisdiction
   
153.03   Definitions
   
153.04   Prohibited signs
   
153.05   Authorized signs
   
153.06   Nonconforming signs
   
153.07   Structural requirements
   
153.08   Signs on public property
   
153.09   Permits
   
153.10   Sign Control Board; powers and duties
   
153.11   Conflicts
 
   
153.99   Penalty
§ 153.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable regulations for the
design, construction, installation, and maintenance of all exterior signs
within the city in order to:
   (A)   Balance the right of individuals to convey their messages and the
right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of
signs;
   (B)   Further the objectives of the city’s Comprehensive Plan;
   (C)   Protect the public health, safety, and welfare;
   (D)   Reduce traffic hazards;
   (E)   Facilitate the creation of an attractive and harmonious community;
   (F)   Protect property values;
   (G)   Promote economic development; and
   (H)   Preserve the right of free speech exercised through the use of signs
containing noncommercial messages.
(Ord. 595, passed 5-23-2006)
§ 153.02 APPLICATION JURISDICTION.
   The sign regulations are effective in the city, and are extended to and
enforceable in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, pursuant to Tex.
Loc. Gov’t Code, Chapter 216. All sign regulations limited or defined by zoning
district (such as “residential”) shall also apply in the ETJ.
(Ord. 595, passed 5-23-2006)
§ 153.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTER. To change the size, shape or outline, copy, nature of message,
intent, or type of sign.
   BULLETIN BOARD. A sign containing information where a portion of that
information may be periodically changed, provided that the change shall be
effected by the replacement or interchange of letters, numbers, or other
graphic symbols by insertion, attachment, or similar means. The use of slate,
chalkboard, cardboard, or similar material with pencil, chalk, crayon, or
similar types of marking is prohibited.
   CANOPY. A roof-like structure which extends horizontally more than 1 foot
from the face of a building wall and does not have a structural border.
   CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL. The person designated by the City Administrator.
   COPY. Logos, characters, symbols, or any other portion of a sign which
conveys a message or information.
   ERECT. To build, construct, attach, hang, place suspended, or affix, and
shall also include the painting of signs on the exterior surface of a building
or structure, and also includes the painting or affixing of signs to the
exterior or interior surface of windows, and includes signs located interior to
a building but readily visible from the exterior.
   GROSS SURFACE AREA OF SIGNS. The entire area within a single continuous
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of each sign. A sign having information
on 2 surfaces shall be considered as a single sign, provided that the surfaces
are located back-to-back. A sign having information on 3 or more surfaces shall
be calculated as the sum of all portions and evaluated as a single sign. If 2
or more  signs share a single structure, each sign or panel may be considered
separately for square footage purposes, provided that each sign or panel has no
relationship to the others, and that the combined area of those signs cannot
exceed the total square footage allowed when evaluated as a single sign. For
signs so constructed, where related portions are located on separate structures
or vehicles, the GROSS SURFACE AREA shall be calculated as the sum of all
portions and evaluated as a single sign. The GROSS SURFACE AREA OF SIGNS less
than 6 feet in height and used as an element of landscaping will be determined
by measurement of a single continuous line enclosing the extreme limits of the
sign, provided that this calculation shall not include planter boxes, screening
walls, retaining walls, and similar improvements.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs,
or outline illuminated directly or indirectly by electric lights, luminous
tubes, or other means.
   MONUMENT SIGN. Any sign mounted on a base and which is 6 feet in height or
less, with a maximum area of 35 square feet, as further defined in §
153.05(B)(14). An example of a MONUMENT SIGN is attached to Ord. 595 as Exhibit
A.
   NONCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL. Any material which will not ignite at or below a
temperature of 1,200°F and will not continue to burn or glow at that
temperature or shall have a flame spread of 25 feet or less.
   ON-PREMISES SIGN. A freestanding sign identifying or advertising a business,
person, or activity, and installed and maintained on the same premises as the
business, person, or activity, event, place, service, or product not
principally located or primarily manufactured or sold on the premises on which
the sign is located.
   PROJECTING STRUCTURES. Covered structures of a permanent nature which are
constructed of approved building material, specifically excluding canvas or
fabric material, and where those structures are an integral part of the main
building or permanently attached to a main building and do not extend over
public property. PROJECTING STRUCTURES include marquee, canopy, and fixed-
awning-type structures.
   ROOF LINE. The height which is defined by the intersection of the roof of
the building with the wall of the building; except, for mansard-type roofs, the
ROOF LINE means the top of the lower slope of the roof. Roofs with parapet
walls completely around the building and not exceeding 4 feet in height may be
considered as the ROOF LINE for the purposes of this chapter.
   SIGN. An outdoor structure, sign, display, light device, figure, painting,
drawing, message, plaque, poster, billboard, or other thing that is designed,
intended, or used to advertise or inform.
   STRUCTURAL TRIM. The molding, battens, cappings, nailing strips, latticing,
and platforms which are attached to the sign structure.
   VEHICLE. Any automobile, truck, camper, tractor, van, trailer, or any device
capable of being transported, and shall be considered a VEHICLE in both moving
and stationary modes, irrespective of state of repair or condition.
(Ord. 595, passed 5-23-2006)
§ 153.04 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   (A)   Signs prohibited by this chapter include, but are not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   Signs which are inadequately maintained so as to show evidence of
deterioration, including peeling, rust, dirt, fading, discoloration, or holes.
Damaged signs shall be repaired or removed within 30 days of receipt of notice
from the city;
      (2)   Signs which advertise a business or product which is no longer in
existence. Abandoned or outdated signs shall be replaced or removed within 30
days of receipt of notice from the city;
      (3)   Signs which are erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent
free ingress to or egress from any door, window, or fire escape. No sign of any
kind shall be attached to a stand pipe or fire escape;
      (4)   Signs which obstruct free and clear vision at any street
intersection;
      (5)   Signs which interfere with, obstruct the view of, or may be
confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device because of
position, shape, or color;
      (6)   Signs which use the words “stop,” “look,” “go slow,” “caution,”
“danger,” “warning,” or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in a
manner that interferes with, misleads, or confuses traffic; except those signs
placed by federal, state, or local governmental authority for public safety and
traffic regulation purposes;
      (7)   Signs which constitute a hazard to safety or health by reason of
inadequate design, construction, repair, or maintenance;
      (8)   Signs which are illuminated with lights which cause a glare into or
upon the surrounding area or any property used for residential purposes or
which distract operators of vehicles or pedestrians on a public right-of-way;
      (9)   Signs which contain reflectors or lights or illuminations that
flash, move, rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker, vary in intensity or color,
or use intermittent electrical pulsation;
      (10)   Signs which display any matter in which the dominant theme of the
material taken as a whole appeals to a prurient interest in sex, or is patently
offensive because it affronts contemporary community standards relating to the
description or representation of sexual matters, and is utterly without
redeeming social value;
      (11)   Signs which are painted on or attached to a motor vehicle used
primarily for the display of the sign. This chapter shall not prohibit the
identification of a business or its products or services on a vehicle(s)
operated and parked in a manner appropriate to the normal course of business;
      (12)   Signs which have visible moving, revolving, or rotating parts or
visible mechanical movement of any kind, achieved by electrical or mechanical
means, except for time-temperature-date signs;
      (13)   Signs attached to or located upon outdoor exposed amenities such
as trees, street signs, utility poles, or fences, which are visible from any
street;
      (14)   Signs which are off-premises signs. This includes, and is not
limited to, builder directional signs, except as stated in §
153.05(B)(1)(b), (c), and (d);
      (15)   Signs or portions thereof which are located on, or project or
extend over, any public right- of-way or easements, any public sidewalk,
street, alley, or other public property;
      (16)   Wind device signs that cause confusion or obstruction to traffic
on adjacent public streets;
      (17)   Signs which are billboards, poster panels, or painted bulletins,
or which promote or advertise places, entities, commodities, or services which
are either not offered, or not limited to being offered on the premises on
which the sign is located; and
      (18)   Signs which are larger than 16 square feet in area, or taller than
6 feet, as measured from ground level to the top of the sign. The height
restriction is waived if the sign is lawfully attached to a building, or
otherwise permitted by this chapter.
   (B)   In addition, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, cause to
have erected, or allow to remain erected any sign or condition prohibited in
this section and the person shall remove that sign or correct that condition
immediately upon notice by the Chief Building Official.
      (1)   No person shall erect, maintain, or permit the erection of any
balloon or other floating device anchored to the ground or to any structure,
except as allowed by other provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   No person shall attach any sign, paper, or other material, or
paint, stencil, or write any name, number (except house numbers), or otherwise
mark on any sidewalk, curb, gutter, street, tree, tower, utility pole, public
building, public fence, or public structure for advertising purposes, except
those signs as are permitted by this chapter to be placed in the public right-
of-way.
      (3)   No sign located internal or external to a building or vehicle shall
be illuminated to an intensity to cause glare or brightness to a degree that
could constitute a hazard or nuisance. Digital display devices showing time,
temperature, or any printed message may be allowed only by special permit of
the City Council.
      (4)   No person shall place on or suspend from the exterior of any
building, pole, structure, projecting structure, parkway, driveway, or parking
area any goods, wares, merchandise, or other advertising object or structure
for the purpose of advertising those items, other than a sign as defined,
regulated, and prescribed by this chapter, except as otherwise allowed by
ordinance or code provisions controlling the outside storage and display of
goods, wares, or merchandise.
      (5)   No cloth, paper, banner, flag, device, or other similar advertising
matter shall be permitted to be attached, suspended from, or allowed to hang
loose from any sign, building, or structure, except as allowed by other
provisions of this chapter, or in the special activities district. In the
special activities district, signs described in this division (B)(5) are
permitted, so long as they describe a specific event to be held on the
premises, are not in place more than 2 weeks prior, nor 3 days after the event
starts and finishes, and do not constitute a nuisance, hazard, or traffic
safety issue.
      (6)   No lighted sign shall be erected within 150 feet of a residential
district unless lighting is shielded from view in the direction of the
residential district.
      (7)   No signs attached to a trailer, skid, or similar mobile structure,
where the primary use of the structure is for sign purposes, will be permitted.
This provision does not restrict the identification signing on vehicles used
for delivery service, interstate commerce, or any bona fide transportation
activity.
      (8)   Signs attached to or upon any vehicle shall be prohibited where any
such vehicle is parked within 20 feet from a street right-of-way on a site.
Signs attached to a vehicle shall be incidental to the bona fide use, for
transportation purposes, of the vehicle to which the sign is attached. If a
vehicle displaying a sign is not a bona fide use for transportation purposes,
the vehicle shall be deemed to be a freestanding sign and subject to all
provisions of this chapter pertaining to freestanding signs. It shall be a
rebuttable presumption that a vehicular sign is not a bona fide use for
transportation if the vehicle is stopped, parked, or allowed to remain at the
same location within the site for any period exceeding 24 hours or contains
arrows, directional information, or promotional advertising relating to the
business or activity.
      (9)   No lot or tract of land shall, unless otherwise permitted by this
chapter, have more than 1 sign for each 300 feet of front footage, and no more
than 1 sign for each 2 acres of any single tract.
(Ord. 595, passed 5-23-2006)
Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.05 AUTHORIZED SIGNS.
   (A)   Authorized signs in the city may be either monument style or attached
to a building, unless otherwise specified.
   (B)   Specifically, authorized signs described in this section shall conform
to the requirements of this section, as set forth below.
      (1)   Real estate.
         (a)   Residential-onsite.  Signs not exceeding 8 square feet in area
and not exceeding 4 feet in height in residential districts which advertise the
sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which such signs are located only.
The number of signs shall be limited to 1 per lot or complex, except, where
such lot or complex abuts more than 1 dedicated public street, 1 additional
sign shall be allowed for the additional public street.
         (b)   Temporary directional-offsite. Temporary realtor directional
signs located off-premises advertising the sale of real estate, providing such
signs do not exceed 4 square feet in area, and providing that signs may contain
the word "open" and may contain a directional indicator. Such signs may not be
located in street right-of-way, including medians, and/or obstruct vision of
traffic or pedestrians, nor be constructed of paper or cardboard. Signs must be
kept well painted and in good condition and may be utilized only from Friday at
12:00 noon until the following Monday at 12:00 noon. No lot, or subdivision, or
lots within a subdivision, shall have more than an aggregate of 10 signs placed
in Parker pursuant to this section. Each subdivision may have a total of 10
signs, which may be any combination of developer, builder, or realtor signs.
         (c)   Undeveloped acreage-onsite.  Signs for undeveloped or not yet
platted acreage of not less than 3 acres may have signs as follows:
            1.   Not larger than 32 square feet per side, 64 square feet total
per sign;
            2.   Not higher than 10 feet in height above the ground surface of
the tract;
            3.   For tracts greater than 3, and less than 50 acres, there may
be 1 sign on each public roadway abutting the tract;
            4.   For tracts of 50 acres and larger, there may be 2 signs on
each public roadway abutting the tract; and
            5.   The sign or signs must be set back 25 feet from the boundary
of the tract.
         (d)   Subdivision directional-offsite. A platted subdivision of not
less than 10 acres may have not more than 2 directional signs as follows:
            1.   Must be within 1 mile of the subdivision;
            2.   Located on a collector or arterial road frontage;
            3.   Not less than a 25 foot setback;
            4.   The 2 signs must not be closer together than 1,000 feet;
            5.   The sign must be removed upon issuance of any building permit
for any of the last 4 lots in this subdivision; or 5 years from the date of the
sign permit to construct such signs, whichever comes first. The applicant may
request an extension from the Sign Control Board.
            6.   Not larger than 32 square feet per side, 64 square feet total
per sign; and
            7.   Not higher than 10 feet in height above the ground surface of
the tract.
         (e)   Residential subdivision permanent identification signs.
Residential subdivision permanent identification signs shall include the
following characteristics:
            1.   The sign shall be permanent in nature, and shall be approved
as a part of the landscaping and entrance treatment, if any, at the entrance,
or entrances, to the subdivision. The purpose of the subdivision identification
sign is the permanent identification of the subdivision, rather than the
identification of the builder, contractors, realtors, or other persons or
entities responsible for the development and sale of the real estate within the
subdivision. The residential subdivision identification sign shall comply with
the requirements for monument signs in division (F) below, or as they may be
specifically authorized by the City Council as a part of the approval process
for the landscaping treatment for the subdivision entrance.
            2.   Without other authorization by the City Council, the maximum
size of a residential subdivision identification sign shall be 35 square feet
in area and 6 feet in height. An example of residential identification
subdivision signs is attached to Ord. 595, as Exhibit B.
   (C)   Temporary political signs.
      (1)   No political sign may be placed in any location that obstructs
vision for traffic. Any sign in violation of the provision of this section may
be removed by the city staff if the sign creates a hazardous condition.
      (2)   All political signs shall comply with all state and federal
requirements, including Tex. Election Code, Chapter 255 and 61.003, and Tex.
Trans. Code, Chapters 392 and 393.
      (3)   No political sign may be placed on public property, including city
right of way and road easements, except in compliance with division (C)(5),
electioneering at polling locations, below.
      (4)   No political sign may be: larger than 36 square feet, and/or more
than 8 feet high, illuminated and/or have any moving elements.
      (5)   Electioneering at polling locations.
         (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide reasonable
regulations for electioneering on city owned or controlled public property when
the property is used as an election polling place. The regulations contained
herein are to mitigate against any safety concerns, prevent damage to public
property, and ensure that the property is sufficiently available for its
patrons who use the facilities other than for election purposes.
         (b)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
            ELECTIONEERING.  The posting, use, or distribution of political
signs or literature.
            PROHIBITED AREA.  The area within which Tex. Election Code § 85.036
(a), as amended, prohibits electioneering during the time an early voting or
voting place is open for the conduct of early voting or voting.
            VOTING PERIOD.  The period each day beginning the hour the polls
are open for voting and ending when the polls close or the last voter has
voted, whichever is later on election day and early voting days. The period for
a runoff election shall be considered to be a separate voting period.
         (c)   Regulations and exceptions.
            1.   The following regulations apply to electioneering on the
premises of public property that occurs outside the prohibited area during the
voting period.
               a.   It is an offense for any person to leave any electioneering
sign or literature on public property that is used as a polling place other
than during the voting period and for 72 hours before and/or after the voting
period.
               b.   It is an offense for any person to attach, place or
otherwise affix or erect any electioneering sign, literature or material in any
area designated as a planting or landscaped area or to any tree, shrub,
building, pole, or other improvement on public property used as a polling
location.
               c.   It is an offense for any person to place any electioneering
sign or literature within 10 feet of the public road way adjacent to the public
property where a polling location is located.
               d.   It is an offense for any person to place an electioneering
sign on the premises of a polling location that exceeds 36 square feet and is
more than 8 feet in height.
               e.   In addition to imposing any criminal penalty,
electioneering sign(s) located in violation of this section may be removed and
disposed of by the entity in control of the public property.
               f.   The authority to conduct electioneering on public property
under this section is limited to the property on the premises where the voting
is conducted and only for the voting period.
            2.   The regulations set forth in division 1. above shall not apply
to any city authorized signs, materials or other messages on its property.
   (D)   Temporary construction signs denoting the architect, engineer,
contractor, subcontractor, and/or financier and temporary signs denoting the
future location of a particular business, retail center or institution subject
to 1 such construction sign and 1 such future location sign per street adjacent
to the construction site or future location site and each sign not to exceed 32
square feet in area, and providing such signs do not extend above 10 feet in
height, measured from ground level, and providing such signs are located on the
premises where construction or location being advertised is or will be
occurring. Only 1 construction sign and 1 future location sign may abut a given
street. Such signs shall be removed upon issuance of any occupancy permit.
   (E)   Occupational signs denoting only the name and profession of an
occupant in a commercial, public, office or institutional building in all
residential districts and areas and not exceeding 3 square feet in area.
   (F)   Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection
when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other
noncombustible materials. Such signs shall not exceed 4 square feet in area for
each wall facing a street.
   (G)   Flags, emblems and insignia of the United States, federal agencies and
any state or local government body including corporate and logo flags, and
decorative displays for holidays or legal public demonstrations which do not
contain advertising and are not used as such. Corporate and logo flags shall be
limited to 1 per site when accompanied by a U.S. and/or state flag of equal
size for larger. Corporate and logo flags shall be limited in size to 20 square
feet for sites of less than 1 acre, 30 square feet for sites of more than 1
acre but less than 5 acres, and 40 square feet for sites of 5 or more acres,
and 40 square feet for sites in residential zoned districts regardless of
acreage.
   (H)   Signs not exceeding 3 square feet in area may be suspended from the
underside of a projecting structure. The lowest portion of such signs must be 8
feet above a walkway.
   (I)   Signs not exceeding 16 square feet and not exceeding 6 feet in height
for establishments providing engine fuel sales which advertise prices of fuel
on premises, providing such sign shall be permanently attached to a structure.
No establishment shall have more than 1 sign per street front.
   (J)   Signs not exceeding 1 square foot in area affixed to windows or doors
which will identify emergency telephone numbers, hours and security
information.
   (K)   Signs on sites used by public, religious institutions in any use
district where such signs are an integral part of the site architecture or
landscaping. A maximum of 2 signs per adjacent public street shall be allowed.
All other sites shall not be allowed more than 1 monument sign and 1 attached
sign. Attached signs shall not exceed 24 square feet in area and shall be
located entirely below the roof line of the building. Attached signs for
educational institutions shall be permissible in these districts; providing,
however, no more than 1 attached sign and 1 attached bulletin board will be
allowed per building. The letters for the attached sign shall be not more than
12 inches in height and the bulletin board shall be no more than 25 square feet
in size. Monument signs shall not exceed 24 square feet in area and 6 feet in
height, except for religious institutions wall shall not exceed 60 square feet
in area.
   (L)   Signs in any district or area not to exceed 3 square feet to advertise
available employment.
   (M)   Signs containing street address numbers, providing that such numbers
shall be no larger than 12 inches in height, and providing that street address
numbers shall be limited to not more than 2 sets per building.
   (N)   Where authorized by this section, monument signs are preferred by the
city. A monument sign shall require a sign permit to be issued by the Chief
Building Official, and shall include the following characteristics:
      (1)   All monument signs shall be placed in concrete bases or footings.
Monument signs may be constructed only of materials that are noncombustible or
slow burning in the case of plastic inserts and faces and may be supported by
noncombustible material only, and finished in a presentable manner; wood or
nonpainted steel supports are specifically prohibited. Heavy timber and other
materials may be used if approved by the Chief Building Official.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         MULTIPLE-USE MONUMENT SIGNS. Monument signs that provide
identification or advertisement of multiple businesses, services, products,
persons, organizations, places or buildings.
         SINGLE-USE MONUMENT SIGNS. Monument signs that provide identification
or advertisement of a specific business, service, product, person,
organization, place or building.
      (3)   Monument signs shall be landscaped around the base of the sign in
an area equal to 4 feet for each square foot of sign and base area. No monument
sign shall obstruct the vision of traffic on public streets or be constructed
so as to interfere with site lines at elevations between 2 1/4 feet and 8 feet
above the top of the adjacent roadway within a triangular area formed by the
intersection of adjacent curb lines from a point on each curb line 20 feet from
the intersection. Monument signs shall be limited to a height of 6 feet or
less, and an area of 35 square feet for single-use signs and 50 square feet for
multiple-use signs.
   (O)   Homeowners association signs.
      (1)   A Homeowners Association in Parker with not fewer than 5 property
owners as members may temporarily post signs in the right of way in accordance
with this division. The HOA may post such signs only to provide notice of
Homeowners Association events or meetings.
      (2)   The Homeowners Association may place not more than a total of 4
signs, each not more than 5 square feet in sign area, nor more than 4 feet in
height, as measured from grade level to the top of the sign. The signs may be
placed not more than 72 hours before the event or meeting, and the signs may
not remain in place more than 24 hours after the event or meeting.
      (3)   Each sign shall clearly identify the name of the Homeowners
Association, and provide an address and telephone number for the agent or
office of the Homeowners Association responsible for the placement of the sign.
The HOA signs all must be placed within the boundaries of the Homeowners
Association.
   (P)   Garage sales signs.
      (1)   A Parker resident desiring to hold a garage sale may place not more
than 4 signs, each of them more than 4 square feet in area, nor more than 4
feet in height, as measured from grade level to the top of the sign to
advertise the sale. The signs may only be placed between sunrise, and sunset,
of the day the sale is taking place.
      (2)   The signs may be placed only on the property on which the sale is
being conducted, and not more than 3 off-site signs. Each sign will clearly
identify the name, address, and telephone number of the person conducting the
sale.
   (Q)   Municipal signs. The city may place any municipal signage on such
municipally owned property, or public right-of-ways, as the city may determine
complies with county, state, and federal law.
(Ord. 595, passed 5-23-2006; Am. Ord. 711B, passed 4-15-2014) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.06 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   A permanent sign erected within the city prior to the effective date of this
chapter, which does not conform to the regulations of this chapter, shall be
deemed to be a nonconforming sign which shall be allowed to continue, with
normal maintenance and repair only; provided, however, a nonconforming sign may
not be enlarged upon, expanded, or extended, except as otherwise provided
herein. It is not the intent of this section to encourage the survival of
nonconforming signs; to the contrary, nonconforming signs are discouraged and
contrary to the intent and purpose of this chapter.
   (A)   Obsolescence or destruction. A nonconforming sign shall not be
enlarged, expanded, extended, replaced, or rebuilt in case of obsolescence or
total destruction by any means or cause.
   (B)   Repair or reconstruction if damaged. In the event a nonconforming sign
is damaged by any means or cause and the repair or reconstruction cost,
whichever is applicable, equals or exceeds 50% of the fair market value of the
sign at the time of the damage, it must be removed or brought into compliance
with this chapter.
   (C)   Removal of unlawful signs. In case any nonconforming sign is enlarged,
expanded, extended, replaced, or rebuilt in violation of any of the terms of
this chapter, the City Administrator or City Secretary shall give written
notice by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the owner, lessee, or person responsible for the sign to remove the sign or
bring the sign into compliance with this chapter. If the order is not complied
with within 10 days, the City Administrator or City Secretary shall revoke the
sign permit, if any, or cause a complaint to be filed in the Municipal Court.
   (D)   Placement and removal of signs. All signs shall be placed by the owner
or the party in control of the property or with the permission of the owner or
party in control, and the owner or party in control shall be responsible for
the prompt removal of any sign in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (E)   Nonconforming temporary business signs and portable signs shall be
removed or made to conform with the provisions of this chapter within 30 days
after the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 595, passed 5-23-2006)
Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.07 STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Compliance with building code. All signs and sign structures shall
comply with the pertinent requirements of the building codes of the city.
   (B)   Transmission lines, minimum spacing. All signs and sign structures
shall have a minimum clearance of 8 feet vertically and 8 feet horizontally
from any transmission line carrying 750 volts or greater.
   (C)   Wiring. Any wiring to a lighted sign, where approved, shall be
installed underground, except where impractical or infeasible, as determined by
the Chief Building Official, and in those instances shall be at least 14 feet
above ground level.
(Ord. 595, passed 5-23-2006)
Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.08 SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)    It shall be unlawful to place a sign in or upon any public property,
including but not limited to a public street, sidewalk, right-of-way, easement,
curb, grounds, bridge, or building, unless express consent therefor shall have
been first granted by the City Council. This division shall not apply to a
public employee in the regular course and scope of his or her employment. Signs
authorized and placed by federal, state, or local governmental authorities are
permitted.
   (B)   Impoundment.  
      (1)   Any sign in violation of division (A) of this section may be
removed without notice to the owner thereof. The code enforcement officer,
employees of the Police Department, and the Department of Public Works are
hereby authorized to remove any such signs and transport or cause the same to
be transported to a location to be designated by the code enforcement officer.
The city shall maintain records of where the signs were located when they were
so removed and the date on which they were so removed, and shall hold the same
in the storage area for a period of not less than 30 days.
      (2)   Any sign so held may be redeemed by the owner thereof upon the
payment of a fee to the city consisting of a total of $50 for hauling the same
to storage, plus $10 per day storage fee for each day the sign is stored. This
fee shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any fine imposed upon the owner
for violation of this section. Any sign impounded and stored and not redeemed
by the owner thereof within 30 days may be disposed of or sold at public
auction in the same manner as surplus property of the city.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Public athletic facilities. Public athletic facilities may have
signs attached to fences surrounding the facility to give public information or
team sponsor advertising. Except for scoreboards, these signs shall not project
above the fence line and shall face the athletic facility.
      (2)   Public and private parks. Public and private parks may have signs
placed by the city to give information or regulations concerning park use.
   (D)   Painted signs. Painted signs shall be on permanently weatherproofed
materials, and all sign surfaces shall be painted or treated with
weatherproofed materials.
(Ord. 595, passed 5-23-2006)
Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.09 PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful for
any person to erect, relocate, or structurally alter any sign or other
advertising structure as defined in this chapter, without first obtaining a
sign permit from the City Secretary, and paying the permit fee required by
resolution adopted by the city. Additionally, all illuminated signs shall be
subject to the provisions of the electrical code and its requisite permit fees.
No permit is required for change of copy or message or for repair, repainting,
or maintenance that does not entail structural change. Permit fees may be
established by the City Administrator. The failure to pay the established
permit fee, or obtain a required permit, is a violation of this chapter.
      (1)   Permits shall be required in all cases for the following signs:
         (a)   Monument signs;
         (b)   Bulletin board signs;
         (c)   Any signs of a size greater than 16 square feet, if otherwise
permitted by this chapter; and
         (d)   All signs which are illuminated.
      (2)   As a part of the permit process, the Chief Building Official may
require that an illuminated sign may be placed on a timer. Absent specific
authorization from the Chief Building Official, any illuminated sign which is
required to be placed on a timer shall cause the illumination to be turned off
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following morning.
   (B)   Application.
      (1)   Erect, alter, replace, or relocate. Applications for permits to
erect, alter, replace, or relocate a sign shall contain or have attached
thereto the following information:
         (a)   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
         (b)   The location of the building, structure, or lot to which or upon
which the sign is to be attached or erected;
         (c)   The position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings or
structures, including other signs;
         (d)   Two blueprint or ink drawings of the plans and specifications
are required, including electrical wiring, construction, type of materials,
method of attachment to the building or structure, and foundation for
freestanding signs;
         (e)   Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing the structure is
designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount
required by this chapter and all other laws and ordinances of the city;
         (f)   The name and address of the person erecting the sign;
         (g)   The zoning classification of the property on which the sign is
to be located, and the zoning classification of all property within 200 feet;
and
         (h)   Other information as the Building Official shall require to show
full compliance with this chapter and all other laws and ordinances of the
city.
      (2)   Repair. Application for sign repair permits shall contain or have
attached thereto the following information:
         (a)   The name, address, and telephone number of the sign owner;
         (b)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person providing
the repair service;
         (c)   The location of the building, structure, or lot upon which the
sign is located;
         (d)   A description of the repair activity to be performed; and
         (e)   Other information as the Building Official shall require to show
full compliance with this chapter and all other laws and ordinances of the
city.
      (3)   Illuminated signs. Prior to issuance of a sign permit for a sign in
which electrical wiring and connections are to be used, the Electrical
Inspector shall examine the plans and specifications submitted with the
application to ensure compliance with the electrical code of the city and with
the requirements of the Underwriters’ Laboratories. The Electrical Inspector
shall approve the application if it meets these requirements and disapprove it
if it does not. Approval of an application by the Electrical Inspector is
required before the Building Official may issue a sign permit. An electrical
permit is also required.
(Ord. 595, passed 5-23-2006)
Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.10 SIGN CONTROL BOARD; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Sign Control Board shall have the following powers and perform the
following duties.
   (A)   The City Council may authorize the Planning and Zoning Commission to
serve as the Sign Control Board. In the event the Planning and Zoning
Commission is not appointed by the City Council as the Sign Control Board, the
City Council may serve as the Sign Control Board, or may appoint a separate
board for sign control.
   (B)   The Sign Control Board may sit as a board of appeals in public
hearings for purposes of this chapter. In considering the requests for
variation to requirements of this chapter, the Sign Control Board shall
consider, but not be limited to, the degree of variance, the reasons for the
variance requested, the location of the variance request, the duration of the
requested variance, the effect on public safety, protection of neighborhood
property, the degree of hardship or injustice involved, and the effect of the
variance on the general plan for signing within the city. The Sign Control
Board shall grant the variance requested, grant a variance of a greater or
lesser nature than requested, or deny a variance request.
   (C)   All action on variance requests shall be submitted to the City Council
for review, and the decisions of the Board shall become final unless reversed
or modified by the City Council at the second City Council meeting following
the Sign Control Board meeting at which formal action was taken by the Board.
In reviewing the action of the Board, or variance requests, the Council shall
consider the records made at the hearing before the Sign Control Board.
   (D)   The Sign Control Board shall conduct studies, and prepare opinions and
general plans as requested by the City Council.
   (E)   The Sign Control Board may, from time to time, recommend to the City
Council amendments or changes to this chapter.
(Ord. 595, passed 5-23-2006)
§ 153.11 CONFLICTS.
   Any conflict with the provisions of Tex. Trans. Code, Chapter 393 and 394,
shall be resolved in favor of this chapter.
(Ord. 595, passed 5-23-2006)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to the same penalty as provided herein, and upon
conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500 for each
offense; and each and every day the violation shall continue shall be deemed to
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 595, passed 5-23-2006)
CHAPTER 154: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
   
154.01   Flood damage prevention ordinance adopted
 
   
154.99   Penalty
§ 154.01 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE ADOPTED.
   The City Council hereby adopts the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, marked
and attached to Ord. 422 as Exhibit A and included herein for all purposes.
(Ord. 422, passed 8-26-1997)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   Any person, firm, corporation, or political subdivision who violates
any of the ordinance adopted in §
154.01 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction in the Municipal
Court, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $2,000 for each offense.
Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense, and that violation is hereby declared to be a common nuisance which
may be abated by the city in any manner authorized by law, including injunction
and an action for damages.
(Ord. 422, passed 8-26-1997)
CHAPTER 155: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Title
   
155.002   Policy
   
155.003   Purposes
   
155.004   Authority
   
155.005   Jurisdiction
   
155.006   Extraterritorial jurisdiction
   
155.007   Applications pending
   
155.008   Minimum requirements; abrogation and greater restrictions
   
155.009   Amendment
   
155.010   Definitions
Platting Procedures
   
155.025   General procedures; establishment
   
155.026   Land study
   
155.027   Plat approval
   
155.028   Plat amendments
   
155.029   Extension or reinstatement of plat approval
   
155.030   Final plat approval
   
155.031   As-built plat plan; record drawings
   
155.032   Appeals to Council
Improvements; Procedures, Standards, and Requirements
   
155.045   Completion, acceptance, and maintenance
   
155.046   Construction procedures
   
155.047   Inspection
   
155.048   Issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy
   
155.049   General requirements
   
155.050   Lot design and improvements
   
155.051   Glare
   
155.052   Streets and thoroughfares
   
155.053   Pedestrian access easements; trails
   
155.054   Drainage
   
155.055   Sewage facilities
   
155.056   Water facilities
   
155.057   Public and private utilities
   
155.058   Parks and trails
   
155.059   Public use; land reservation
   
155.060   Homeowners associations; common amenities
   
155.061   Design standards and specifications
   
155.062   Additional requirements
Replatting; Plat Amendment; Vacation
   
155.075   Replatting of land
   
155.076   Amending plat
   
155.077   Vacation of plat
Development Plats
   
155.080   Applicability
   
155.081   Exceptions
   
155.082   Prohibition on development
   
155.083   Standards of approval
   
155.084   Conditions on approval
   
155.085   Procedure
   
155.086   Submittal requirements
Administration and Enforcement
   
155.090   Variances
   
155.091   Participation policies; development costs
   
155.092   Violations
   
155.093   Injunctive relief; remedies not exclusive
   
155.999   Penalty
   
Appendix:    Attachments
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be officially known, cited, and referred to as the
“subdivision regulations” of the city (hereinafter “this chapter”).
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
§ 155.002 POLICY.
   (A)   The subdivision or platting of land and the subsequent development of
the land is subject to the control of the city pursuant to the Comprehensive
Plan for the orderly, planned, efficient, and economical development of the
city.
   (B)   Land to be subdivided or platted shall be of a character that can be
used safely for building purposes without undue danger to health or peril from
fire, flood, or other menace, and land shall not be developed until adequate
public facilities and improvements exist and proper provision has been made for
drainage, water, wastewater processing, and streets.
   (C)   Proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related
to the proposals shown in the Comprehensive Plan and the capital improvements
program of the city. This chapter shall supplement and facilitate the
enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in building and housing
codes, zoning ordinances, the Comprehensive Plan, and the capital improvements
program of the city.
   (D)   Land that has been platted prior to the effective date of the adoption
of this chapter shall, whenever possible, be brought within the scope of this
chapter to further the purposes identified in §
155.003.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
§ 155.003 PURPOSES.
   This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
   (A)   To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the public, and to protect against the ill effects of urbanization;
   (B)   To guide the future growth and development of the city in accordance
with the Comprehensive Plan;
   (C)   To ensure safety from fire, flood, and other danger, and to prevent
overcrowding of the land and undue concentration of population;
   (D)   To guide public and private development in order to promote adequate
transportation, water distribution, wastewater collection, drainage conveyance,
and other public requirements and facilities;
   (E)   To provide for the circulation of traffic and pedestrians as required
for the beneficial use of land and buildings and to reduce congestion
throughout the city;
   (F)   To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for
platting and replatting to further the orderly layout and use of land, and to
ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of platted land;
   (G)   To ensure that adequate public facilities and services are available
and will have sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision or addition
and that the community will be required to bear no more than its fair share of
the cost of providing the facilities and services;
   (H)   To ensure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water
table; and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources, and
enhance the stability and beauty of the community and the value of the land;
and
   (I)   To provide for open spaces through the efficient design and layout of
the land.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
§ 155.004 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   This chapter is formulated under the powers granted by Tex. Loc. Gov’t
Code, Chapter 212, subch. A and B. The term “plat” as used in subch. A and this
Chapter 155 shall also include within its definition the term “development
plat” specified in subch. B, except where noted.
   (B)   In addition to its other responsibilities, the Planning and Zoning
Commission of the city (hereinafter “Commission”) is vested with the authority
to review, and to recommend the approval, recommend the conditional approval,
or disapprove applications for the platting or subdivision of land, including
preliminary plats, final plats, amended plats, replats, and vacations of plats.
The Commission may recommend variances from this chapter pursuant to the
provisions of §
155.090.
   (C)   The City Administrator is vested with the authority to approve minor
plats. The City Administrator may, for any reason, elect to present a minor
plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval. The City Administrator
may not disapprove a minor plat and shall refer any minor plat refused for
approval to the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Council.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
§ 155.005 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   This chapter applies to all subdivisions of land, located within the
corporate limits of the city and within the city’s extraterritorial
jurisdiction, as provided by law, and to all additions of land within the
corporate limits of the city, except as expressly stated herein.
   (B)   The following types of subdivision do not require approval by the
city; however, the city shall not extend utilities, provide access to public
roads, or issue building permits for the development of any property which has
not received final plat approval, except as otherwise provided by this chapter:
      (1)   The division of land into 2 or more parts where all parts are
larger than 5 acres and where no new building or improvement is proposed and no
required public improvement is to be dedicated;
      (2)   The creation of a remainder of a tract caused by the platting of a
portion of the tract, provided the remainder is larger than 10 acres;
      (3)   The division of a tract or parcel for purposes of creating a
dedication plat;
      (4)   The creation of a leasehold for a space within a commercial
building site which does not abut a public street, or the division of property
into such leaseholds, provided that the property is a part of an approved
subdivision or addition and regulated in accordance with the platting
requirements of the city, and the plat has been amended as may be required to
add easements or otherwise serve the leasehold. For purposes of this section, a
leasehold abuts a public street if it is immediately adjacent to a public
street or if it is so close to a public street that no usable property lies
between the leasehold and the public street; and
      (5)   The creation of a leasehold for agricultural use of the subject
property, provided that the use does not involve the construction of a building
(s) to be used as a residence or for any purpose not directly related to
agricultural use of the land or crops or livestock raised thereon.
   (C)   A written request may be directed to the Commission for information
concerning whether a plat is required under this chapter, in accordance with
Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, § 212.0115, as amended.
   (D)   The exclusion of these activities from this chapter does not waive any
jurisdiction the city now exercises or may exercise over these matters.
   (E)   Except as provided above, no land may be subdivided or platted through
the use of any legal description other than with reference to a plat approved
by the Council in accordance with this chapter.
   (F)   Except as provided herein and for lots of record established prior to
the effective date of the adoption of this chapter, no land shall be sold,
leased, or transferred until the property owner has obtained approval of a
final plat from the Council as required by this chapter.
   (G)   The city shall withhold all public improvements and utilities,
including the maintenance of streets and the provision of wastewater disposal
facilities (if any) and water service, from all tracts, lots, or additions, the
platting of which has not been officially approved by the City Council and for
which a certificate of compliance has not been issued pursuant to §
155.030(G).
   (H)   No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any
parcel or tract of land inside the city limits until that property has received
final plat approval and is in substantial conformity with the provisions of
this chapter, and no private improvements shall take place or be commenced
except in conformity with this chapter.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.006 EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The subdivision regulations of the city, as they now exist or may
hereafter be amended (including Ord. 333 and 487, and the ordinance adopting or
amending this chapter), are hereby extended to all of the area lying within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, and the rules and regulations within
this chapter governing plats and subdivision of land shall be applicable to the
area within that extraterritorial jurisdiction from and after the effective
date of the adoption of this chapter regulating subdivisions.
   (B)   No person shall subdivide or plat any tract of land within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, except in conformity with the
provisions of the subdivision regulations contained herein.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.007 APPLICATIONS PENDING.
   All completed applications for plat approval, including final plat, pending
on the effective date of this chapter and which have not lapsed shall be
reviewed under regulations in effect immediately preceding the date of adoption
of this chapter.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
§ 155.008 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS; ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This chapter shall
be construed broadly to promote the purposes for which it is adopted.
   (B)   Conflict with other laws. This chapter is not intended to interfere
with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or
other provision of law except as provided in this chapter. Where any provision
of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other
provision of this chapter, or other provision of law, the provision which is
more restrictive or imposes higher standards shall control.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
§ 155.009 AMENDMENT.
   For the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, and general
welfare, the Council may from time to time propose amendments to this chapter
which shall then be approved or disapproved by the Council at a public meeting.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
§ 155.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABUT. To be separated by common property lines, lot lines, or an alley;
adjacent, adjoining, contiguous, or touching.
   ACCESS WAY. An area on private property used by vehicular traffic for access
to and from streets.
   ADDITION. One lot, tract, or parcel of land lying within the corporate
boundaries of the city which is intended for the purpose of development.
   ALL-WEATHER ACCESS (CONSTRUCTION). An access way paved with a paving
material which is cohesive and holds its form when subjected to vehicular
traffic and the normal variation of weather conditions experienced in the city.
   AMENDED PLAT. A revised plat correcting errors or making minor changes to
the original recorded final plat.
   AMENITY. An improvement to be dedicated to the public or the common
ownership of the lot owners of the subdivision and providing an aesthetic,
recreational, or other benefit, other than those prescribed by this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. The BASE FLOOD shall be determined by using a fully developed
watershed and the city’s criteria for a 100-year storm.
   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets
and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways,
or boundary lines of municipalities.
   BOND. Any form of a surety bond in an amount and form satisfactory to the
city.
   BUFFERYARD. A unit of land and any structures such as walls or berms that
may be required between different land uses to eliminate or minimize conflicts
between them. (Example: an area of trees or landscaping between larger
residential lots in 1 city, and smaller residential lots or commercial
development in another city.) Specific BUFFERYARD requirements are defined in
Chapter 156, the comprehensive zoning ordinance.
   BUILDER. The person or party responsible for the construction of buildings
and other structures or permanent improvements on a platted lot or building
site, as defined by the Building Official. The BUILDER shall also be defined as
the DEVELOPER, if responsible for platting or replatting of property or
development of property, as herein defined.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line designated on an approved subdivision plat
which is parallel or approximately parallel to a property line to define a zone
between the building line and the property line in which buildings and
structures may not be erected.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM. The official proposed schedule of all future
public projects listed together with cost estimates and the anticipated means
of financing each project, as adopted by City Council.
   CITY. The City of Parker, Texas.
   CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The City Administrator or his or her designee.
   CITY ENGINEER. The official appointed professional engineer with
responsibility to review and release plans for construction projects, or his or
her designee.
   COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission for the city.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A plan for development of the city prepared and adopted
by the Council, and including any part of that plan separately adopted, and any
amendment to that plan, or parts thereof.
   CONSTRUCTION PLAN. The maps or drawings accompanying a plat and showing the
specific location and design of public improvements to be installed in the
subdivision or addition in accordance with the requirements of the Commission,
requirements of the Texas Engineering Act, and construction plans shall be
designed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas as a
condition of the approval of the plat.
   CONTIGUOUS. Lots are contiguous when at least 1 boundary line of 1 lot
touches a boundary line or lines of another lot.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of this city.
   COUNTY. Collin County, Texas.
   CURVILINEAR STREET. A street comprising curved and straight portions in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
   DEDICATION PLAT. A plat prepared for the purpose of dedicating land or
easements for rights-of-way to the city.
   DEVELOPER. The owner of the property being platted or replatted or the
person designated by the owner as being responsible for the development of the
property. The terms SUBDIVIDER and DEVELOPER are synonymous and used
interchangeably, and shall include any person, partnership, firm, association,
corporation, or any officer, agent, employee, servant, and trustee thereof who
does or participates in the doing of any act toward the subdivision of land
within the intent, scope, and purview of this chapter. The DEVELOPER shall also
be defined as the BUILDER if he or she is responsible for the construction of
buildings or other structures or permanent improvements.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, paving, drainage,
or utilities, but not agricultural activities.
   DEVELOPMENT EXACTION. Any dedication of land or easements for, construction
of, or contribution toward construction of a public improvement required as a
condition of plat approval by the city under this chapter.
   DEVELOPMENT PLAT. Special requirements for development of 1 lot pursuant to
state law, and as described in §§
155.080 et seq. of this municipal code.
   DRAINAGE WAY. All areas with an elevation lower than a ground elevation,
defined as being the highest elevation of the following:
      (1)   Two feet above the base flood for fully developed upstream
conditions, calculated in accordance with criteria set forth by the city;
      (2)   Two feet above the elevation required for peak discharge for the
100-year design flood, Alternate C, of the Flood Insurance Study, U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Agency; or
      (3)   The top of the high bank.
   DRIVEWAY. A private, all-weather surfaced drive connecting the residence, or
building, with a public or private street.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for a family, and including a residential kitchen, bathroom, and
provisions for living, sleeping, and sanitation.
   EASEMENT. An interest in the real property of another which is the dominant
estate and is a right to use that real property for the purposes specified
therein.
   EQUAL CONVEYANCE REDUCTION. Proposed floodplain alterations reducing stream
conveyance should allow a corresponding conveyance reduction on the opposite
stream bank. The right of equal conveyance reduction applies to all owners and
uses and may be relinquished by written agreement.
   ESCROW. A deposit of cash with the city in accordance with city policies.
   FINAL PLAT. The map of a subdivision or addition to be recorded after
approval by the City Council and any accompanying material and additional
requirements as described in this chapter.
   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from the
base flood.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control
ordinances), storm water design criteria and other applications of police
powers. The term describes such state and local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provides standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention
and reduction.
   FLOODWAY. A drainage area designated on a plat to accommodate the design
flood for existing creeks and the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent
land area that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designed
height.
   LAND STUDY. A drawing preparatory to the plat, to enable the property owner
to save time and expense by communicating the general plans for development of
a subdivision with the Commission and the City Council.
   LEASEHOLD. Property held by lease.
   LOT. A tract, plot, or portion of a subdivision, addition, or other parcel
of land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
transfer of ownership, or possession, or for building development.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot created prior to September 25, 1990.
   MAJOR PLAT. All plats not classified as minor plats, including but not
limited to subdivisions of more than 4 lots, or any plat requiring creation of
any new street or extension of the city’s facilities.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of this city, or his or her designee.
   MINOR PLAT. A subdivision resulting in 4 or fewer lots and not requiring the
creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities.
   MUNICIPAL FACILITY. An improvement owned and maintained by the city.
   OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENT. Any public improvement located outside the physical
boundaries of the subdivision or addition to be platted.
   PERIMETER STREET. Any existing or planned street which abuts the subdivision
or addition to be platted.
   PLAT. The plan or map for a subdivision or addition. The plat and
accompanying construction drawings for a subdivision or addition as described
in this chapter. The PLAT is approved by the City Council prior to construction
of public improvements, but not filed with the county.
   PLATTING. The act of preparing for approval and processing, pursuant to this
chapter, the plan or map for a subdivision or addition.
   PRIVATE STREET. A private vehicular access way shared by and serving 2 or
more lots, which is not dedicated to the public and is not publicly maintained.
PRIVATE STREETS may be established only under the terms of this chapter; see §
155.052.
   PROPERTY OWNER. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or
corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient
proprietary interest in the land comprising the subdivision or addition, or any
representative or agent thereto, who has express written authority to act on
behalf of that owner.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any drainage way, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, utility,
pedestrian way, off-street parking area, lot improvement, open space, or other
facility for which the city or other governmental entity will ultimately assume
the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an
improvement for which local government responsibility is established.
   PUBLIC WAY. An officially approved, privately maintained drive, constructed
to city street standards, open to unrestricted and irrevocable public access,
serving 2 or more lots with a minimum of 50 feet of frontage as their primary
means of access.
   REMAINDER. The residual land left after platting of a portion of a tract.
Platting of a residual may in some instances be required under the provisions
of this chapter.
   REPLATTING. Any change in a map of an approved or recorded plat, except as
permitted as an amended plat, that affects any street layout on the map or area
reserved or dedicated thereon for public use or any lot line, or that affects
any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations
controlling subdivisions or additions. REPLATTING includes the combination of
lots into a single lot for purposes of development.
   RESERVE STRIP. Land that has been withheld or kept back from sale or
disposition.
   RE-SUBDIVISION. The replatting of a subdivision plat.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A parcel of land dedicated to the city, occupied or intended
to be occupied by a street. Where appropriate, RIGHT-OF-WAY may include other
facilities and utilities, such as sidewalks, railroad crossings, electrical,
communication, oil, gas, water, or sanitary or storm sewer facilities, or for
any other special use. RIGHT-OF-WAY shall also include parkways and medians
outside of pavement. The usage of the term RIGHT-OF-WAY for land platting
purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on
a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining
the right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of those lots
or parcels.
   SECURITY. The letter of credit or cash escrow provided by the applicant to
secure its promises in an agreement.
   STORM SEWER. A conduit to convey storm water runoff.
   STREET, ARTERIAL. A street meeting the requirements for an arterial
thoroughfare, and intended as the primary urban traffic-carrying system between
major traffic centers.
   STREET, COLLECTOR. A street meeting the minimum requirements for a collector
thoroughfare, and intended to move traffic from local access streets to
arterial streets.
   STREET, EASEMENT. An authorization by the property owner in perpetuity for
the public use of a portion of his or her property for the placement thereon of
a street, trail, or the like, whereby the property owner retains title to the
property upon which the easement is established. Public use of this easement
shall also be extended to the construction and placement of trails; street
signs, signals, and markings; utilities, both above- and below-ground; and
other facilities as are customarily located within typical street rights-of-
way.
   STREET, SUBSTANDARD. An existing street or highway that does not meet the
minimum specifications in the thoroughfare standards ordinance and city
construction standards and specifications, or if a state highway or FM highway
does not meet the minimum standard specifications of the State Department of
Highways and Public Transportation and is not constructed to the ultimate
extent for the type of roadway it is designated for in the major thoroughfare
plan. A STANDARD STREET is a street or highway that meets or exceeds those
standard specifications and the major thoroughfare plan.
   SUBDIVIDER. See DEVELOPER.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of any tract or parcel of land into 2 or more lots
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of offer for sale or lease or for
the purpose of development. SUBDIVISION includes the division or development of
residentially and nonresidentially zoned land, whether by deed, metes and
bounds description, devise, intestacy, lease, map, plat, or other recorded
instrument. SUBDIVISION also includes re-subdivision. SUBDIVISION also refers
to the land to be so divided, as the context may indicate. Certain types of
subdivisions do not require approval by the city under the terms of §
155.005(B) of this code.
   TEMPORARY IMPROVEMENT. Improvements built and maintained by an owner during
construction of the development of the subdivision or addition and prior to
release of the performance bond, or improvements required for the short-term
use of the property.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other accepted datum where specified), of
flood various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplain of coastal or
riverine areas.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
PLATTING PROCEDURES
§ 155.025 GENERAL PROCEDURES; ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   Classification of subdivisions and additions.  
      (1)   Before any land is platted, the developer shall apply for and
secure approval of the proposed subdivision plat or addition plat in accordance
with the following procedures, unless otherwise provided by this chapter.
Subdivisions are classified as major or minor depending on the number of lots
proposed and the extent of public improvements required.
         (a)   Minor subdivisions shall create no more than 4 lots and do not
require the creation of a new street or the extension of municipal facilities.
Minor subdivisions may be approved for residential and nonresidential
properties. Minor plat approval requires the submission of a final plat as
described under §
155.030. The City Administrator may approve minor plats or refer them to the
Planning and Zoning Commission and Council for their action.
         (b)   Major subdivisions involve the creation of new streets, the
extension of municipal facilities, or the creation of more than 4 lots. Major
subdivisions may be approved for residential and nonresidential properties. The
procedure for approving a major subdivision plat typically involves 4 steps:
land study (voluntary), plat, final plat, and submission of as-built plans.
      (2)   Except as otherwise permitted, the Council’s approval of a
preliminary plat is required prior to the construction of public improvements
to the property. The developer may undertake efforts to improve the land, and
begin construction of public improvements after receiving approval of a plat.
Upon completion of detailed surveys and all necessary engineering to fully and
accurately define the subdivision, the developer shall submit a final plat for
approval. Lots may be sold and building permits obtained only after approval of
the final plat by the Council, and filing of the signed final plat. Upon
completion of the required public improvements, the owner shall submit a set of
as-built plans to the city. Certificates of occupancy for any permanent
structures shall not be granted until the as-built plans have been approved and
accepted by the city.
   (B)   Submission date for items requiring Commission, Council, or staff
approval. Plats and final plats will be acted on within 30 days by the Planning
and Zoning Commission and 30 days thereafter by Council, unless the time
requirements are waived by the developer. Minor plats may be processed in a
shorter period, since they only require staff approval. All other approvals
require the action of the Planning and Zoning Commission and Council. The
official submission date is the date of submission of all documents and payment
of all fees as required by this chapter.
   (C)   Statutory compliance procedure.
      (1)   Applications for plat approval shall be evaluated for compliance
with this chapter and requirements contained in the city’s standard
specifications manual and design manuals, which are incorporated herein by
reference, and with any other criteria, policies, rules, and plans which are
referenced elsewhere in this chapter, or established by ordinance.
      (2)   The City Administrator shall place the application on a scheduled
meeting of the Commission prior to the expiration of 30 days following the
submission date, subject to any waiver executed or agreed to by the applicant.
The Commission shall recommend approval, conditional approval, or deny the
application. In the absence of a waiver, if the Commission fails to approve or
disapprove (disapproval includes the identification of requirements to be
satisfied prior to approval) an application within 30 days of the official
submission date, or thereafter in the event of a waiver of time, the
application shall be deemed approved by the Commission as a recommendation.
      (3)   The recommendation of the Commission shall be forwarded to the City
Council, who shall schedule a meeting for the consideration of the application,
and the recommendation of the Commission. The meeting shall be held within 30
days of the recommendation of the Commission. The Council shall approve or
disapprove the application, or identify requirements which must be satisfied
prior to approval of the application. In the absence of a waiver, if the
Council fails to approve or disapprove (disapproval includes the identification
of requirements to be satisfied prior to approval) an application within 30
days
of the recommendation of the Commission, the application shall be deemed
approved, subject to the applicant’s waiver. However, the identification of
requirements by the Council, which remain to be satisfied prior to plat
approval, shall constitute disapproval of the application for purposes of
statutory compliance only. Unless the Council unconditionally disapproves the
plat application within that period, the city shall continue to process the
application for compliance with this chapter. The Council may table a plat, or
final plat, or may request the applicant to withdraw. These items must be
withdrawn by the applicant if the applicant is not ready to proceed. The
applicant may resubmit the project with no additional fees if it is rescheduled
within 30 days of the date of withdrawal. Tabling the application does not
extend the time periods required for action.
   (D)   Fees, application forms, and procedures. The City Council shall
establish a schedule of fees as required to recoup costs related to the
administration of this chapter. The City Administrator may establish
procedures, forms, and standards with regard to the content, format, and number
of copies of information constituting an application for a plat, replat,
vacation of plat, final plat, or as-built plat plans.
   (E)   Extraterritorial jurisdiction. Land in the city’s extraterritorial
jurisdiction is subject to platting, as provided by law. The approval of a plat
or final plat for land within the extraterritorial jurisdiction does not
constitute approval of land use. Properties incorporated subsequent to platting
are subject to the city’s zoning authority.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.026 LAND STUDY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the land study is to review and discuss a
general plan for the development of property, including the layout of streets,
lots, open space, and sites for public facilities and utilities, in accordance
with the city’s Comprehensive Plan, master thoroughfare plan, and drainage
requirements.
      (1)   Review of the land study is performed by the city as an
accommodation to the developer, and to the city, in an effort to identify clear
issues for further evaluation by the developer.
      (2)   No development rights are granted by the city through consideration
of the land study. The developer proceeds at his or her own risk and expense in
his or her applications for zoning, or preparation of plat and final plat
materials.
   (B)   Applicability. A land study is a voluntary submission by the
developer, and is not a requirement or prerequisite for processing plat or
final plats with the city. A land study may be submitted by the developer at
the developer’s option to determine the feasibility of the parameters of the
subdivision. Land studies shall be submitted for review to the Commission prior
to being submitted to the Council.
   (C)   Submission procedure.
      (1)   A developer who wishes to submit a land study for review by the
Commission or the City Council shall submit a request in writing to the City
Administrator with the following information:
         (a)   The name and address of the land owner;
         (b)   The name and address of the developer;
         (c)   The proposed name of the subdivision;
         (d)   Proposed land uses; and
         (e)   A request that a review of a land study be placed on the agenda
for the Commission.
      (2)   The following information is recommended to be included in the land
study for the benefit of adequate review by the Commission and the City
Council:
         (a)   A location map;
         (b)   A map of the proposed subdivision, including the following:
            1.   Scale recommended to be 1 inch = 100 feet;
            2.   The subdivision boundary lines;
            3.   A general depiction of adjacent properties and tracts;
            4.   Existing structures and uses within the subdivision;
            5.   The location of houses, barns, walls, wells, and tanks;
            6.   The extent of wooded areas and tree lines;
            7.   A generally accurate depiction of existing streets;
            8.   A general depiction of proposed streets;
            9.   Storm water retention and detention basins; and
            10.   Trails.
         (c)   Acreage breakdown, including:
            1.   The gross acreage of the subdivision;
            2.   The number of proposed lots;
            3.   The net lot size of the smallest lot;
            4.   The net lot size of the largest lot;
            5.   A lot size and count breakdown;
            6.   Acreage within the 100-year floodplain;
            7.   Acreage designated as streets; and
            8.   Acreage designated for public improvements.
         (d)   All contiguous holdings of the property owner, with an
indication of the portion which is proposed to be developed or offered, sold,
or leased.
   (D)   Review procedure. Review and discussion of a land study shall be
placed on the agenda for the Commission after the developer has submitted the
written request and all applicable drawings. The review and discussion of the
proposed development shall be a Commission meeting or work session, and it
shall be open to the public. No rights are vested to the landowner/developer
regarding the land study or by the comments or suggestions of the Commission or
the Council. The landowner/developer proceeds at his or her own risk.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
§ 155.027 PLAT APPROVAL.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the plat is to allow the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the City Engineer, and the City Council to evaluate the proposed
subdivision for conformity with the applicable requirements of the city’s
Comprehensive Plan,
Chapter 156 of this code, good engineering practice, city standards, city
design standards, and this chapter. Additionally, the Commission, Council, and
staff will review the plat to evaluate construction plans for public
improvements, to provide adequate security for construction of the same, and to
authorize the City Engineer to release the property for grading and
construction of public improvements.
   (B)   Applicability. A plat is required for all major subdivisions prior to
the construction of public improvements.
   (C)   Application procedure and requirements. On forms approved by the city,
the applicant shall file for approval of a plat. The plat shall be prepared by
or under the supervision of a professional public surveyor and registered with
the State of Texas and professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas (if
applicable) in this state and shall bear his or her seal, signature, and date
on each sheet. All documents, maps, drawings, tables, and other materials shall
be submitted in both printed form and electronic form. The specific electronic
format of submitted materials shall be dictated by the city as 1 or more of
commonly accepted electronic formats for the materials (PDF or TIFF). The
payment of all applicable fees shall be required at the time of submission. The
fee covers the review of the plat and construction plans for 2 submittals. All
subsequent reviews will be paid for by the developer. Payment shall be paid to
the city prior to the review.
      (1)   General application requirement. Copies of the proposed plat shall
be at a scale of 1 inch = 100 feet or larger and in a form substantially as
follows:
         (a)   The boundary lines with accurate distances and bearings and the
exact location and width of all existing or recorded streets intersecting the
boundary of the tract. Exact total gross acreage to the nearest hundredth shall
be shown. Documentation shall be provided showing that boundary line error does
not exceed 1:10,000 for unadjusted boundary and 1:50,000 for plat boundary;
         (b)   True bearings and distances to the nearest established street
lines and official monuments, which shall be accurately described on the plat.
Municipal, ETJ, school district, and other jurisdictional boundaries shall be
accurately tied to subdivision boundaries by distance and bearing;
         (c)   Accurate ties to the abstract and survey corners as required by
prudent surveying practices;
         (d)   The exact layout, including:
            1.   Street names, which must be submitted to the City
Administrator and United States Postal Service for approval in accordance with
the city’s guidelines for the naming of streets. Names of corporations may not
be used as street names;
            2.   The length of all arcs, radii, internal angles, points of
curvature, length, and bearings of the tangents;
            3.   All easements for rights-of-way, utilities, drainage,
emergency access, line-of-sight, and any limitations of the easements;
            4.   All lot numbers and lines with accurate dimensions in feet and
hundredths of feet and bearings and angles to street lines, and net lot areas
in acres;
            5.   The location of the center line of creeks or drainage ways
shall be tied with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths of feet with
bearings and angles. No unplatted remainder will be allowed between property
boundaries and center lines of creeks. The location of the 100-year event
floodplain shall be shown along with FEMA Firm map references; and
            6.   The locations of permanent structures within the subdivision,
including houses, barns, walls, tanks, wells, and the significant features.
         (e)   The accurate location, material, and size of all monuments
approved by the City Engineer. Horizontal and vertical control data shall be
established for a minimum of 2 corners of the subdivision or addition. One-inch
iron rods with surveyors cap shall be set at all boundary corners, block
corners, angle points, points of corners, and points of tangents. One-half-inch
iron rods shall be set at all other lot corners. All these iron rods with
surveyor caps shall have plastic red caps, identifying the surveyor;
         (f)   The accurate outline of all property which is offered for
dedication for public use with the purpose indicated thereon, and of all
property that may be reserved by deed covenant for the common use of the
homeowners in the subdivision or addition;
         (g)   Building setback lines;
         (h)   Special restrictions, including, but not limited to, drainage
and floodway, fire lanes, and screening;
         (i)   The proposed name of the subdivision or addition;
         (j)   The name and address of the property owner;
         (k)   North arrow, scale, and date of origination, and latest revision
date;
         (l)   Certification by a professional land surveyor registered in the
State of Texas to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him or
her and that all the monuments shown thereon actually exist, and that their
location, size, and material description are correctly shown, and that the
survey correctly shows the location of all rights-of-way, easements, and other
matters of record affecting the property being platted;
         (m)   Boundary survey closure and area calculations;
         (n)   Additional documents necessary for dedication or conveyance of
easements or rights-of-way, as required by the city. The city may, in some
instances, require the conveyance of fee simple title for certain rights-of-
way;
         (o)   Entry easements to allow city personnel to enter the property
being platted for the purpose of examining the construction of the public
improvements;
         (p)   The layout, names, and width of proposed streets, and easements;
         (q)   The location of proposed screening walls and other forms of
screening shall be clearly indicated;
         (r)   Existing contours of the tract in intervals of 2 feet or less,
referred to sea level datum, and final contours after construction (lot grading
including) referred to in intervals of 1 foot or less, referred to sea level
datum;
         (s)   Existing sewer lines, water lines, utility lines, culverts, or
other underground structures within the tract and immediately adjacent thereto,
with pipe sizes and locations included;
         (t)   Proposed sewer (if applicable), water lines and storm drainage
lines with pipe sizes and locations and showing culverts, bridges, and other
appurtenances or structures;
         (u)   Storm water retention or detention basins as required; and
         (v)   Erosion control for the overall development meeting TCEQ (Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality) and the city SWPPP (Storm Water Pollution
Prevention Program) requirements.
      (2)   Standards for approval. No plat shall be recommended for approval
by the Planning and Zoning Commission or approved by the Council unless the
above and following standards have been met:
         (a)   The construction plans have been reviewed and recommended for
acceptance by the City Engineer;
         (b)   Provision for installation and dedication of public improvements
has been made on-site and off-site;
         (c)   The plat conforms to applicable zoning and subdivision
regulations; and
         (d)   The plat meets all other requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   Approval procedure. After review of the plat, the report and
recommendation of the City Engineer on the construction plans, and any exhibits
submitted at a public meeting, the applicant shall be advised of any required
changes or additions. The Commission shall recommend the plat for approval by
the City Council or denial of the plat. One copy of the proposed plat shall be
returned to the owner with the date of such actions noted thereon. If the
Commission denies the proposed plat, the applicant may request a hearing be
held by City Council within 30 days.
      (4)   Effect of approval. Approval of a plat by the Council constitutes
authorization for the City Engineer to release construction plans subject to
his or her final approval and for the City Engineer to authorize the developer
to commence grading of the site and construction of those public improvements
as are required by the city. Approval of a plat also authorizes the property
owner, upon fulfillment of all requirements and conditions of approval, to
submit for approval an application for final plat approval. Upon release of the
construction plans, the City Engineer may, upon request of the applicant, issue
a certificate indicating the construction plans have been released and
construction of the improvement is thereafter authorized. Additional
certificates may be issued by the City Engineer authorizing the construction of
private utilities on a phased schedule. The certificate shall read as follows:
      “The Plat for (insert name of the subdivision or addition) as approved by
the Council on (insert date of approval) is authorized for use with engineering
plans for the construction of public improvements as approved by the City
Engineer. A final plat will be considered for approval by the Council upon the
completion of all public improvements.”
      (5)   Lapse of plat approval. The approval of a plat shall be effective
for a period of 2 years from the date that the plat is approved by the Council,
at the end of which time the applicant must have submitted and received
approval for a final plat. If a final plat is not submitted and approved within
2 years, the plat approval shall be null and void, and the applicant shall be
required to submit a new plat subject to the then existing zoning and
subdivision regulations. See §
155.029 concerning extensions and reinstatement of approval.
   (D)   Phasing of development. The Commission may permit a plat for a major
subdivision to be divided into 2 or more phases, as indicated on the plat,
provided each phase satisfies the requirements of this chapter. In considering
phasing of a plat, the Commission may approve certain conditions as it deems
necessary to ensure the orderly development of the platted land. Those
conditions may include but are not limited to temporary streets, temporary cul-
de-sacs, and off-site utility extensions.
   (E)   Construction plan procedure and requirements.
      (1)   General application requirements. Construction plans shall be
prepared by or under the supervision of a professional engineer or architect
registered (if building is involved) licensed in the State of Texas as required
by state law governing those professions. Plans submitted for review by the
city shall be dated and bear the responsible engineer’s or architect’s name,
professional license number, and the designation of “engineer,” “professional
engineer,” “P.E.,” or “architect” and an appropriate stamp or statement near
the engineer’s or architect’s identification, stating that the documents are
for review and are not intended for construction. Final plans acceptable to the
city shall bear the seal and signature of the engineer or architect and the
date signed on all sheets of the plans and a statement that plans are for
construction. Public works construction in streets, alleys, or easements which
will be maintained by the city shall be designed by a professional engineer
licensed in the State of Texas.
      (2)   Review procedure. Copies of the construction plans and the required
number of copies of the plat shall be submitted to the City Engineer to be
reviewed for recommendation. The plans shall contain all necessary information
for construction of the project. All materials specified shall conform to the
standard specifications and standard details of the city. Each sheet of the
plans shall contain a title block including space for the notation of
revisions. This space is to be completed with each revision to the plan sheet
and shall clearly note the nature of the revision and the date the revision was
made. The City Administrator will release the plans for construction, after the
plans are recommended for approval by the City Engineer, and approval of the
final plat by the Council and payment of all fees. Upon this release, each
contractor shall maintain 1 set of plans stamped with the city approval on the
project site at all times during construction. (Also see §§ 155.046 and
155.047.)
      (3)   Failure to commence construction. If construction has not commenced
within 1 year after approval of the construction plans, resubmittal of plans
may be required by the city for meeting current standards and engineering
requirements.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.028 PLAT AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   General considerations. At any time following the approval of a plat,
and before the lapse of that approval, a developer may request an amendment.
Changing of the approved number of lots shall be considered a major amendment.
The rerouting or adjustment of street alignments, street lengths, and paving
details, drainage details, and the adjustment of lot lines, shall be considered
minor amendments.
   (B)   Minor amendments. The City Administrator, after recommendation of the
City Engineer, may approve or disapprove a minor amendment. Disapproval may be
appealed to the Commission under the terms of §
155.032.
   (C)   Major amendments. The Council may approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove any proposed major amendment at a public meeting in accordance with
the same requirements for the approval of a plat and may make any modifications
in the terms and conditions of final plat approval reasonably related to the
proposed amendment.
   (D)   Retaining previous approval. If the applicant is unwilling to accept
the proposed amendment under the terms and conditions required by the city, the
applicant may withdraw the proposed major amendment or appeal the action to the
City Council in accordance with §
155.032.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
§ 155.029 EXTENSION OR REINSTATEMENT OF PLAT APPROVAL.
   (A)   Sixty days prior to or following the lapse of approval for a plat, as
provided in this chapter, the developer may petition the Council to extend or
reinstate the approval. This petition shall be considered at a public meeting
of the Council.
   (B)   In determining whether to grant such a request, the Council shall take
into account the reasons for the lapse, the ability of developer to comply with
any conditions attached to the original approval, and the extent to which newly
adopted subdivision regulations shall apply to the plat or study. The Council
may extend or reinstate the plat, or deny the request, in which instance the
developer must submit a new application for approval.
   (C)   The Council may extend or reinstate the approval subject to additional
conditions based upon newly enacted regulations or as are necessary to ensure
compliance with the original conditions of approval. The Council may also
specify a shorter time for lapse of the extended or reinstated plat or study
than is applicable to original approvals.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
§ 155.030 FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of a final plat is to record the subdivision of
property including the accurate description of blocks, rights-of-way,
easements, building lines, and street names. Lots of the subdivision may not be
sold, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to any other party, nor shall building
permits for permanent structures be issued prior to the city’s approval and
filing of the final plat documents.
   (B)   Applicability. A final plat shall be required for subdivisions of
property and the recording of single lots in accordance with §
155.005.
   (C)   Application procedure and requirements. A final plat for minor
subdivisions may be approved by the City Administrator. A final plat for a
major subdivision shall require recommendation for approval by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, if there are any changes to the approved plat, and approval
by the City Council. Final plats shall comply with the plat where applicable.
The application shall be accompanied by the following materials in both printed
form and electronic form. All documents, maps, drawings, tables, and other
materials shall be submitted in both printed form and electronic form. The
specific electronic format (file type) of submitted materials shall be dictated
by the city as 1 or more of commonly accepted electronic formats for the
materials (PDF or TIFF).
      (1)   Copies of the proposed final plat bearing all information specified
in §
155.027(C), and the following language: “Notice: Selling a portion of this
addition by metes and bounds is a violation of city ordinance and state law and
is subject to fines and withholding of utilities and building permits;”
      (2)   Formal irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of all
streets, local government uses, utilities, parks, and easements, in a form
approved by the City Attorney. The plat shall be marked with a notation
indicating the formal offers of dedication;
      (3)   A recording fee in an amount as set by the County Clerk;
      (4)   As-built construction plans, where applicable;
      (5)   Accurate ties to the abstract and survey corners as required by
state surveying law and the amount of acreage in each abstract shown; and
      (6)   Certification by a professional land surveyor licensed in the State
of Texas to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him or her and
that all the monuments shown thereon actually exist, and that their location,
size, and material description are correctly shown, and that the survey
correctly shows the location of all visible easements and rights-of-way, and
all rights-of-way, easements, and other matters of record affecting the
property being platted.
   (D)   Standards for approval. No final plat shall be approved by the City
Administrator, the Commission, or the Council unless the following standards
have been met:
      (1)   The plat substantially conforms to the plat and shall be entirely
consistent with the construction and public improvements as completed and
accepted by the city;
      (2)   Required public improvements have been constructed, erosion control
established, and are ready to be accepted;
      (3)   The plat conforms to applicable zoning and other regulations;
      (4)   Provision has been made for adequate public facilities under the
terms of this chapter;
      (5)   The homeowners association agreement and deed restrictions as
applicable have been reviewed and approved by the City Attorney; and
      (6)   The plat meets all other requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   Approval procedure. After review of the final plat by the City
Engineer, the City Administrator shall place the final plat for consideration
on the agenda. Minor plats may be approved by the Mayor or referred to the
Commission in accordance with §
155.004(B). One copy of the final plat shall be returned to the applicant with
the date of the action noted on the final plat.
   (F)   Appeals. If the Commission disapproves the final plat, the applicant
may appeal to the Council in the manner prescribed in §
155.032.
   (G)   Certificate of compliance. Upon approval of a final plat required by
this chapter, the City Administrator shall issue to the person applying for
approval a certificate stating that the final plat has been approved by the
City Council. For purposes of this section, final approval shall not occur
until all conditions of approval have been met.
   (H)   Signing and recording of final plat.
      (1)   The Mayor and the City Administrator shall endorse approval on the
final plat after approved by the Council, and all the conditions pertaining to
the final plat have been satisfied.
      (2)   When installation of public improvements is required prior to
recordation of the final plat, the chairperson of the Commission, the Mayor,
and City Administrator shall endorse approval on the final plat after all
conditions of approval have been satisfied and all public improvements
satisfactorily completed. There shall be written evidence that the required
public improvements have been installed in a manner satisfactory to the city as
shown by a certificate signed by the City Engineer stating that the necessary
installation of public improvements have been accomplished. (See §
155.047)
      (3)   It shall be the responsibility of the city to file the final plat
with the County Clerk. Simultaneously with the filing of the final plat, the
city shall record those other agreements of dedication and legal documents as
shall be required to be recorded by the City Attorney. The final plat, bearing
all required signatures, shall be recorded after final approval and within 10
working days of its receipt. A minimum of 3 copies of the recorded final plat,
and additional copies (or other media formats) as required by the City
Administrator, with street addresses assigned, will be forwarded to the
developer.
   (I)   Effect of approval. Approval of a final plat shall certify compliance
with the regulations of the city pertaining to the subdivision of land. An
approved and signed final plat shall be filed with the county as a record of
the subdivision of land and may be used to reference lots and interests in
property thereon defined for the purpose of conveyance and development as
allowed by this chapter.
   (J)   Assurance for completion and maintenance.
      (1)   Improvement agreement and security for completion. When any of the
required public improvements will be postponed and constructed after final plat
approval and recordation, the final plat shall not be accepted for filing, nor
shall it be approved, unless and until the applicant enters into a subdivision
improvement agreement by which the applicant:
         (a)   Will complete the improvements;
         (b)   Warrants the improvements for a period of 2 years following
final acceptance by the city;
         (c)   Will provide a maintenance bond in the amount of 110% of the
costs of the improvements for such period consistent with the requirements
contained in division (J)(4)(a)1. below;
         (d)   Provides provisions for securing the obligations of the
subdivision improvement agreement consistent with this section; and
         (e)   Outlines other terms and conditions as are agreed to by the
applicant and the city, or as may be required by this division (J).
      (2)   Agreement to run with the land. The subdivision improvement
agreement shall provide that the covenants and other items of agreement
contained therein shall run with the land and shall bind all successors, heirs
and assignees of the applicant. All existing owners shall be required to
execute the subdivision improvement agreement or otherwise provide written
consent to the covenants and other items contained in the subdivision
improvement agreement.
      (3)   Approval by Council. The Council shall review the subdivision
improvement agreement, and shall approve it, approve it with conditions, or
deny it. The subdivision improvement agreement shall also be subject to review
by the City Attorney, and the applicant shall reimburse the city for all
related legal costs for review. This reimbursement shall be paid in full prior
to filing of the final plat.
      (4)   Security for completion of improvements.
         (a)   Type of security. When any of the required public improvements
will be constructed after approval and recordation of the final plat, the
applicant shall guarantee proper construction of such postponed improvements,
in accordance with the city’s design criteria and construction standards and
with this division (J), by either:
            1.   A bond executed by a surety company holding a license to do
business in the State of Texas, and acceptable to the city, on the form
provided by the city;
            2.   A letter of credit that is (A) irrevocable; (B) for a term
sufficient to cover the completion, maintenance and warranty periods in this
section; and (C) require only that the city present the letter of credit with a
sight draft and an affidavit signed by the City Attorney attesting to the
city’s right to draw funds under the letter of credit; or
            3.   A cash escrow with escrow instructions that provide: (A) that
the applicant will have no right to a return of any of the funds except upon
actual acceptance of the dedication of public improvements and then only to the
ratio that the cost of the public improvement for which dedication was accepted
bears to the total cost of public improvements for the subdivision; and (B)
that the escrow agent shall have a legal duty to deliver the funds to the city
whenever the City Attorney presents an affidavit to the agent attesting to the
city’s right to receive funds whether or not the applicant protests that right.
         (b)   Estimated cost and security approval. Security shall be issued
in the amount of 110% of the cost to construct and complete all required public
improvements to the city’s standards as estimated by the applicant’s
professional engineer, and as approved by the City Administrator and City
Engineer. Security shall be subject to the review and approval of the City
Attorney. The applicant shall reimburse the city for all related legal costs
for review (this reimbursement shall be paid in full prior to filing of the
final plat).
         (c)   Security for construction in extraterritorial jurisdiction
(ETJ). Where all or some portion of the proposed development is located in the
city’s ETJ, the security shall be in a form and shall contain such terms as are
consistent with the city’s interlocal agreements with Collin County under
V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 242. In cases where the requirements
governing the form and terms of the security are defined in such an agreement,
they will supersede any conflicting provisions within this division (J).
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016; Am. Ord. 803,
passed 7-20-2021) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.031 AS-BUILT PLAT PLAN; RECORD DRAWINGS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of an as-built plan is to record the subdivision
of property, including the accurate description of utilities, drainage ways,
streets, blocks, rights-of-way, easements, building lines, and street names.
Certificates of occupancy, or final inspection of improvements shall not be
granted by the city until the as-built plat plans have been submitted and
approved.
   (B)   Applicability. Three sets of as-built plat plans shall be required for
subdivisions of property and the recording of single lots in accordance with §
155.005.
   (C)   Timing. As-built plat plans shall be required to be submitted to the
city within 30 days after all public improvements and utilities have been
installed, inspected by appropriate authorities, and approved. Extensions of
time for compliance with this requirement may be granted by the City
Administrator upon good cause shown.
   (D)   Submission procedure and requirements. The developer shall submit to
the city a complete set of certified drawings of the paving, drainage, water,
and sanitary sewer improvements, showing all changes made in the plans during
construction and containing on each sheet a record- drawing stamp bearing the
signature of the developer’s engineer and the date. In addition, 3 reproducible
paper drawings on 22 x 34 inch sheets, along with one 11 x 17 paper of the
utility plan sheets, containing the record-drawing information, shall be
submitted to the city. In addition, all plans shall be required to be supplied
to the city in electronic form as specified by the city (PDF or TIFF).
      (1)   No final acceptance of the subdivision will be made by the city nor
shall certificates of occupancy for structures within the subdivision be
granted until this requirement has been met to the satisfaction of the city. It
shall be the responsibility of the developer to furnish copies of the record-
drawing plans to the appropriate state agencies.
      (2)   In the event the as-built plans are not in substantial conformance
with the approved construction plans, the city may terminate all permits and
approvals of the project until the as- built plans are reconciled by the
Municipal Engineer.
   (E)   Standards for acceptance. No as-built plat plans shall be accepted by
the City Administrator, the Commission, or the Council unless the following
standards have been met:
      (1)   The plat substantially conforms to the final plat and shall be
entirely consistent with the construction and public improvements as completed
and accepted by the city; and
      (2)   All required public improvements have been constructed and are
ready to be accepted.
   (F)   Effect of acceptance. Acceptance of the as-built plat plans shall
certify compliance with the regulations of the city pertaining to the
subdivision of land. Certificates of occupancy for permanent structures within
the subdivision can then be granted subject to all other applicable
construction, building, and code regulations, county, state, and federal law.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.032 APPEALS TO COUNCIL.
   (A)   The applicant may appeal any negative decision of the Commission with
regard to a plat, or replat, by filing a notice of appeal in the office of the
City Administrator, no later than 10 days after the date on which the
Commission notifies the applicant of its decision. The notice of appeal shall
set forth in clear and concise fashion the basis for the appeal. The Council
shall consider the appeal at a public
meeting no later than 45 days after the date on which the notice of appeal is
filed. The Council may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the
Commission and may, where appropriate, remand the land study plat, or replat
request to the Commission for further proceedings consistent with the Council’s
decision.
   (B)   Appeals of any negative decision of the City Administrator may be made
to the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council in a manner similar to
that outlined above.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
IMPROVEMENTS; PROCEDURES, STANDARDS, AND REQUIREMENTS
§ 155.045 COMPLETION, ACCEPTANCE, AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Completion of improvements.  
      (1)   Except as provided below, before the final plat is signed by the
Mayor, all applicants shall be required to complete, in accordance with the
city’s decision and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, all the street,
utility, erosion control, vegetation established, and other public
improvements, as well as lot improvements on the individual residential lots of
the subdivision or addition as required in this chapter, specified in the final
plat, and as approved by the Commission, and to dedicate those public
improvements to the city.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         LOT IMPROVEMENTS. Include grading and installation of improvements
required for proper drainage and control of soil erosion.
   (B)   Temporary improvements. The developer shall build and pay for all
costs of temporary improvements required by the Council and shall maintain
those temporary improvements for the period specified by the Council.
   (C)   Acceptance of dedication offers. Acceptance of formal offers of
dedication of streets, public areas, easements, and parks shall require both
the recommendation of the City Engineer and separate and specific action by the
Council. A plat or final plat, shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the
acceptance by the city of any street, easement, or park shown on that plat. The
Council may require the plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this
effect. The dedication of a drainage easement to the city does not indicate or
signify that the city accepts any duty to maintain the easement, absent a
specific notation on the plat that the city will maintain the easement. Without
this specific notation, the property owner will maintain the easement. (See §
155.054)
   (D)   Maintenance and guarantee of public improvements. The developer shall
maintain all required public improvements for a period of 2 years following the
acceptance by the city and shall provide a warranty that all public
improvements will be free from defect for a period of 2 years following the
acceptance by the city. The maintenance bond shall be not less than 100% of
construction costs.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.046 CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Permit required. A permit is required from the city prior to beginning
any work in the city which affects erosion control, vegetation or tree removal,
floodplain, grading, street construction, removal of existing structures,
utility installation, and the like.
   (B)   Preconstruction conference. The City Engineer may require that all
contractors participating in the construction meet for a preconstruction
conference to discuss the project.
   (C)   Conditions prior to authorization. Prior to authorizing release of a
construction permit, the City Engineer shall be satisfied that the following
conditions have been met:
      (1)   The plat shall be approved by the Council;
      (2)   Initial erosion control measures and facilities shall be in place,
as required by the subdivision regulations, SWPPP, City Administrator, and the
City Engineer. All necessary off-site easements or dedications required for
city maintained facilities shall be conveyed solely to the city, with proper
signatures affixed;
      (3)   All contractors participating in the construction shall be
presented with a set of approved plans bearing the city stamp stating “Release
for Construction.” These plans shall remain on the job site at all times;
      (4)   A complete list of the contractors, their representatives on the
site, and telephone numbers where a responsible party may be reached at all
times must be submitted to the City Engineer and the City Administrator; and
      (5)   All applicable fees shall be paid to the city.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.047 INSPECTION.
   (A)   General procedure. Construction inspection shall be supervised by the
city staff and City Engineer. Construction shall be in accordance with the
city’s approved plans, and the standards and specifications of the city. Any
change in design required during construction should be made by the engineer
whose seal and signature are shown on the plans and approved by the city. All
revisions shall be approved by the City Engineer. If the City Engineer finds
upon inspection that any of the required public improvements have not be
constructed in accordance with the city’s construction standards and
specifications, the property owner shall be responsible for completing or
correcting the public improvements.
   (B)   Certificate of satisfactory completion.  
      (1)   Prior to the city accepting dedication of required public
improvements, the applicant’s engineer or surveyor shall certify to the City
Administrator, through submission of a detailed as-built construction drawing
of the property, indicating location, dimensions, materials, and other
information required by the Commission or City Administrator, that all required
public improvements have been completed. The as-built construction drawing
shall include a complete set of drawings of the paving, drainage, water,
sanitary sewer, or other public improvements, both onsite and offsite, showing
that the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements is in
accordance with construction plans for the plat, and all changes made in the
plans during construction, and containing on each sheet an as-built stamp
bearing the signature of the engineer and the date. Digital plans shall be
provided in a form required by the City Engineer (PDF or TIFF). In addition, 3
reproducible drawings 22 x 34 inch and one 11 x 17 copy of the utility plan
sheets containing the as-built information shall be submitted.
      (2)   The engineer or surveyor shall also furnish a copy of the final
plat and engineering plans, in a format that is compatible with the city’s CADD
or GIS system (PDF or TIFF). When these requirements have been met, the City
Engineer, on behalf of the city, shall thereafter accept the public
improvements for dedication in accordance with the established procedure.
      (3)   Acceptance of the development shall mean that the developer has
transferred all ownership and rights to all the public improvements to the city
for use and maintenance. The City Engineer may, at his or her decision, accept
dedication of a portion of the required public improvements, if the remaining
public improvements are not required for health and safety reasons and the
owner has posted security in accordance with §
155.027 of this chapter in the amount of 100% of the estimated cost as
determined by the City Engineer of those remaining improvements for a length of
time to be determined by the City Engineer. If the remaining public
improvements are greater than $10,000 and are not completed within the
determined length of time, the city will impose a penalty of 10% of the secured
amount. The obligation to complete the improvements remains with the developer,
and all future building permits or certificates of occupancy will be withheld
until the improvements are complete. If the remaining public improvements are
less than $10,000, the developer shall pay the actual dollar amount. The length
of time may be extended due to inclement weather or unforeseen delays by mutual
agreement between the developer and the city.
      (4)   Upon acceptance of the required public improvements, the City
Engineer shall submit a certificate to the developer stating that all required
public improvements have been satisfactorily completed.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.048 ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   No building permit shall be issued for a lot or building site unless
the lot or site has been officially recorded by a final plat approved by the
city and all public improvements as required for final plat approval have been
completed, except as permitted below. No building permit shall be issued for a
lot or building site unless all utility services (including city services and
outside services such as gas, power, and the like) have been installed and made
operational, and further, all drainage work for the lot has been satisfactorily
completed in accordance with the final plat requirements, erosion control
measures in place and vegetation established.
   (B)   Building permits may be issued for nonresidential development,
provided that a final plat is approved by the city and construction plans have
been released by the City Engineer. Building construction shall not be allowed
to surpass the construction of fire protection improvements.
   (C)   The City Administrator may authorize residential building permits for
a portion of a subdivision, provided that a final plat has been approved and
all public improvements have been completed for that portion of the
development, including but not limited to those required for fire and emergency
protection and erosion control. Notwithstanding, no lot may be sold or title
conveyed until a final plat approved by the city has been recorded.
   (D)   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for the use of a property
unless all subdivision improvements have been completed and both a final plat
and the as-built plat plans have been approved and accepted by the city, and
the final plat has been recorded. Notwithstanding the above, the City
Administrator or City Engineer may authorize the occupancy of a structure,
provided that an agreement providing cash escrow, a letter of credit, or other
sufficient surety is approved by the city for the completion of all remaining
public improvements. The certificate of occupancy may be revoked if the final
plat approval and filing process is not completed.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.049 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Plats straddling municipal boundaries. Whenever access to the
subdivision or addition is required across land in another municipality, the
Council may request assurance from that municipality’s attorney that access is
legally established, and from its engineer that the access road is adequately
improved, or that a bond has been duly executed and is sufficient in amount to
ensure the construction of the access road. In general, lot lines should be
drawn so as not to cross municipal, county, or school district boundary lines.
   (B)   Adequate public facilities policy. The land proposed for subdivision
shall be adequately served by essential public facilities and services. These
services include street access, water, and drainage. No plat or replat may be
approved unless it conforms to this policy and its standards. This policy may
be further defined and supplemented by other ordinances adopted by the city.
      (1)   Street access. All platted lots shall have safe and reliable street
access for daily use and emergency purposes.
         (a)   All platted lots shall have direct access to an improved public
street, private street, or an approved public way, and connected by improved
public streets to an improved public thoroughfare.
         (b)   All subdivisions shall have 2 means of access or approach. Where
development phasing or constraints of the land prevent the provision of a
second, separate means of access, the city may accept a temporary street
connection, or a median divided street or entry to satisfy this requirement. In
some situations, provisions for street extensions on adjacent property at a
future date may be acceptable.
      (2)   Water. All platted lots shall be connected to a public water system
which is capable of providing water for health and emergency purposes.
         (a)   All lots shall be provided service connections from a looped
water main providing water flow from 2 directions or sources.
         (b)   Water service shall be sufficient to meet the fire flow
requirements of the proposed development, except where a suitable alternative
means of fire protection is approved by the City Fire Chief.
         (c)   The city may accept development phasing, development
restrictions, or the construction of improvements to maintain adequate fire
protection.
      (3)   Wastewater. On-site systems shall be designed and constructed
according to the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) Construction
Standards for On-Site Wastewater Facilities, and the requirements of the
county, and special provisions of the city, if any. The construction plans
shall contain data and typical design criteria of the system for on-site
disposal of wastewater. Public wastewater removal, for those lots not meeting
county standards allowing on-site systems, shall conform to TCEQ and county
standards, and special provisions of the city, if any. The city adopts TCEQ and
county regulations regarding wastewater as a part of this chapter. The more
restrictive of the 2 regulations shall apply.
      (4)   Drainage. Increased storm water run-off attributable to new
development shall not exceed the capacity of the downstream drainage system or
adversely affect adjoining property. Where the projected run-off would exceed
capacity, the city may accept the phasing of development, the use of control
methods such as retention or detention, or the construction by the developer of
off- site drainage improvements as means of mitigation. An enclosed storm sewer
system, designed to properly accommodate the run-off from a storm event of 100-
year frequency, shall be provided in all areas where density is greater than or
equal to 2 units per gross acre.
   (C)   Subdivision or addition name. The proposed name of the subdivision or
addition shall not duplicate, or too closely approximate phonetically, the name
of any other subdivision or addition in the area covered by this chapter and
shall, where possible, correspond to named subdivisions or additions in the
immediate vicinity. The Council shall have final authority to approve the name
of the subdivision or addition.
   (D)   Corner and reference markers.
      (1)   All lot corners shall be located and marked with 1/2-inch
reinforcing bar, 18 inches in length, and shall be placed flush with the ground
or counter sunk, if necessary, in order to avoid being disturbed.
      (2)   Iron rods, 1 inch in diameter and 18 inches long, shall be placed
on all boundary corners, block corners, angle points, points of corners, and
points of tangents in public rights-of-way. Monuments in accordance with city
Construction Details shall be located as required by the City Engineer and
shall be located along all drainage and floodway boundaries.
      (3)   All iron rods set shall have plastic caps identifying the surveyor
and significance of the point (such as PC, PT, block corner, and the like). All
corners shall be flagged at the time of final inspection of the development.
   (E)   House numbering. The owners of all buildings within the city shall
display the building address so as to be visible from the street. All building
numbers shall be at least 3 inches in height and of a contrasting color and
attached to the mail box, visible from both directions.
   (F)   Benchmarks.
      (1)   Each new subdivision shall establish a permanent benchmark in the
vicinity of at least 1 entrance point. The benchmark shall be based on Texas
State Plane Coordinate System, NAD 83. The benchmark shall be tied into the
existing city benchmark system and shall have 3 reference marks.
      (2)   All work to establish benchmarks shall be under the direct
supervision of a registered professional land surveyor in the State of Texas
(RPLS). The RPLS shall prepare and provide written description of the benchmark
and reference point horizontal locations to the city. Each benchmark shall have
a northerly and easterly coordinate, latitude and longitude and elevation above
mean sea level.
      (3)   The benchmark shall consist of 3 1/3 inch aluminum domed survey
discs containing the following information:
         City of Parker
         Station ____
         Survey Marker Do Not Disturb.
      (4)   The aluminum disc shall be anchored in to concrete pier. The pier
shall extend into rock (limestone) 2 feet and be a minimum of 5 inches in
diameter. The coring for the pier shall be in the presence of the city Public
Works staff.
      (5)   Graphics of the aluminum disc and benchmark and fill in reference
mark description sheet can be obtained from the city.
      (6)   All marks shall be set and paper descriptions shall be filed with
the city prior to final inspection of the completed work.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.050 LOT DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Lot arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be
no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in
securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with Chapters
151 and
156 of this code, and other applicable ordinances, laws, and regulations.
Driveway access shall be provided to residential structures and detached
garages on the lots from an approved street or public way.
   (B)   Lot dimensions. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards
of
Chapter 156. In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street
lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule
will give a better street or lot plan. Depth and width of properties reserved
or laid out for business purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-
street parking, landscaping, and loading facilities required for the type of
use and development contemplated, as established in
Chapter 156, and provided those uses are allowed by ordinance.
   (C)   Double frontage residential lots. Double frontage lots shall be
avoided except where necessary to separate residential development from traffic
arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
   (D)   Blocks. The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be such as are
appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated.
   (E)   Soil preservation and final grading. Top soil shall not be removed
from residential lots or used as spoil, but shall be redistributed so as to
provide at least 6 inches of cover on the lots and parkways. Top soil may need
to be imported to obtain 6 inches of depth on each lot. Permanent erosion
control measures, such as grassed parkways, shall be established throughout the
development prior to final acceptance of the improvements. All areas disturbed
during the construction process shall be revegetated and regraded as necessary.
   (F)   Lot grading and drainage. Drainage for lots shall be designed in
accordance with the city’s requirements. Lots shall be laid out so as to
provide positive drainage away from all buildings, and individual lot drainage
shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area.
Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water
from each lot to adjacent lots. The land shall be platted with appropriate
regard for all topographical and drainage features and shall minimize the use
of retaining walls. A grading plan shall be provided with contours at an
interval of 0.5 foot or less. Grading plans shall show existing and design
contours.
   (G)   Debris and waste. No cut trees, timber, debris, large rocks or stones,
junk, rubbish, or other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any
land, or left or deposited on any lot or street for longer than 60 calendar
days or at the time of final acceptance by the City Engineer, and removal of
those items and materials shall be required prior to that acceptance. No items
and materials as herein described shall be left or deposited in any area of the
subdivision or addition at the time of acceptance of dedication of public
improvements. However, soil for redistribution may be stockpiled with
appropriate erosion control measures on a property with approval of the City
Engineer.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.051 GLARE.
   (A)   No use in any district, or the extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall be
operated so as to produce intense glare or direct illumination across the
boundary property line from a visible source of illumination of such intensity
as to create a nuisance or detract from the use or enjoyment of the adjacent
property. All outside lights shall be designed with a light source and
reflector so selected that acting together the light beam is controlled and not
directed across any bounding property line. With the exception of street lights
owned and operated by the city, the maximum allowable intensity of light
measured at the property line shall not exceed 1 foot candle.
   (B)   A light pole, and height of the light fixture, shall not exceed 20
feet above grade, without a special use permit.
(Ord. 455, passed 4-13-1999; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.052 STREETS AND THOROUGHFARES.
   (A)   Screening. Screening walls are not permitted, except as specifically
approved by the Council.
   (B)   Adequacy of streets and thoroughfares. All streets shall be designed
and platted in general conformance with the thoroughfare plan, and other
standards as applicable. Access to all lots shall be via approved streets as
defined in this chapter.
   (C)   Design standards.
      (1)   General. In order to provide for streets of suitable location,
width, and construction to accommodate prospective traffic and afford
satisfactory access to police, firefighting, sanitation, and street maintenance
equipment, and to coordinate streets so as to compose a convenient system and
avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties, an adequate street and
thoroughfare system shall be designed in accordance with the standards set
forth in this chapter. In the event of a conflict between this chapter or other
regulations and those contained in such documents, the more specific or
restrictive provisions shall be applied as determined by the City Engineer.
Paving and other improvements are subject to the participation policies of the
city. All pavement structures shall be designed by the engineer of record based
on a geotechnical investigation of the site and actual projected traffic
volumes.
      (2)   Street paving and improvements. After underground utilities have
been installed, the developer shall construct roadways as prescribed in this
chapter. Adequate provision shall be made for water lines, sewer lines, other
utilities, culverts, drains, and bridges. All street pavement, drainage
improvements and structures, and turnarounds shall conform to all construction
standards and specifications contained or referenced in this chapter.
      (3)   Concrete street requirements. Streets shall conform to the
corresponding attachments in the
Appendix to this chapter.
      (4)   Substandard streets. Existing substandard streets or roads, as
defined in §
155.010 of this code that are located within or adjacent to the proposed
development shall be upgraded, by the developer at his or her expense, to city
standards. Off-site roads that are proposed by the developer to be improved to
less than city standards shall be by written request of the developer and must
be acted on as a variance to this chapter.
      (5)   Construction requirements.
         (a)   Residential and collector street construction. The developer
shall, at his or her own cost and expense, construct all residential and
collector streets within the subdivision in accordance with city standards (see
Ch. 155 Appendix). No proposed pavement section of lesser thickness or using
alternate materials to those shown on the
Ch. 155 Appendix attachments shall be permitted unless the design is fully
documented by the developer’s engineer to substantiate that the alternate
design will provide equivalent capacity and durability and the alternate design
is approved by the City Council with the advice and consent of the City
Engineer.
         (b)   Major thoroughfare construction.
            1.   On roadways, adjacent to the proposed subdivision, that are
designated to be major thoroughfares, the subdivider shall be required to
construct, at his or her own cost and expense, ½ of the proposed ultimate
street section together with proper drainage facilities.
            2.   Where major thoroughfares traverse a subdivision, the
subdivider shall be required, at his or her own cost and expense, to construct
a 2-lane wide section on each side of the roadway. Construction shall be in
accordance with city standard construction details (see
Appendix Attachments 5 and 6).
            3.   No proposed pavement section of lesser thickness or using
alternate materials to those shown on the
Appendix attachments shall be permitted unless the design is fully documented
by the engineer to substantiate that the alternate design will provide
equivalent capacity and durability and the alternate design is approved by the
City Council with the advice and consent of the City Engineer.
      (6)   Paving type and width requirements.
         (a)   Residential and collector streets. Widths of residential and
collector streets shall be as described in city standards (see
Appendix Attachments 1 through 6).
         (b)   Roadway and street sections. As a minimum, roadways and streets
shall have the right-of-way, cross-section, and construction indicated in the
Appendix, Attachments 1 through 6, which are as follows:
            1.   Attachment 1, (24 feet), Estate Residential (concrete);
            2.   Attachment 2, Suburban Residential (concrete);
            3.   Attachment 3, (24 feet), Estate Collector (concrete);
            4.   Attachment 4, Suburban Collector (concrete);
            5.   Attachment 5, M4U-S (Suburban Undivided 4-Lane Thoroughfare);
and
            6.   Attachment 6, M4D-S (Suburban Divided 4-Lane Thoroughfare).
         (c)   Street returns.
            1.   The minimum radius for all street returns shall be 30 feet.
            2.   The minimum radius returns for driveways on residential or
collector streets shall be 20 feet.
            3.   The minimum radius returns for driveways on thoroughfares
shall be 30 feet.
      (7)   Longitudinal pavement grades. The maximum longitudinal grades are
as follows (unless approved by the City Engineer).
 
Type of Street     Maximum Grade
Collector          8%
Major thoroughfare 6%
Residential        10%
 
      (8)   Median openings. Median openings, median pavers, and left turn
lanes, including channelizing buttons, constructed to serve dedicated streets
or private drives, shall be installed and paved to city standards (see
Appendix) by the developer. Existing trees in the median, if affected by median
improvements, must be relocated or replaced. If the trees cannot be relocated
or replaced in the median, then the developer shall pay a reasonable fee to the
city to replace the tree or equivalent caliber of trees in public right-of-way
or on public land.
      (9)   Acceleration and deceleration lanes. Acceleration or deceleration
lanes shall be installed by the developers when required by the City Engineer,
and constructed to the same standards as the adjoining street in accordance
with the City Engineer’s requirements.
      (10)   Future connections. Street extensions may be required to link
subdivisions as the neighborhood develops. Temporary cul-de-sacs shall be
installed by the developer when required by phasing.
      (11)   Intersections. Street intersections shall be constructed in
accordance with the city’s standards, as modified by the City Engineer for
application within the city’s jurisdiction.
      (12)   Traffic buttons. If recommended by the City Engineer and required
by the Commission, the developer shall install traffic buttons which are
necessary for the safe transition, channelization, or separation of traffic.
      (13)   Reserve strips. The creation of reserve strips shall not be
permitted in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent property to any
street, unless a variance, in writing, is requested.
      (14)   Grading and improvement plan. Streets shall be graded and improved
in conformance with the city standards (see
Appendix), and the design and specifications shall be approved as to design and
specifications by the City Engineer. The construction plans are required to be
submitted prior to plat approval, and shall include cross sections at a minimum
of every 100 feet.
      (15)   Topography and arrangement.
         (a)   Streets shall be related appropriately to the topography.
Residential streets shall be curvilinear as defined below. All streets shall be
arranged so as to obtain building sites, when possible, at or above the grades
of the streets. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the
original topography. A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided.
Design speeds shall be included in the plan set for roadway horizontal and
vertical design.
         (b)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
            CURVILINEAR STREETS. Generally, streets which have at least 75% of
the center line length along curves having radii of no more than 500 feet and
subtending arcs of at least 45 degrees. This definition is subject to site
physical consideration and site configuration.
         (c)   All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and
proposed system of streets and dedicated rights-of-way as established on the
city’s thoroughfare plan. However, collector streets not shown on the plan may
be required to meet traffic requirements of proposed development. Residential
streets shall be designed to discourage use by through traffic, to permit
efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of
streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property.
         (d)   Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the
tract to be platted, unless prevented by topography or other physical
conditions, or unless in the opinion of the Commission that extension is not
necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision or
addition with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development
of adjacent tracts.
      (16)   Continuation of streets and cul-de-sacs.
         (a)   The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of
principal streets between adjacent properties.
         (b)   If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must
temporarily be a dead-end street, the street shall be constructed to the
property line in accordance with city standards (see
Appendix).
         (c)   Cul-de-sac turnarounds having a minimum radius of 40 feet shall
be provided at the end of all permanent dead-end streets.
      (17)   Cul-de-sac length. No cul-de-sac unless otherwise authorized shall
exceed 600 feet in length, which is to be measured from the center line of the
street with which it intersects to the center point of the cul-de-sac. Lengths
longer than 600 feet shall require specific approval by the Council. In
reviewing an over-length submittal, the Commission shall consider the
following:
         (a)   Alternative designs which would reduce cul-de-sac length;
         (b)   Means of mitigation, including but not limited to increased
street width, mid-block turnarounds, limitation on the number of lots to be
created and served, temporary points of access, and additional fire protection
measures.
      (18)   Street names and signs.
         (a)   Street names must be submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for approval in accordance with the city’s guidelines for the naming
of streets. Names of corporations may not be used as street names. The Planning
and Zoning Commission will maintain an index of street names which will contain
these guidelines. Street names and subdivision names are fixed at the time of
approval of the final plat. A fee, in accordance with this code, will be
charged to change street names and subdivision names after approval of the
final plat, and approved by the appropriate post office.
         (b)   The developer shall purchase and install all street signs to
city approved standards.
         (c)   Street name signs shall be installed in accordance with the
city’s guidelines before issuance of a building permit for any structure on the
streets approved.
      (19)   Street lights.
         (a)   Street lighting shall conform to ordinances and standards of the
city. The cost of street lighting, including installation, maintenance and
operation shall be borne by the developer and the Home Owners Association.
         (b)   Street lights shall use full cut-off fixtures to confine light
to the area requiring illumination. The developer shall submit a street
lighting plan that includes conduit with construction plans for approval by the
city. The developer shall install conduit for street lights and traffic signals
in divided thoroughfares as directed by the City Engineer, conduit shall be
scheduled 80 with a minimum diameter of 3 inches with hand holes at all change
of direction and at termination points.
   (D)   Street dedications and reservations.
      (1)   Dedication of right-of-way. The developer shall provide all right-
of-way required for existing or future streets, including perimeter streets, as
shown in the thoroughfare plan or other valid development plans approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council. Additional right-of-way may be
necessary to meet drainage, utility placement, visibility, emergency egress and
ingress, or other requirements as required by the City Engineer. In the case of
perimeter streets, at least ½ of the total required right-of-way for those
streets shall be provided. However, in some instances more than ½ shall be
required depending on the actual or proposed alignment of the street. Standard
right-of-way widths are specifically set forth in accordance with city
standards (see
Appendix).
      (2)   Perimeter streets. Where an existing half-street is adjacent to a
new subdivision or addition, the remaining ½ of the street shall be dedicated
and improved by the developer of the addition.
      (3)   Slope easements. The dedication of easements, in addition to
dedicated rights- of-way, shall be required whenever, due to topography,
additional width is necessary to provide adequate earth slopes. These slopes
shall not be in excess of 4 feet horizontal to 1 foot vertical, unless accepted
by City Engineer.
   (E)   Street construction. The developer shall construct all streets or
thoroughfares in accordance with city standards (see
Appendix) in rights-of-way as required by the thoroughfare plan, subject to
participation policies stated in §
155.091 of this code. Streets which dead-end at power lines or similar rights-
of-way and are intended for future extension shall be constructed in the full
right-of- way as required by the thoroughfare plan, for ½ the distance across
the right-of-way for each side.
   (F)   Improvement, widening, and realignment of existing and proposed
streets. Where a subdivision or addition borders a substandard street or when
the thoroughfare plan indicates plans for realignment, widening, or
constructing a street that would require use of some of the land in the
subdivision or addition, the applicant shall improve and dedicate those areas
for widening or realignment of those streets, as follows.
      (1)   When a proposed subdivision or addition abuts or will abut both
sides of a substandard street or a proposed street in the major thoroughfare
plan, the developer shall improve the substandard street or proposed street so
that it will be a standard street. The minimum street cross- sections are as
shown in the
Appendix, Attachments 1 through 6.
      (2)   If the proposed subdivision or addition is located along only 1
side of a substandard street or a proposed street in the major thoroughfare
plan, the owner shall be required to improve his or her
side of the substandard street or proposed street, so that it will be a
standard street. The minimum street paving width shall be as shown in division
(C)(6) of this section. The developer may, however, petition the city to
construct the improvements herein required, subject, upon approval, to the
city’s escrow policies stated in §
155.091 of this code.
      (3)   When any nonresidential street is to be extended through a property
to intersect with another nonresidential street, the full design width shall be
constructed for a minimum distance of 350 feet from the point of intersection.
From that point the pavement width may be decreased, with provision of an
appropriate transition in paving width. If property abutting only 1 side of the
proposed thoroughfare is to be developed, then ½ of the lanes shall be
constructed, including left turn lane and transition.
   (G)   Access from residential subdivisions or additions. Residential lots
shall have a minimum street frontage at least 4 times the minimum side yard
setback (cul-de-sac lots not included). Where subdivisions are platted so that
lots face onto thoroughfares, direct driveway access to the thoroughfare is not
permitted unless the lot has a front yard setback of at least 75 feet and a lot
width of at least 150 feet.
   (H)   Private streets. Subdivisions may be developed with private streets
instead of public streets if the development complies with the requirements of
this section and the subdivision has received a specific use permit for a
private street development.
      (1)   Design and construction standards. Private streets shall conform to
the same standards regulating the design and construction of public streets.
      (2)   Streets excluded. Streets shown on the thoroughfare plan shall not
be used, maintained, or constructed as private streets. Also, the Planning and
Zoning Commission may deny the creation of any other private street if in the
Commission’s judgment the private street would negatively affect traffic
circulation on public streets or impair access to property either on-site or
off-site to the subdivision, impair access to or from public facilities
including schools, parks, and libraries, or delay the response time of
emergency vehicles.
      (3)   Homeowners associations required. Subdivisions developed with
private streets shall have a homeowners association which includes all property
served by private streets. The association shall own and be responsible for the
maintenance of private streets and appurtenances. The association documents
must establish a reserve fund for the maintenance of streets and other
improvements. The association documents shall be reviewed and approved by the
City Attorney to ensure that they conform to this and other applicable city
ordinances. The documents shall be filed of record prior to the approval of the
final plat. Lot deeds must convey membership in the association and provide for
the payment of dues and assessments required by the association. The
association may not be dissolved without the prior written consent of the city.
No portion of the association documents pertaining to the maintenance of the
private streets and assessments may be amended without the written consent of
the city.
      (4)   Private street lot.
         (a)   Private streets shall be constructed within a separate lot owned
by the homeowners association. The street shall be in accordance with city
standards (see
Appendix Attachments 1 through 6), and the lot shall conform to all applicable
city requirements.
         (b)   An easement covering the street lot shall be granted to the city
providing unrestricted use of the property for utilities and the maintenance of
same. This right shall extend to all utility providers, including telecable
companies, operating within the city. The easement shall also provide the city
with the right of access for any purpose related to the exercise of a
governmental service or function, including but not limited to fire and police
protection, inspection, and code enforcement. The easement shall permit the
city to remove any vehicle or obstacle within the street lot that impairs
emergency access.
      (5)   Construction and maintenance cost. The city shall not pay for any
portion of the cost of constructing or maintaining a private street.
      (6)   City utilities. Water, sewer (when required), drainage facilities,
street lights, and signs placed within the private street lot shall be
installed to city standards and dedicated to the city prior to approval of the
final plat. All city regulations relating to infrastructure financing,
developer cost participation, and capital cost recovery shall apply to
developments with private streets, with the exception of those applying to
street construction.
      (7)   Plans and inspections. Developments proposed with private streets
must submit to the city the same plans and engineering information required to
construct public streets and utilities. Requirements pertaining to inspection
and approval of improvements prior to final plat approval shall apply. Fees
charged for these services shall also apply. The city may periodically inspect
private streets and require repairs necessary to ensure emergency access.
      (8)   Access restrictions. The entrances to all private streets must be
marked with a sign stating that it is a private street. Guard houses, access
control gates, and cross arms may be constructed with approval of the City
Council. All restricted access entrances must be staffed 24 hours every day, or
provide an alternative means of ensuring access to the subdivision by the city
and other utility service providers with appropriate identification. If the
association fails to maintain reliable access as required to provide city
services, the city may enter the subdivision and remove any gate or device
which is a barrier to access at the sole expense of the association. The
association documents shall contain provisions in conformity with this division
which may not be amended without the written consent of the city.
      (9)   Waiver of services. The subdivision final plat, property deeds, and
property owner association documents shall note that certain city services
shall not be provided on private streets. Among the services which will not be
provided are: routine police patrols, enforcement of traffic and
parking ordinances, and preparation of accident reports. All private traffic
regulatory signs shall conform to the State Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices. Depending on the characteristics of the proposed development, other
services may not be provided.
      (10)   Petition to convert to public streets. The property association
documents shall allow the association to request the city accept private
streets and the associated property as public streets and rights-of-way upon
written notice to all association members and the favorable vote of 51% of the
membership. However, in no event shall the city be obligated to accept these
streets as public. Should the city elect to accept the streets as public, the
city may inspect the private streets and assess the lot owners for the expense
of needed repairs concurrent with the city’s acceptance of the streets. The
city will be the sole judge of whether repairs are needed. The city may also
require, at the association’s expense, the removal of guard houses, access
control devices, landscaping, or other aesthetic amenities located within the
street lot. The association documents shall provide for the city’s right to
this assessment. Those portions of the association documents pertaining to the
subject matter contained in this division shall not be amended without the
written consent of the city.
      (11)   Hold harmless. The subdivision final plat shall specifically state
that the homeowners association, as owner of the private streets and
appurtenances, agrees to release, indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the
city, any governmental entity, and public utility for damages to the private
street occasioned by the reasonable use of the private street by the city,
governmental entity, or public utility; for damages and injury (including
death) arising from the condition of that private street; for damages and
injury (including death) arising out of the use by the city, governmental
entity, or public utility of any restricted access gate or entrance; and for
damages and injury (including death) arising out of any use of the subdivision
by the city, government entity, or public utility. Further, the statement shall
provide that all lot owners shall release the city, governmental entities, and
public utilities for such damages and injuries. The indemnifications contained
in this division apply regardless of whether or not those damages and injury
(including death) are caused by the negligent act or omission of the city,
governmental entity, or public utility, or their representative officers,
employees, or agents.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.053 PEDESTRIAN ACCESS EASEMENTS; TRAILS.
   (A)   Pedestrian accesses. The city may require, in order to facilitate
pedestrian access from the streets to schools, parks, playgrounds, or other
nearby streets, perpetual unobstructed easements at least 15 feet in width.
Easements shall be indicated on the plat.
   (B)   Trails. When trails are provided in a development, they shall be
improved to meet the intended purpose of the trail. The trail improvement shall
be permanent and shall be designed for easy maintenance.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.054 DRAINAGE.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Plans, profiles, and specifications shall be prepared for storm
sewer improvements to be constructed and shall show the locations, sizes,
grades, hydraulic gradients, flow arrows, and other details for the proposed
pipe, inlets, manholes, culverts, outlet structures, and other appurtenances.
Each sheet of the plans and profiles shall bear the seal and signature of the
professional engineer who prepared them. Along with plan/profile sheets the
engineer of record shall include in the plan set the design calculations for
drainage channels, culvert pipes, storm sewer pipes and inlets. All starting
hydraulic grade lines shall be tied to a known FEMA 100-year water surface.
      (2)   Storm sewers, bridges, culverts, inlets, and drainage channels or
ditches of a permanent design, adequate to carry off 100-year design storm,
shall be installed by the subdivider throughout the entire length of the
drainage area where the surface drainage traverses the subdivision. Drainage
ditches shall be no deeper than 4 feet, including 1 foot of freeboard with 4:
1 sideslopes. All excess storm drains shall be carried by underground storm
drainage system to the outfall.
      (3)   The subdivider shall pay for the cost of all drainage improvements
connected with the development of his or her subdivision, including any
necessary off-site channels or storm sewers required or attributed including
any facilities needed to accommodate increased run-off resulting from the
developer’s development of the subdivision, and acquisition of any required
easements. The developer shall provide on-site water detention capacity to
limit the rate of run-off from the subdivision or make the necessary off-site
improvements to handle the off-site run-off rate increase above undeveloped
conditions, if the City Engineer determines those facilities are needed.
         (a)   All flow lines shall be permanently established by natural rock
or some other system approved by the city.
         (b)   In areas containing FEMA streams, the developer shall conform to
FEMA requirements and submit related data to the city for review and approval
submission to FEMA.
         (c)   The plans shall indicate the sizes of all driveway culverts and
the location and size of all street culverts. All culverts shall be provided
with city approved safety (sloped) head walls, and side slopes of drainage
ditches shall not be steeper than 4:1, unless approved by the City Engineer.
         (d)   For control of erosion along drainage ditches and channels in
subdivisions, the developer shall provide a complete climate adaptable grass
cover or other city accepted erosion material along the ditches and channels
prior to acceptance of the work by the city. Grass shall be placed by using
solid sod to obtain the required coverage. Alternatively, if adequate
precautions are taken for erosion control, hydromulch may be used. During the
first growing season, the grassed area shall be fertilized. Water sufficient to
obtain complete coverage of the area shall be provided daily for at least 60
days prior to final acceptance by the city. Areas which do not exhibit healthy
growth within 90 days shall be
replanted until a healthy growth is obtained. On all open ditch drainage
facilities, the developer shall be responsible for keeping silt removed, eroded
areas restored, and ground cover in place for 2 years after acceptance of the
development or until 90% of the lots have been developed, whichever occurs
first. Each lot shall include erosion control devices to minimize silting of
open channels. The developer’s assurance of this maintenance shall be in a form
acceptable to the city.
      (4)   Discharge of storm drainage shall be at a point of adequate
capacity. If adequate capacity does not exist off-site, the developer shall be
required to provide off-site drainage improvements or improve downstream
facilities so they are adequate to carry the 100-year storm flow under fully
developed conditions.
   (B)   Design of facilities.
      (1)   Standards. The design, materials, and construction of storm
drainage structures shall be in accordance with the City of Plano Storm
Drainage Design Manual as may be amended by this chapter and the City Engineer.
Plans and calculations shall be submitted with the plat. Detention systems
shall be designed for a series of storm frequencies 2, 25, 50, and 100 year
storm events. Each pond shall have a designed outlet structure to release storm
water for the various storm frequencies.
      (2)   Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert or other
drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential
run-off from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the
subdivision or addition. The developer’s engineer shall initially determine the
necessary size of the facility based on the provisions of the construction
standards and specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed
development, subject to approval by the City Engineer.
      (3)   Effect on downstream drainage areas. The developer’s engineer,
shall study the effect of each addition’s storm run-off on the existing land
and drainage facilities immediately downstream of the addition. Where it is
determined that existing capacity is not available immediately downstream as
assessed by the City Engineer, the developer’s engineer shall design a drainage
system, detention facility, or parallel system to mitigate the deficiency. The
Commission may withhold (if a waiver is on file) or deny approval of the plat
until this mitigation has been provided.
      (4)   Location. Except where otherwise required, drainage shall be
provided in a system of earthen channels where depth does not exceed 4 feet,
including 1 foot of freeboard or a combination of open channels and underground
storm drainage system constructed in street rights-of- way, or in easements.
      (5)   Construction of underground facilities. In some cases, a developer
may choose or be required to install drainage facilities underground. All flows
which cannot be conveyed by 4 feet of deep earthen channels will be in
underground system or in combination of open channel and underground pipe
system. These installations are subject to approval by the City Engineer.
      (6)   Detention facilities. Lakes, detention ponds, and retention ponds
may be constructed in all areas, provided they are approved by the City
Engineer. Easements shall be provided to ensure protection of these areas for
maintenance purposes. Detention facilities shall include a maintenance plan as
part of the design.
      (7)   Alternate facilities. Other innovative drainage concepts will be
considered if approved by the City Engineer.
   (C)   Creeks and floodplains.
      (1)   Floodplain restrictions. The City Council shall, when it deems it
necessary for the health, safety, or welfare of the present and future
population of the area and necessary to the conservation of water, drainage,
and sanitary facilities, prohibit development of any portion of the property
which lies within the floodplain of any stream or drainage course. These
floodplain areas shall be preserved from any and all destruction or damage
resulting from clearing, grading, or dumping of earth, waste, or material, or
stumps, except at the discretion of the City Council. Floodplains are also
subject to the restrictions of the tree preservation requirements in this code,
if any.
      (2)   Creek restrictions. Major creeks shall remain in open natural
condition; smaller creeks or drainage ways may be channelized, provided they
meet the criteria of the storm drainage requirements of the city, the Corps of
Engineers and as accepted by the City Engineer. All creeks and excavated
channels shall remain part of the platted lot with a city dedicated drainage
easement. The easement may be dedicated to the city or a homeowners
association. When a creek or excavated channel is to remain open, or in its
natural condition, it shall meet 1 of the following requirements, subject to
approval of Council:
         (a)   Creeks and drainage ways may be retained as a part of a
residential lot, and it shall be the property owner’s responsibility to
maintain this area, except as otherwise provided. A maintenance drainage
easement shall be granted to the city at city request and shall grant the right
but not the obligation to maintain and construct drainage facilities if the
creek or drainage way is not being properly maintained. A lien may be filed
against the property in favor of the city to secure payment of any expenses
incurred by the city for maintenance;
         (b)   Creeks or drainage ways may be owned and maintained by an
approved maintenance entity. A maintenance entity may include homeowners
association or similar entity. The maintenance entity’s bylaws and covenants
filed of record, if any, shall provide for ongoing maintenance. The easement
shall authorize a lien against individual abutting lots in favor of the city to
secure the payment to the city for any expenses incurred by the city in the
event of default; or
         (c)   All properties may create an entity to maintain creeks or
drainage ways, provided the maintenance area is set forth by easement and the
entity’s bylaws, filed of record, provide for ongoing maintenance. These
easements shall authorize a lien against individual abutting properties in
favor of the city to secure payment for any expenses incurred if the
maintenance entity is not properly maintaining the creek or drainage way.
Adequate floodway easements and drainage easements shall be required that give
the city the right but not the obligation to maintain and construct drainage
facilities if, in the city’s sole opinion, the maintenance entity is not
properly maintaining the creek or drainage way.
      (3)   Right of approval. In all cases, the city shall have the discretion
to approve, or disapprove, the proposed street alignment fronting on city
trails, or drainage ways and creeks.
   (D)   Dedication of drainage easements.
      (1)   General requirements. On request of the city, when a subdivision or
addition is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream, there
shall be provided a storm water or drainage easement conforming substantially
to the line of that watercourse, and of a width and construction as will be
adequate for the purpose. Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage
be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for
maximum potential volume of flow and access for maintenance.
      (2)   Maintenance and access easements. The property owner shall provide
sufficient access on each side of and parallel to creeks or drainage ways for
maintenance purposes. The access shall be above the base flood elevation and
accessible to vehicles and equipment. Access must also be provided at a maximum
1,200-foot spacing along streets. The location and size of the maintenance and
access easement shall be determined by the City Engineer. The minimum width
shall be 10 feet, and the maximum width of the access easement shall be 15
feet. Permanent monuments, the type and locations of which to be approved by
the City Engineer, shall be placed along the boundaries of the maintenance and
access easement and private property. This maintenance and access easement
shall be included in the dedication requirements of this section, and included
in the drainage and floodway easement width.
      (3)   Drainage easements.
         (a)   Where topography or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within street rights-of-way,
perpetual, unobstructed easements at least 25 feet in width, depending on
slopes, for drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the
street lines and with satisfactory access to the street. Easements shall be
shown on the plat. Drainage easements shall extend from the street to a natural
watercourse or to other drainage facilities.
         (b)   When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private
land outside the subdivision or addition, appropriate drainage easements must
be secured.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.055 SEWAGE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Sewage facilities, if required. Sewage systems shall in all respects
conform with the city’s Comprehensive Plan and meet the requirements, in all
respects, TCEQ and Collin County. The city shall make the final determination
of the adequacy of facilities proposed. The systems shall be designed according
to the city standards, as established by the City Engineer, with approval by
the Council. The developer shall install all sewage facilities at the
developer’s cost.
      (1)   Necessity and adequacy. Sanitary sewer facilities, if required by
the city, county, or state, shall be furnished and installed to adequately
service the subdivision. The necessity or adequacy of the sewerage facilities
provided by the developer shall be determined by the city.
      (2)   Minimum size main. The minimum diameter of sewer mains shall be 8
inches. Six-inch diameter sewer mains may be acceptable only for short
distances, not to exceed 400 feet, and only in locations approved by the city.
Peaking factors shall be determined by the City Engineer.
      (3)   Location. Sewer lines shall be located in street rights-of-way or
in easements (minimum width 15 feet), and shall be a minimum of 6 feet deep to
the invert, unless a shallow depth is approved by the City Engineer. Easements
shall be provided for sewer lines that parallel state numbered highways.
      (4)   Alignment and grades. All sewers shall conform to the requirements
of TCEQ.
      (5)   Lift stations. All lift stations shall be designed and constructed
with 2 or more sewage pumps, and the stations shall be capable of pumping the
design maximum flow with the largest pump out of service. Detailed design data,
plans, and specifications of the pumps shall be submitted to the City Engineer
with the final plat. The City Engineer shall designate the peaking factor. Lift
station design shall meet the requirements of TCEQ.
      (6)   Force mains. At design for maximum flows, a cleansing velocity of
at least 2 feet per second shall be maintained. Where necessary, automatic air
release/vacuum valves shall be placed at high points in the force main to
prevent air locking. Air valves shall be kept to a minimum as determined by
City Engineer. Reasonable pressures in the force main shall be a maximum of 20
psi, unless higher pressure is accepted by the City Engineer and approved by
the city.
      (7)   Meter station. When meter stations are necessary, the plans for the
station shall be submitted to the city and the treatment authority for review
with the construction plans for the subdivision.
      (8)   Cleanouts. Standard cleanouts shall be constructed at the ends of
all sanitary sewers where no future extensions are planned. Two-way cleanouts
shall be installed and located at or near the property line of each lot
connected to the sanitary sewer. Other cleanouts may be required at other
locations as determined by the City Engineer.
   (B)   On-site wastewater systems. On-site systems shall be designed and
constructed according to TCEQ Construction Standards for On-Site Wastewater
Facilities, and the requirements of Collin County and the city for on-site
wastewater systems. The final construction plans shall contain data and typical
design of the system for on-site disposal of wastewater. The city requires a
residential lot of 1 acre minimum area per residential unit for the
installation and use of an on-site (septic) wastewater system.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.056 WATER FACILITIES.
   (A)   Standards and requirements. Water systems shall be of sufficient size
to furnish adequate domestic water, to furnish fire protection to all lots, and
shall conform with the city’s master plan, standard details, and city design
standards and meet the requirements, in all respects, of TCEQ. The city shall
make the final determination of the adequacy of water mains proposed. The water
line sizes shall be designed according to the city standards (see
Appendix), which are the water standards of the City of Plano with
modifications by the City Engineer. Line sizes shall be as shown on the city’s
master water plan, and the developer shall install all lines and system
components at the developer’s cost.
   (B)   Location.
      (1)   All water mains shall be constructed within exclusive street
rights-of-way or easements dedicated to the city and be parallel to the street
right-of-way.
      (2)   Easements shall be provided for water mains which parallel any
state numbered highway.
      (3)   Water mains shall be installed in or extended along all frontage
streets of the proposed subdivision and shall be connected to all existing
water mains as determined by the City Engineer. Provision of water mains in
conjunction with cul-de-sac streets shall be at the discretion of the City
Engineer. To ensure reliability of service, all extensions to the water system
must provide for looping including cul-de-sacs unless a specific variance is
given. Adequate capacity shall be determined by the standards for fire flow as
accepted by the State Board of Insurance and the Fire Prevention and
Engineering Bureau of the state.
      (4)   All water lines crossing under pavement and drainage structures
must include steel encasement pipe. Water services lines must include PVC
encasement pipe.
   (C)   Water line size. The minimum diameter of all water service mains shall
be 8 inches. Valving shall be provided so that no more than 800 feet of line
will be out of service unless approved by the City Engineer. Where dead-ends
must exist, 8-inch diameter or larger mains shall be installed and fire
hydrants or other means for flushing those lines shall be provided at the
terminal ends. The minimum limits set forth in the above shall not be exceeded
except upon the specific approval by the City Engineer, City Building Official,
and the Fire Chief, but in no event shall these requirements be less than the
minimum required by the State Board of Insurance and the Fire Prevention and
Engineering Bureau of the state.
   (D)   Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants and valves shall be required for all
subdivisions and additions and shall be located to satisfy the requirements of
the city. Fire hydrants shall be located in accordance with the requirements of
the City Engineer. To eliminate future street openings, all underground
utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves and all
other supply improvements, shall be installed before any final paving of a
street shown on the subdivision plat. Reflective fire hydrant buttons shall be
installed in all streets at a point adjacent to fire hydrants. The buttons
shall conform to the City Engineer’s specifications. At corner locations,
buttons shall be installed in both streets.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.057 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE UTILITIES.
   (A)   Easements.
      (1)   The property owner shall be required to furnish all easements and
rights-of-way required to serve the development. Where reasonable, utilities
shall be located within street rights-of- way. However, the property owner may
offer easements outside of street rights-of-way. All utility facilities
existing and proposed throughout the property shall be shown on the plat.
      (2)   Easements shall be provided for both municipal and private
utilities and shall be recorded on the final plat or replat. Municipal
easements for water and sanitary sewer shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width.
Storm sewer easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width. All municipal
easements may be wider as determined by the City Engineer depending on the
depth and the size of the utility. Private utility easements shall be sized by
the utility company. Proper coordination shall be established between the
property owner and the applicable utility companies for the establishment of
utility easements on adjoining properties. Private utilities shall not be
constructed in public utility easements.
      (3)   When topographical or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of utilities within a public right-of-way, perpetual
unobstructed easements at least 10 feet in width shall be provided for
satisfactory access. Easements shall be indicated on the plat.
   (B)   Damage. The contractor and owner shall be responsible for all damage
to existing public improvements caused during construction of new public
improvements.
   (C)   Underground utilities. All utilities, including electrical
distribution and communication, shall be installed underground along
thoroughfares, in compliance with utility service regulations, unless otherwise
approved by the City Engineer. Electrical utility service to properties from
distribution lines shall be placed underground from the right-of-way or
easement to the point of service. Developers shall install all utilities
underground on each property.
   (D)   General requirements.
      (1)   All services for utilities shall be made available for each lot in
a manner so as to eliminate the necessity for disturbing the pavement, curb,
gutter, and drainage structures when connections are made.
      (2)   The developer shall provide separate service lines for water and
sanitary sewers, where required, to each lot or point of metering.
      (3)   All water service lines shall be single services. Double services
are prohibited except by special permission of the City Water Department.
         (a)   Single services shall be located at the center of each lot
street frontage. The service shall be a minimum of 1-inch type K copper, or
poly (SDR-9 PR200 psi) (larger services may be required based on the facility
served), with double banded brass saddles with corporation on saddle,
compression couplings (only), angle stop, and no couplings under pavement. All
fittings shall be brass.
         (b)   The meter shall be located in the easement parallel to the
street right-of- way within 1 foot of the property line. The meter shall be set
so the top of the meter is no more than 8 inches below final grade level, and
is off-centered in the box toward the street side. The box shall be acceptable
to the city.
      (4)   Sanitary sewer service lines shall have a minimum diameter of 4
inches, shall meet the same requirements for sanitary sewers described above,
shall be constructed from the main to the lot property line using wyes and
necessary bends, and shall have a minimum cover at the property line of 4 feet,
where possible. All sewer service lines shall be located 10 feet downstream
from the center of the street frontage of each lot, or as directed by the city.
Minimum velocity in a service line is 2 feet per second.
      (5)   The developer shall place a suitable marker at the point where the
service lines are stubbed out so that these lines can be easily located for
connection by the city. Suitable markers shall be a “W” for water and an “S”
for sewer stamped in the top of the curb, or the edge of the pavement if no
curb is constructed, or by separate markers. Letters shall have a minimum
height of 2 inches and a minimum width of 2 inches.
      (6)   The developer shall make arrangements with all other appropriate
utility companies for the extension of their respective utility lines and
service to and within the addition and for any costs or refunds of cost.
      (7)   All utility companies shall notify the city at least 48 hours
before digging, boring, drilling, and the like.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.058 PARKS AND TRAILS.
   (A)   Park reservation and dedication. No parks shall be dedicated to the
city without the city’s formal acceptance. Parks and trails shall be denied
where the Council determines that the proposed parks and trails are
inconsistent with the Comprehensive Plan, would impose an unreasonable
maintenance responsibility on the city, or are judged to be premature based on
service demand. If land is to be dedicated, the city shall specify the proposed
land requirements and the developer shall accommodate the dedication. Specified
parks and trails and improvements shall be dedicated to the city upon approval
of the final plat and completion and acceptance of the improvements.
   (B)   Minimum park improvements. Unless waived by the Council, parks and
trails shall be improved by the developer prior to acceptance by the city. The
minimum park improvements shall include:
      (1)   Grading and clearance of unwanted vegetation;
      (2)   Installation of drainage and stream erosion controls;
      (3)   Establishment of turf and planting of trees; and
      (4)   When required, the installation of trails, which shall be as
follows:
         (a)   A minimum of 8 feet wide and constructed as required by Council;
         (b)   Railings may be required at the developer’s expense if the
adjoining grade of or obstructions along the trail present safety concerns;
         (c)   An engineering plan for the trails, including adjacent streets,
floodplain location, and other information related to the trail design shall be
submitted and approved by the city prior to release for construction; and
         (d)   Barricades, fencing, or warnings shall be maintained during the
construction process.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.059 PUBLIC USE; LAND RESERVATION.
   (A)   Reservation of land. Land studies, plats, and final plats shall
reserve land for future public use as designated in the Comprehensive Plan and
associated plans for future public facilities and utilities. These uses
include, but are not limited to: parks (see §
155.058), libraries, police and fire stations, pump stations, water storage
tanks, and lift stations. Land reserved shall be of a suitable size, dimension,
topography, and character for the designated purpose.
   (B)   Procedure for reserving land. All land studies, plats, and final plats
shall provide for the necessary reservation of land for future public use as
follows.
      (1)   Plat. All plats shall be reviewed to determine if land reservations
are required as specified in §
155.057(A). If land is to be reserved, the city shall provide the developer a
description of the land to be reserved and any other requirements of the
reservation. The city shall specify the proposed use of the land and estimate
the time needed to complete the acquisition. The developer shall accommodate
the reservation as specified, or may offer to reserve an alternative site(s)
which reasonably meets the same needs of the city. Should an alternative be
proposed by the developer, the Commission shall determine if the alternative
shall be approved. Land reserved on an approved plat indicates the city’s
intent to acquire the area reserved at a future time. However, the city is not
obligated to acquire land reserved on a plat and may void the reservation at
any time.
      (2)   Final plat. All final plats submitted for approval shall continue
to reserve sites for public use as designated on approved land studies.
Boundaries of land reserved for public use may be adjusted subject to the
approval of the Commission.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.060 HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATIONS; COMMON AMENITIES.
   (A)   Homeowners association. Any subdivision creating an area or amenity to
be owned in common by the owners of lots within the subdivision shall require
the establishment of a homeowners association prior to the approval of the
final plat.
      (1)   Documents establishing the homeowners association shall be
submitted to the city for review by the City Attorney for conformance with this
chapter and other applicable ordinances prior to approval of a final plat.
      (2)   The documents shall specify:
         (a)   Membership in the association is mandatory for all owners of
property within the subdivision;
         (b)   All association responsibilities and property interests;
         (c)   Bylaws related to the governance of the association;
         (d)   Covenants for maintenance assessments which run with the land;
         (e)   Responsibility for liability insurance and local taxes;
         (f)   Authority for the association to secure funds from its members
sufficient to meet its responsibilities. This authority shall include the
ability to collect dues, to increase dues, charge special assessments, and
place liens against property for failing to pay dues and assessments; and
         (g)   Other city requirements as applicable, including the right of
the city to enjoin, or enforce provisions of the restrictive covenants, or
bylaws, as per the example available from the city staff.
   (B)   Amenities.
      (1)   City requirements. Where amenities are proposed as a part of a
subdivision or addition, those amenities shall be maintained by a homeowners
association. The city may require the following:
         (a)   Plans and illustrations of the proposed amenities;
         (b)   Cost estimates of construction, maintenance, and operating
expenses;
         (c)   Association documents, deed restrictions, contracts, and
agreements pertaining to the amenities; and
         (d)   Provision of surety as required for maintenance and other
expenses related to the amenities.
      (2)   Designs. The design of amenities shall be reviewed by the
Commission and approved by the City Council.
      (3)   Completion. All amenities shall be completed and in place prior to
the City Engineer making an acceptance of the public improvements and prior to
final release of certificate of occupancy and occupying of residential
structures.
   (C)   Notice to purchasers. When a homeowners association is required,
builders are required to post notice in a prominent place in all model homes
and sales offices stating that a homeowners association has been established
and membership is mandatory for all homeowners. The notice shall state at a
minimum that the builder shall provide any person upon his or her request the
association documents and a 5-year projection of dues income and association
expenses.
   (D)   Maintenance reserve fund. Prior to the transfer of the association to
the lot owners, the developer shall provide a reserve fund equivalent to 2
months’ dues based on full association membership.
   (E)   Property association activation. Concurrent with the transfer of the
association, the developer shall transfer to the association control over all
utilities related to property and amenities to be owned by the association. The
developer shall also disclose to the association the total cost to date related
to the operation and maintenance of common property and amenities.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.061 DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The following design standards and specifications are incorporated by
reference into this chapter: all building code, water and sewer design
standards, public works, thoroughfare, flood and erosion control, and storm
drainage measures previously adopted by the city, and as may hereafter be
adopted by resolution or ordinance, except as specifically set forth below.
   (B)   All improvements proposed for any subdivision to be developed under
the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be designed, furnished, and installed by
the developer in accordance with the current editions of the following
standards unless modified by this chapter or other city ordinances:
      (1)   Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, published by
the North Central Texas Council of Governments, with special provisions of the
city;
      (2)   Parker Standard Construction Details;
      (3)   Parker Storm Drainage Design Manual; and
      (4)   Parker Manual for Design of Water and Sewer Lines.
   (C)   All improvements, even in previously approved but still unimproved
subdivisions, shall conform to the city’s current regulations and
specifications for street, drainage, and utility construction. A coring of the
streets shall be done in accordance to the requirements of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.062 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Sight barriers and bufferyards. Residential areas shall be separated
from nonresidential or adjacent city or extraterritorial jurisdiction areas by
a bufferyard in accordance with Chapter 156 of this code, open space, the
erection of an earthen sight barrier berm of 6 feet minimum height, with a
maximum 2 feet horizontal to 1 foot vertical slope, or other means as deemed
appropriate by the City Council.
   (B)   Inspections.
      (1)   A letter of acceptance shall be required from the City Inspector
Engineer before any job is designated as complete.
      (2)   No acceptance will be given on any work covered before the City
Inspector Engineer has seen it.
      (3)   A minimum of 1 work day’s notice shall be given to the city before
an inspection at the job site. Any work or improvements requiring inspection
shall be accessible or uncovered for inspection.
   (C)   Permits. Any developer, contractor, builder, or the like shall obtain
a permit from the city prior to the commencement of any construction. This
includes such improvements as erosion control, vegetation or tree removal,
floodplain grading, street construction, removal of existing structures,
utility installation, and the like.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000) Penalty, see §
155.999
REPLATTING; PLAT AMENDMENT; VACATION
§ 155.075 REPLATTING OF LAND.
   (A)   Replat required. Unless otherwise expressly provided for herein, a
property owner who proposes to replat any portion of an already approved final
plat, other than to amend or vacate the plat, shall first obtain approval for
the replat under the same standards and by the same procedures prescribed for
the platting of land by this chapter.
   (B)   Replatting without vacating preceding plat. A replat of a final plat
may be recorded and is controlling over the preceding plat without vacation of
that plat if the replat:
      (1)   Is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property being
replatted;
      (2)   Is approved, after a public hearing on the matter at which parties
in interest and citizens have an opportunity to be heard, by the Council;
      (3)   Does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions
previously incorporated in the final plat; and
      (4)   Does not result in any lot smaller than the lot(s) in the original
plat.
   (C)   Additional requirements for certain replats.
      (1)   In addition to compliance with division (B) above, a replat without
vacation of the preceding plat must conform to the requirements of this section
if:
         (a)   During the preceding 5 years, any of the area to be replatted
was limited by an interim or permanent zoning classification to residential use
for not more than 2 residential units per lot; or
         (b)   Any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions
to residential use for not more than 2 residential units per lot.
      (2)   Compliance with this division (C) is not required for approval of a
replat of part of a preceding plat if the area to be replatted was designated
or reserved for other than single or duplex family residential use by notation
on the last legally recorded plat or in the legally recorded restrictions
applicable to the plat.
      (3)   Notice of the hearing required under division (B) shall be given
before the fifteenth day before the date of the hearing by publication in an
official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the county and by
written notice, with a copy of division (C) attached, forwarded by the
Commission to the owners, as indicated on the most recently approved ad valorem
tax roll of the city, of property in the original subdivision within 200 feet
of the property upon which the replat is requested. The written notice may be
delivered by depositing the notice, properly addressed with postage prepaid, in
a post office or postal depository within the boundaries of the city.
      (4)   If the proposed replat requires a variance, and the owners of 20%
or more of the area of lots to whom notice is required to be given under
division (B) file with the Commission a written protest of the replatting
before or at the hearing, approval of the replat will require the affirmative
vote of 3/4 of the Commission members present. In computing percentages of
ownership, each lot is considered equal to all other lots regardless of size or
number of owners, and the owners of each lot are entitled to cast only 1 vote
per lot. The area of streets and alleys shall be included in computing the
percentage of land area.
      (5)   Any replat which adds or deletes lots must include the original lot
boundaries.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.076 AMENDING PLAT.
   (A)   The City Administrator, or his or her designee, may, upon petition of
the property owner or developer, approve and issue an amending plat which is
signed by the applicants only unless otherwise required to the contrary and
which is for 1 or more of the purposes set forth in this section, and this
approval and issuance shall not require notice, hearing, or approval of other
lot owners.
   (B)   This section shall apply only if the sole purpose of the amending plat
is:
      (1)   To correct an error in any course or distance shown on the prior
plat;
      (2)   To add any course or distance that was omitted on the prior plat;
      (3)   To correct an error in the description of the real property shown
on the prior plat;
      (4)   To indicate monuments set after death, disability, or retirement
from practice of the surveyor charged with responsibilities for setting
monuments;
      (5)   To show the proper location or character of any monument which has
been changed in location or character or which originally was shown at the
wrong location or incorrectly as to its character on the prior plat;
      (6)   To correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or
omission as previously approved by the City Council; these errors and omissions
may include, but are not limited to, lot numbers, acreage, street names, and
identification of adjacent recorded plats;
      (7)   To correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between 2
adjacent lots where both lot owners join in the application for plat amendment
and neither lot is abolished, provided that this amendment does not attempt to
remove recorded covenants or restrictions and does not have a material adverse
effect on the property rights of the other owners in the plat;
      (8)   To relocate a lot line in order to cure an inadvertent encroachment
of a building or improvement on a lot line or on an easement;
      (9)   To relocate 1 or more lot lines between 1 or more adjacent lots
where the owner or owners of all the lots join in the application for the plat
amendment, provided that this amendment does not:
         (a)   Attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; or
         (b)   Increase the number of lots.
      (10)   To make necessary changes to the prior plat to create 6 or fewer
lots in the subdivision or addition or a part of the subdivision or addition
covered by the prior plat if:
         (a)   The changes do not affect applicable zoning and other
regulations of the city;
         (b)   The changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or
restrictions; and
         (c)   The area covered by the changes is located in an area that the
Council has approved, after a public hearing, as a residential improvement
area.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.077 VACATION OF PLAT.
   (A)   By property owner. The property owner of the tract covered by a plat
may vacate, upon the approval of the Council, the plat at any time before any
lot in the plat is sold. The plat is vacated when a signed, acknowledged
instrument declaring the plat vacated is approved and recorded in the manner
prescribed for the original plat.
   (B)   By all lot owners. If lots in the plat have been sold, the plat may be
vacated on the application of all the owners of lots in the plat with approval
obtained in the manner prescribed for the original plat.
   (C)   Criteria. The Council shall approve the petition for vacation on terms
and conditions as are reasonable to protect public health, safety, and welfare.
As a condition of vacation of the plat, the Council may direct the petitioners
to prepare a revised final plat in accordance with this chapter.
   (D)   Effect of action. On the execution and recording of the vacating
instrument, the vacated plat shall have no effect. Regardless of the Council’s
action on the petition, the property owner or developer will have no right to a
refund of any monies, fees, or charges paid to the city nor to the return of
any property or consideration dedicated or delivered to the city except as may
have previously been agreed to by the Council.
   (E)   Government initiated plat vacation.
      (1)   General conditions. The Council, on its motion, may vacate the plat
of an approved subdivision or addition when:
         (a)   No lots within the approved plat have been sold within 5 years
from the date that the plat was signed by the Mayor;
         (b)   The property owner has breached an agreement and the city is
unable to obtain funds with which to complete construction of public
improvements, except that the vacation shall apply only to lots owned by the
property owner or its successor; and
         (c)   The plat has been of record for more than 5 years and the
Council determines that the further sale of lots within the subdivision or
addition presents a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, except that
the vacation shall apply only to lots owned by the property owner or its
successors.
      (2)   Procedure. Upon any motion of the Council to vacate the plat of any
previously approved subdivision or addition, in whole or in part, the Council
shall publish notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the county and
provide personal notice to all homeowners within the subdivision or addition
and shall also provide notice to the Commission. The notice shall state the
time and place for a public hearing on the motion to vacate the subdivision or
addition plat. The Council shall approve the vacation only if the criteria in
division (D) above are satisfied.
      (3)   Record of notice. If the Council adopts a resolution vacating a
plat in whole, it shall record a copy of the resolution in the County Clerk’s
office. If the Council adopts a resolution vacating a plat in part, it shall
cause a revised final plat to be recorded which shows that portion of the
original plat that has been vacated and that portion that has not been vacated.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
DEVELOPMENT PLATS
§ 155.080 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter shall apply to any land lying within the city and/or within
its extraterritorial jurisdiction in the following circumstances:
   (A)    The development of any tract of land which has not been platted or
replatted prior to the effective date of this subchapter, unless expressly
exempted herein;
   (B)   The development of any tract of land for which the property owner
claims an exemption from the city’s Subdivision Regulations, including
requirements to replat, which exemption is not expressly provided for in such
regulations;
   (C)   The development of any tract of land for which the only access is a
private easement or street; or
   (D)   The division of any tract of land resulting in parcels or lots, each
of which is greater than 5 acres in size, and where no public improvement is
proposed to be dedicated or constructed.
(Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
§ 155.081 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No development plat shall be required where the land to be developed
has received final plat or replat approval prior to the effective date of this
subchapter. The City Council may, from time-to-time, exempt other development
or land divisions from the requirements of this subchapter by majority vote of
the City Council. Existing owner occupied farming operations on land which is
held under the agriculture-related exemption are exempt from providing a
development plat on the construction of improvements or structures to be used
solely for the storage of agriculture-related products such as wire fences,
farm equipment, livestock, feed, and other agriculture commodities.
   (B)   Development on a single lot which meets all the requirements of Single
Family zoning (“SF”) classification shall be exempt from the requirements of
this subchapter for the preparation and filing of a development plat. Plans and
any required statements as to use, parking, access, and other relevant issues,
with the required fee(s), if any, shall be presented by the landowner to the
city. The city staff may approve the plans and/or require such amendments and
modifications as necessary. Written affidavits from the landowner may be
required regarding use of the structure(s) and their compliance with SF
regulations. The staff shall grant a waiver to the preparation and filing of a
development plat if all requirements of SF are being met. This process does not
zone the property SF. It determines whether or not a development plat is
required, or waived.
   (C)   Appeal. Any person owning property subject to this subchapter who
wishes to appeal the decision of the staff may, on written notice filed with
the City Secretary within 10 days of the decision being appealed, appeal the
decision to the City Council. The City Council may review the staff’s decision
and may affirm, reverse, or modify the staff’s decision. The City Council may
call a public hearing on the matter at their discretion.
(Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
§ 155.082 PROHIBITION ON DEVELOPMENT.
   No development shall commence, nor shall any building permit, utility
connection permit, electrical connection permit or similar permit be issued,
for any development or land division subject to this subchapter, or the city’s
Subdivision Regulations, until a subdivision plat or development plat (as
required) has been reviewed by the Planning Commission, approved by the City
Council, and submitted to the city for filing at the county. Notwithstanding
the provisions of this section, the city shall not require building permits or
otherwise enforce the city’s building code in the city’s ETJ in relation to any
development plat required by this subchapter.
(Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.083 STANDARDS OF APPROVAL.
   The development plat shall not be approved until the following standards
have been satisfied:
   (A)   The proposed development conforms to all city plans, including but not
limited to, the Comprehensive Plan, utility plans and applicable Capital
Improvements Plans;
   (B)   The proposed development conforms to the requirements of the zoning
regulations (if located within the city's corporate limits) and the Subdivision
Regulations;
   (C)   The proposed development is adequately served by public facilities and
services, parks and open space in conformance with city regulations;
   (D)   Appropriate agreements of acceptance and use of public dedications to
serve the development have been tendered;
   (E)   The proposed development conforms to the design and improvement
standards contained in this subchapter and in the city's standard
specifications as required by the city's Subdivision Regulations, and to any
other applicable regulations of the city that are related to development of a
land parcel;
   (F)   Development plats in areas which have not been zoned, including the
exterritorial jurisdiction, shall have set back and side yard requirements for
each lot as shown on the Comprehensive Plan for regulations for the location of
the tract for which a development plat is required; and
   (G)   The development plat shall have a full engineering analysis of
drainage on the property, including designations of the 100-year flood plain,
floodways, and other related on- or off-site drainage affecting the property
itself, and property downstream as a result of the development of the property.
The development plat shall clearly show the location and specifications of any
onsite sewage systems. The amount of the plat area covered in impervious
construction, such as roofs, all other parking lots, or other surfaces which
may increase run-off shall be shown, in a drainage plan provided as part of the
development plat documentation for the review and approval of the City
Engineer, and the city.
(Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
§ 155.084 CONDITIONS ON APPROVAL.
   (A)   The City Council may impose such conditions on the approval of the
development plat as are necessary to assure compliance with the standards in §
155.083(E).
   (B)   Restriction on issuance of building and other permits by municipality,
county or official of other governmental entity. The municipality, a county, or
an official of another governmental entity may not issue a building permit or
any other type of permit for development on lots or tracts subject to this
subchapter until a development plat is filed with and approved by the
municipality in accordance with this subchapter.
   (C)   Approval of development plat. The city shall endorse approval on a
development plat filed with it if the plat conforms to:
      (1)   The general plans, rules, and ordinances of the municipality
concerning its current and future streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks,
playgrounds, and public utility facilities;
      (2)   The general plans, rules, and ordinances for the extension of the
municipality or the extension, improvement, or widening of its roads, streets,
and public highways within the municipality and in its extraterritorial
jurisdiction, taking into account access to and extension of water mains and
the instrumentalities of public utilities (including sewer lines, where
expressly authorized in the city); and
      (3)   Any general plans, rules, or ordinances adopted under Tex. Local
Gov't Code § 212.044, and §
155.083 of this code.
   (D)   Effect of approval on dedication. The approval of a development plat
is not considered an acceptance of any proposed dedication for public use or
use by persons other than the owner of the property covered by the plat and
does not impose on the municipality any duty regarding the maintenance or
improvement of any purportedly dedicated parts until the municipality's
governing body makes an actual appropriation of the dedicated parts by formal
acceptance, entry, use, or improvement.
(Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
§ 155.085 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Approval procedure. The application for a development plat shall be
submitted to the city in the same manner as a final plat (see city’s
Subdivision Regulations), and shall be approved, conditionally approved, or
denied by the City Council following review and recommendation by the Planning
and Zoning Commission in a similar manner as a final plat. Upon approval, the
development plat shall be filed at the county by the City Secretary in the same
manner as described for a final plat, and approval of a development plat shall
expire if all filing materials are not submitted to the City Administrator (or
designee) and if the plat is not filed at the county within the time periods
specified for a final plat.
   (B)   Lapse. Approval of a development plat shall lapse if the improvements
shown thereon are not substantially complete within 1 year of City Council
approval of the development plat. The 1- year period may be extended as part of
the approval process, or may be renewed by the City Council by majority vote.
(Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
§ 155.086 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   In addition to all information required to be shown on a final plat, a
development plat shall:
      (1)   Be prepared by a registered professional land surveyor;
      (2)   Clearly show the boundary of the development plat;
      (3)   Show each existing or proposed building, structure or improvement
or proposed modification of the external configuration of the building,
structure or improvement involving a change therein;
      (4)   Show all easements and rights-of-way within or abutting the
boundary of the surveyed property;
      (5)   The dimensions of each street, sidewalk, alley, square, park, or
other part of the property intended to be dedicated to public use or for the
use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the street,
sidewalk, alley, square, park or other part of the property; and
      (6)   Be accompanied by the required number of copies of the plat, a
completed application form, the required submission fee, and a certificate of
some other form of verification from Collin County Central Appraisal District
showing that all taxes have been paid on the subject property and that no
delinquent taxes exist against the property.
   (B)   A copy of all application materials for a development plat shall be
simultaneously submitted to the City Engineer for review in the same manner as
for a final plat, or the application shall be deemed incomplete and shall
automatically be deemed denied.
   (C)   If a person is required under state law or an ordinance of the
municipality to file a subdivision plat, a development plat is not required in
addition to the subdivision plat.
(Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 155.090 VARIANCES.
   (A)   General. Where the Council finds that unreasonable hardships or
difficulties may result from strict compliance with this chapter, or the
purposes of this chapter may be served to a greater extent by an alternative
proposal, it may approve variances to this chapter so that substantial justice
may be done and the public interest secured; provided, that the variance shall
not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter; and
further provided, the Council shall not approve variances unless it shall make
findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
      (1)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other property;
      (2)   The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are
unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable
generally to other property;
      (3)   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience,
if the strict letter of this chapter is carried out; and
      (4)   The variance will not in any manner materially vary the provisions
of Chapter 156 of this code or the Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   Criteria for variances from development requirements. Where the
Council finds that the imposition of any development exaction pursuant to this
chapter exceeds reasonable benefit to the property owner or is so excessive as
to constitute confiscation of the tract to be platted, it may approve variances
to those requirements, so as to prevent that excess.
   (C)   Conditions. In approving variances, the Council may require conditions
as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the purposes described in §
155.003.
   (D)   Procedures. A petition for a variance shall be submitted in writing by
the developer. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application
and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
§ 155.091 PARTICIPATION POLICIES; DEVELOPMENT COSTS.
   The city has established by separate ordinance a system for sharing of
development costs.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
Cross-reference:
   Water and Wastewater Facilities Extension, see §§
50.01 et seq.
§ 155.092 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent of any owner to subdivide
or plat any land into lots, blocks, and streets or to sell property therein and
thereby which has not been platted or subdivided in accordance with this
chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any term or provision
of this chapter.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.093 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF; REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   Appropriate civil actions and proceedings may be maintained in law or in
equity to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to impose
additional penalties, and to restrain, correct, or abate a violation of this
chapter, whether the violation occurs with respect to lands within the
corporate boundaries of the city or within the city’s extraterritorial
jurisdiction. These remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described in
§
155.999.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
§ 155.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions or
terms of this chapter, except §
155.051, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000 for each offense. Each and every day
the violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000)
   (C)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of §
155.051 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction in the
Municipal Court shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000 for each
offense.
(Ord. 455, passed 4-13-1999; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
APPENDIX: ATTACHMENTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d8bd8f885120944a036ebdd2fee1d518e146dbe0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-669.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d8bd8f885120944a036ebdd2fee1d518e146dbe0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-672.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d8bd8f885120944a036ebdd2fee1d518e146dbe0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-674.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d8bd8f885120944a036ebdd2fee1d518e146dbe0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-676.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d8bd8f885120944a036ebdd2fee1d518e146dbe0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-678.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d8bd8f885120944a036ebdd2fee1d518e146dbe0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-680.gif]
 
(Ord. 487, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016)
CHAPTER 156: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
156.01   Definitions
   
156.02   Minimum requirements
Zoning Map; Districts
   
156.15   Use districts established
   
156.16   Official zoning map
   
156.17   Interpretation of district boundaries
   
156.18   Newly annexed territory
District Uses and Requirements
   
156.30   Application of regulations
   
156.31   Agricultural-open space district
   
156.32   Single-family residential district
   
156.33   Single-family transitional district
   
156.34   Manufactured housing district
   
156.35   Planned development district
   
156.36   Special activities district
   
156.37   Supplementary zoning regulations
Nonconforming, Conditional, and Special Uses
   
156.50   Nonconforming uses
   
156.51   Conditional uses
   
156.52   Special use permits
Administration and Enforcement
   
156.65   Construction; site plan required
   
156.66   Administration authority
   
156.67   Board of Adjustment
   
156.68   Appeals; Board and Council responsibilities
   
156.69   Fees, charges, and expenses; establishment
   
156.70   Amendment
   
156.71   Planning and Zoning Commission meetings
 
   
156.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING. An ACCESSORY BUILDING that is a separate dwelling for
immediate family, hired help, or used as guest quarters.
   ACCESSORY USE, ACCESSORY STRUCTURE, or ACCESSORY BUILDING. A use or
structure which is clearly incidental and secondary to the primary use and
which does not change the character thereof, including, but not limited to,
stables, barns, detached garages, bathhouses, greenhouses, tool sheds, and
portable buildings over 120 square feet floor area.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The person responsible for administration of city ordinances;
ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATOR.
   AGRICULTURE. The practice of farming and ranching; including:
      (1)   Cultivating the soil (tilling soil in order to better prepare it
for planting);
      (2)   Producing crops for human food, animal feed, planting seed, or
fiber;
      (3)   Floriculture (cultivation and management of ornamental and
flowering plants);
      (4)   Viticulture (the cultivation or culture of grapes especially for
wine making);
      (5)   Horticulture (growing fruits, vegetables, flowers, or ornamental
plants--wildflowers may exceed 12 inches when growing, but shall be mowed to a
maximum height of 12 inches after seeding);
      (6)   Silveculture (dealing with the development and care of forests);
      (7)   Current wildlife management; and
      (8)   Current raising or keeping livestock or poultry.
   ANIMAL, LARGE. Any animal whose adult body weight is greater than 500
pounds.
   ANIMAL, MEDIUM. Any animal whose body weight is between 200 and 500 pounds.
   ANIMAL, SMALL. Any animal whose adult body weight is less than 200 pounds.
   BARN. A structure used for shelter of animals or storage of agricultural
products or equipment.
   BUFFERYARD. A unit of land and any structures such as fences, walls, or
berms that may be required between different land uses on adjacent lots to
eliminate or minimize conflicts between them. Example: an area of trees or
landscaping between larger residential lots in one city and smaller residential
lots or commercial development in another city.
   BUILDING. Any structure affixed to the land and built for the support,
shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, or moveable property.
   BUILDING AREA. The BUILDING AREA of a lot is the area covered by the
buildings or structures when placed on the lot.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building to the highest
point of the roof’s surface.
   CITY. The City of Parker, Collin County, Texas.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of this city.
   COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the city.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A plan and associated maps showing the existing and
proposed land uses within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ).
   COMPREHENSIVE ZONING ORDINANCE. This chapter, and as hereafter amended.
   CONCEPT PLAN. The development plan for one or more lots that shows the
existing and proposed conditions of the development, including lot lines;
landscaping; open spaces; means of ingress, egress, and circulation; berms,
buffer yards, and screening devices; surrounding roadways; basic drainage
information; and any other information required so an informed decision can be
made by the city.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A use that requires a variance from an existing ordinance
as approved through a formal application process.
   CONSTRUCTION PLAN. A plan for new construction or for additions to any
structure submitted in application for a building permit.
   DEVELOPMENT. The process of converting land to a new purpose by constructing
buildings or making use of its resources.
   EMPLOYEE. A person who receives a wage, salary, or percentage of profits
related to the home occupation and whose place of work is at the residence.
   ETJ. Extraterritorial jurisdiction.
   GROSS (SITE) AREA. The total area of a tract of land, including rights-of-
way and dedicated easements.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Commercial non-agricultural activity within the home or on
the grounds that does not involve more than one other unrelated person, client
visitation without appointment, operation of commercial trucks, or signage or
outside storage of business-related equipment or materials. HOME OCCUPATION is
defined as a business activity within the residence, or any other building, or
on the grounds, that does not involve more than one other unrelated person,
operation of commercial trucks, signage, or visible storage of business related
equipment or materials. Business activity is broadly construed to include all
non-residential activity, for profit or otherwise, including, but no limited
to, retail, commercial, industrial, manufacturing, or similar use.
   LOT COVERAGE. Area of a lot covered by buildings usually expressed as a
percentage.
   LOT SIZE. Area enclosed by the metes and bounds of a given lot.
   OFFENSIVE TRADE ACTIVITY. Any activity prohibited by federal or state law or
city ordinance and not authorized by a special use permit.
   OFFICER. A person referred to in this chapter by title means the person
employed or appointed by the city to that position, or his or her duly
authorized representative.
   OPEN SPACE. An outdoor area for outdoor living, recreation, pedestrian
access, or landscaping, but excluding parking facilities.
   PASTURE. Land used primarily for the grazing of animal stock.
   RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. Items of personal use and enjoyment other than
automotive vehicles and trucks, specifically including boats and boat trailers,
travel trailers, pick-up campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on
automotive vehicles or trucks), motorized dwellings/RVs, tent trailers, and
cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied
by such equipment or not.
   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE. A one-family detached dwelling.
   STORY. The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it,
then the space between that floor and the ceiling above it.
   STRUCTURE. Anything that is constructed that emanates above the ground, or
descends below ground, considered either permanent or temporary.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land situated within
the corporate limits or within the city’s statutory extraterritorial
jurisdiction into two or more parts, lots, or sites for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale, division of ownership, or building development,
including resubdivision. SUBDIVISION of land does not include the division of
land for agricultural purposes in parcels or tracts of 25 acres or more.
   TREES, REQUIRED. Pecan, Texas Ash, Eastern Red Cedar, Chinese Pistachio,
Austrian Pine, Bur Oak, Live Oak, Red Oak, Sycamore, Lacebark Elm. Examples of
trees not to be planted in the bufferyard are: Arizona Ash, Chinese Tallow,
Cottonwood, Siberian Elm, Honeylocust, Hackberry, Mimosa, Fruitless Mulberry,
Pin Oak, Poplar, Silver Maple, and Italian Cyprus.
   VARIANCE. A legal modification from city ordinances, granted to relieve
hardship conditions existing within a single piece of property other than
financial and not of the applicant’s making.
   ZONING MAP. A map of the city showing current zoning.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 508, passed 7-10-2001; Am. Ord. 562,
passed 2-8-2005; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022)
§ 156.02 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of public
health, safety, and general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this chapter
are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules,
regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions, or covenants, the requirement that
is most restrictive or that imposes the higher standards, as determined by the
Commission, shall govern.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022)
ZONING MAP; DISTRICTS
§ 156.15 USE DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   The several use districts into which the city is divided are hereby designed
and described as follows:
   (A)   A-O, agricultural-open space;
   (B)   MH, manufactured housing;
   (C)   SF, single-family residential;
   (D)   SFT, single-family transitional;
   (E)   PRD, planned residential development; and
   (F)   SA, special activities.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022)
§ 156.16 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   (A)   Official Zoning Map.
      (1)   The city is hereby divided into use districts, as shown on the
Zoning Map, which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The Zoning Map
shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor attested by the City
Secretary and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: “This is
to certify that this is the Zoning Map referred to in Section 1B of Ordinance
Number 403 of the city as amended.” If, in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, the city’s Comprehensive Plan, and Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, Chapter
211, as amended, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter
portrayed on the Zoning Map, then the amendment as approved by the City Council
shall be reflected on the Zoning Map, which may also be known as the “Zoning
Map.”
      (2)   No changes of any nature shall be made in the Zoning Map or matter
shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this
chapter. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person shall be
considered a violation of this chapter and punishable as provided for
hereafter. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Zoning Map
which may from time to time be made or published, the Zoning Map, which shall
be located in the office of the City Secretary or City Administrator, shall be
the final authority as to the current status of land and water areas,
buildings, and other structures in the city.
   (B)   Replacement of official Zoning Map.
      (1)   In the event that the Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost,
or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and
additions, the City Council may, by ordinance, adopt a new Zoning Map, which
shall supersede the prior Zoning Map. The new Zoning Map may correct drafting
or other errors or omissions in the prior Zoning Map, but no such correction
shall have the effect of amending the original Zoning Map or any subsequent
amendment thereof. The new Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of
the Mayor, attested by the City Secretary, and bearing the seal of the city and
date under the following words: “This is to certify that this Zoning Map
supersedes and replaces the Zoning Map originally adopted by the city on the
day of December 2, 1980.”
      (2)   Unless the prior Zoning Map has been lost or has been totally
destroyed, the prior Map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be
preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or
amendment.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022; Am. Ord. 827, passed
9-20-2022) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.17 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
   (A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets or highways shall be construed to follow those center lines;
   (B)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following plotted lot lines
shall be construed as following those lot lines;
   (C)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits lines
shall be construed as following those city limits lines;
   (D)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to
follow those center lines;
   (E)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or as extensions of features
indicated in divisions (A) through (D) above shall be so construed. Distances
not specifically indicated on the Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale
of the map;
   (F)   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not
covered by divisions (A) through (E) above, the Board shall interpret the
district boundaries; and
   (G)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single
ownership at the time of passage of this chapter, the Board may permit the
extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50
feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022)
§ 156.18 NEWLY ANNEXED TERRITORY.
   Any territory hereafter annexed to the city shall be annexed in accordance
with the zoning designation indicated in the current city land use plan. The
owner of that territory may apply after annexation for new zoning under the
procedures in this chapter.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022)
DISTRICT USES AND REQUIREMENTS
§ 156.30 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The regulations set by this chapter within each use district shall be
minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of
structure or land, except as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied,
and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, except in
conformity with all the regulations herein specified for the district in which
it is located.
   (C)   No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or
loading space required about or in connection with any building or use for the
purpose of complying with this chapter, shall be included as part of a yard,
open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any
other building or use.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.31 AGRICULTURAL-OPEN SPACE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose; A-O. The agricultural-open space (A-O) use district includes
lands within the corporate limits of the city which are not subdivided and are
relatively undeveloped. This use district is designed to promote continued
agricultural activities and to provide open space.
   (B)   Uses; A-O.
      (1)   Permitted uses.
         (a)   Barn or stable for keeping private animal stock;
         (b)   Agriculture;
         (c)   Farm;
         (d)   Pasturage;
         (e)   Single-family residence;
         (f)   Home occupation; and
         (g)   Accessory buildings.
      (2)   Conditional uses; special use permit required. The following uses
require filing an application for a special use permit, with subsequent hearing
by Planning and Zoning Commission after which approval is required by City
Council:
         (a)   Tower structures exceeding 25 feet in height;
         (b)   Golf course;
         (c)   Accessory dwelling;
         (d)   Rodeo;
         (e)   Grain elevator;
         (f)   Common stables; and
         (g)   Riding academy.
   (C)   Building setbacks; A-O. No structure shall be constructed within 100
feet of any property line.
   (D)   Special requirements; A-O. Any structure constructed within this A-
O district shall conform to all area requirements and building regulations as
required by the single-family residential district (SF), unless otherwise
specified in this classification.
      (1)   No mobile homes or HUD-Code manufactured homes shall be permitted.
      (2)   No property qualifies for A-O district unless it has five acres in
contiguous tracts under single ownership.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.32 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose; SF. The purpose of this classification is to provide for
single-family residential development that is most consistent with the general
desires of the community.
   (B)   Uses; SF.
      (1)   Permitted uses.
         (a)   Single-family residence;
         (b)   Accessory buildings; and
         (c)   Home occupation.
      (2)   Conditional uses; special use permit required. The following uses
require filing an application for a special use permit, with subsequent hearing
by Planning and Zoning Commission after which approval is required by City
Council:
         (a)   Accessory dwelling;
         (b)   Boarding and activities involving large animals.
   (C)   Lot size requirements; SF.
      (1)   Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size shall be 2.0 acres net
(87,120 square feet).
      (2)   Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage by all above ground
structures shall be no more than 20%. For a 2-acre lot, this is a maximum of
17,424 square feet.
      (3)   Nonresidential structures; maximum lot coverage. No more than 10%
of the total lot area may be accessory buildings.
      (4)   Minimum lot width at front lot line. The minimum lot width at the
street frontage of any lot shall be 200 feet for straight streets. On curved
streets and cul-de-sacs, the minimum lot width at the front lot line is
determined by the effective radius of curvature, R, measured in feet, of the
right-of-way boundary as follows. The width (W) shall be at least:
         W = 70 - (400 / R) feet
         In this formula, R shall be no less than 40 feet.
      (5)   Minimum lot depth. The minimum lot depth shall be 300 feet measured
from the closest straight line distance between the front property line and the
rear property line.
   (D)   Bufferyards; SF. Bufferyards are not required for the single-family
zoning classification.
      (1)   The buffer yard shall be included as a part of the property to be
maintained by the homeowner’s association, or owner of the lot.
   (E)   Building setbacks; SF. The following setbacks are the minimum
requirements. Distances indicated are exclusive of public or private motor
vehicle easements or rights-of-way.
      (1)   Front setback. The minimum front setback for any structures on the
lot shall be 100 feet from the closest point of the front property line. No two
adjacent houses shall have the same front building line. The front building
line of all adjacent houses shall vary by at least five feet.
      (2)   Side setback. The minimum side setback shall be 40 feet from the
closest point of the side property line.
      (3)   Side setback at corner. The minimum side setback for any structures
on a lot located on a corner shall be the same as the front setback on the side
closest to the adjacent street.
      (4)   Rear setback. The minimum rear setback for any structures shall be
50 feet from the closest point of the rear property line.
   (F)   Building regulations; SF.
      (1)   Single-family residence.
         (a)   Minimum living space. There shall be a minimum of 2,500 square
feet of air-conditioned living space.
         (b)   Building materials.
            1.   First floor elevation. Not less than 90% of the exterior
materials used on the first floor elevation shall be brick, stone or approved
masonry product, exclusive of doors and windows.
            2.   Total elevation. Not less than 75% of the exterior materials
used on the entire elevation, including the first floor elevation, shall be
brick, stone or approved masonry product, excluding doors and windows.
            3.   Brick or stone; alternatives. Approved masonry products for
elevations may be permitted in lieu of brick or stone, with the approval of the
Building Official that these materials and their application conform to the
requirements of the International Residential Code, and other pertinent
ordinances in the city.
         (c)   Maximum height.
            1.   The maximum height for the primary residence shall be two
stories above the finished foundation elevation, not to exceed 45 feet above
finished foundation elevation, excluding architectural treatment elements.
            2.   Architectural treatment elements are not to exceed 50 feet
above finished foundation elevation.
      (2)   Accessory buildings. Refer to §
156.37(N).
      (3)   Accessory dwellings. Accessory dwellings may be constructed only
after the issuance of a special use permit.
         (a)   Minimum living space. There is no minimum living space
requirement.
         (b)   Building materials. Same requirements as primary residence.
         (c)   Maximum height. The maximum height for any accessory buildings
shall be two stories above the finished foundation elevation, not to exceed the
height of the primary residence.
   (G)   Garages; SF. No garage shall open to the front of a lot or to the side
street in a corner lot.
   (H)   Fences; SF.
      (1)   General restrictions.
         (a)   All perimeter fencing shall not exceed six feet in height. All
fences shall be of open construction and not solid or near-solid fabric or
surfacing, except for parcels of land that are side or rear adjacent to the
following roads: Parker Road, Dillehay Drive (FM 2551), and Hogge Drive (FM
2551) on which a solid or near-solid fence constructed of wood, masonry, or
wrought iron is permitted along the roadway. Open construction shall mean that
each fence panel, when viewed from an elevation perspective at a perpendicular
to that elevation, shall be constructed of materials that allow at least 50% of
the surface area of each panel to provide for an open unobstructed view.
         (b)   The 50% open construction requirement for each fence panel is
exclusive of columns and posts, which may be constructed of solid material
including masonry or metal.
         (c)   Fencing columns, if used, shall not be more than two feet square
on base, and not more than six feet in height. The columns shall not be closer
together than six feet center to center.
      (2)   Chain link fencing. Chain link fences may not be used in the front
yard. They cannot extend beyond the front building line of the primary dwelling
on the lot. They cannot extend into the side setback on the street side of a
corner lot. It is preferred that chain link fence be black or green vinyl
coated rather than galvanized.
      (3)   Privacy fencing. Privacy fences are permitted around swimming pool
areas, subject to the following:
         (a)   The privacy fence must not be built farther than 30 feet from
the side of the pool. The side of the pool is defined as where the water’s edge
meets the side of the pool, not the outside edge of the pool decking, if any.
      (4)   Inspection and maintenance. When any fence is completed, it must be
inspected. The Building Inspection Department shall be notified upon completion
of the fence. The Building Official will approve the fence if it complies with
the provisions of this section, or it will be rejected. All fences constructed
under the provisions of this section shall be maintained so as to comply with
the requirements of this section at all times. Fences shall be maintained by
the owner or person in charge of the property in as near as possible the
condition of the fence when installed and accepted as provided herein, and
shall be maintained as follows:
         (a)   The fence shall not be out of vertical alignment more than 20%;
and
         (b)   All damaged, removed, or missing portions of the fence shall be
replaced or repaired with comparable materials of a comparable color to the
remaining portions of the fence.
      (5)   Materials.
         (a)   Permitted materials. Materials permitted are wood, concrete,
masonry, chain link, wrought iron, metal tubing, vinyl, fiberglass composite,
barbed wire, or other materials approved by the Building Official for exterior
exposure as fence material.
         (b)   Prohibited materials. Materials prohibited are razor ribbon,
sheet metal, corrugated steel and fiberglass panel, plywood, or any other
similar material manufactured for other uses.
      (6)   Certain locations, construction prohibited.
         (a)   Within easements. No fence shall be located within any easement
except by prior written approval of those agencies having interest in that
easement.
         (b)   Electric fences. No fence erected shall be electrically charged
in a manner to be dangerous to humans.
      (7)   Swimming pool enclosures. A building permit is required for the
construction of all swimming pools, and all pools and their associated safety
fences shall be built according to the building code.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 508, passed 7-10-2001; Am. Ord. 697,
passed 8-6-2013; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.33 SINGLE-FAMILY TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Applicability. The single-family transitional district (SFT) zoning
classification is closed and not available for applications. The regulations
concerning this zoning classification remain applicable to existing SFT zoned
properties within the city.
   (B)   Purpose; SFT. The purpose of this classification is to provide for the
gradual transition from the smaller lot sizes in neighboring cities to the
larger lot sizes preferred by most city residents. This classification also
provides for a landscaped bufferyard between cities.
   (C)   Uses; SFT.
      (1)   Permitted uses.
         (a)   Single-family residence;
         (b)   Accessory buildings; and
         (c)   Home occupation.
      (2)   Conditional uses; special use permit required. The following uses
require filing an application for a special use permit, with subsequent hearing
by Planning and Zoning Commission after which approval is required by City
Council:
         (a)   Accessory dwelling;
         (b)   Boarding and activities involving large animals.
   (D)   Lot size requirements; SFT.
      (1)   Average lot size. The average lot size shall not be less than 1.5
acres net (65,340 square feet).
      (2)   Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size shall be one acre (43,560
square feet).
      (3)   Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage by all above-ground
structures shall be no more than 20%.
         (a)   1-acre lot: 8,712 square feet maximum;
         (b)   1.5-acre lot: 13,068 square feet maximum; and
         (c)   2-acre lot: 17,424 square feet maximum.
      (4)   Nonresidential structures maximum lot coverage. No more than 10% of
the total lot area may be accessory buildings.
      (5)   Special provisional lot sizes.
         (a)   Minimum lot size within the city limits after January 1, 1999
shall be two acres. These lots are included in the average lot size calculation
in division (C)(1) above.
         (b)   Lots adjacent to platted lots within the city limits on or
before January 1, 1999 shall be a minimum of two acres or not less than the
smallest adjacent platted lot, whichever is less.
      (6)   Minimum lot width at front lot line.
         (a)   1-acre lot: 100 feet on straight street.
         (b)   1.5-acre lot: 150 feet on straight street.
         (c)   2-acre lot: 200 feet on straight street.
         (d)   On curved streets and cul-de-sacs, the minimum width at the
front lot line is determined by the effective radius of curvature, R, measured
in feet, of the right-of-way boundary as follows. The width shall be at least:
            W = 70 - (400 / R) feet
            In this formula, R shall be no less than 40 feet.
      (7)   Minimum lot depth. The minimum lot depth shall be the following
indicated distances in feet measured from the closest straight line distance
between the front property line and the rear property line.
         (a)   1-acre lot: 150 feet;
         (b)   1.5-acre lot: 225 feet; and
         (c)   2-acre lot: 300 feet.
   (E)   Bufferyards; SFT. For those lots adjacent to another city or its ETJ
in which the adjacent lot areas are (or are expected to be) less than 3/4 acre
per lot, the setback requirement shall be modified as follows: An additional
side or rear setback of 50 feet, in addition to the setbacks required below,
shall be required providing a buffer yard to compensate for the differences in
lot sizes. This bufferyard setback shall contain at least one tree per 20
linear feet. If hardy native or adapted trees currently are growing in the area
of this bufferyard setback, retention of these trees is preferred over planting
new trees. Each planted tree shall be a native or adapted species and of a
variety normally considered hardy for the area. New trees shall be from the
required tree list. All bufferyard plantings must be completed prior to a
certificate of occupancy being issued for the lot.
   (F)   Building setbacks; SFT. The following setbacks are the minimum
requirements. Distances indicated are exclusive of public or private motor
vehicle easements or rights-of-way.
      (1)   Front setback. The minimum front setback for any structures on the
lot shall be in accordance with the following listed distances, measured in
feet from the closest point of the front property line. No two adjacent houses
shall have the same front building line. The front building line of all
adjacent houses shall vary by at least five feet.
         (a)   1-acre lot: 50 feet;
         (b)   1.5-acre lot: 75 feet; and
         (c)   2-acre lot: 100 feet.
      (2)   Side setback. The minimum side setback shall be in accordance with
the following listed distances, measured in feet from the closest point of the
side property line.
         (a)   1-acre lot: 25 feet;
         (b)   1.5-acre lot: 25 feet; and
         (c)   2-acre lot: 40 feet.
      (3)   Side setback at corner. The minimum side setback for any structures
on a lot located on a corner shall be the same as the front setback on the side
closest to the adjacent street for the same size lot.
         (a)   1-acre lot: 50 feet;
         (b)   1.5-acre lot: 75 feet; and
         (c)   2-acre lot: 75 feet.
      (4)   Rear setback.
         (a)   Minimum 1-acre lot: 30 feet;
         (b)   Minimum 1.5-acre lot: 50 feet; and
         (c)   Minimum 2-acre lot: 50 feet.
   (G)   Building regulations; SFT.
      (1)   Single-family residence.
         (a)   Minimum living space. There shall be a minimum of 2,500 square
feet of air- conditioned space.
         (b)   Building materials.
            1.   First floor elevation. Not less than 90% of the exterior
materials used on the first floor elevation shall be brick, stone or approved
masonry product, exclusive of doors and windows.
            2.   Total elevation. Not less than 75% of the exterior materials
used on the entire elevation, including the first floor elevation, shall be
brick, stone or approved masonry product, excluding doors and windows.
            3.   Brick or stone; alternatives. Approved masonry products for
elevations may be permitted in lieu of brick or stone, with the approval of the
Building Official that these materials and their application conform to the
requirements of the International Residential Code, and other pertinent
ordinances in the city.
         (c)   Maximum height.
            1.   The maximum height for the primary residence shall be two
stories above the finished foundation elevation, not to exceed 45 feet above
finished foundation elevation to top of roof peak, excluding architectural
treatment elements.
            2.   Architectural treatment elements are not to exceed 50 feet
above finished foundation elevation.
      (2)   Accessory buildings. Refer to §
156.37(N).
      (3)   Accessory dwellings. Accessory dwellings may be constructed only
after the issuance of a special use permit.
         (a)   Minimum living space. There is no minimum living space
requirement.
         (b)   Building materials. Same requirements as the primary residence.
         (c)   Maximum height. The maximum height for any accessory buildings
shall be two stories above the finished foundation elevation, not to exceed the
height of the primary residence.
   (H)   Garages; SFT. No garage shall open to the front of a lot or to the
side street in a corner lot.
   (I)   Fences; SFT.
      (1)   General restrictions.
         (a)   All perimeter fencing shall not exceed six feet in height. All
fences shall be of open construction and not solid or near-solid fabric or
surfacing, except for parcels of land that are side or rear adjacent to the
following roads: Parker Road, Dillehay Drive (FM 2551), and Hogge Drive (FM
2551) on which a solid or near-solid fence constructed of wood, masonry, or
wrought iron is permitted along the roadway. Open construction shall mean that
each fence panel, when viewed from an elevation perspective at a perpendicular
to that elevation, shall be constructed of materials that allow at least 50% of
the surface area of each panel to provide for an open unobstructed view.
         (b)   The 50% open construction requirement for each fence panel is
exclusive of columns and posts, which may be constructed of solid material
including masonry or metal.
         (c)   Fencing columns, if used, shall not be more than two feet square
on base, and not more than six feet in height. The columns shall not be closer
together than six feet center to center.
      (2)   Chain link fencing. Chain link fences may not be used in the front
yard. They cannot extend beyond the front building line of the primary dwelling
on the lot. They cannot extend into the side setback on the street side of a
corner lot. It is preferred that chain link fence be black or green vinyl
coated rather than galvanized.
      (3)   Privacy fencing. Privacy fences are permitted around swimming pool
areas, subject to the following:
         (a)   The privacy fence must not be built more than 30 feet from the
side of the pool. The side of the pool is defined as where the water’s edge
meets the side of the pool, not the outside edge of the pool decking, if any.
      (4)   Inspection and maintenance. When any fence is completed, it must be
inspected. The Building Inspection Department shall be notified upon completion
of the fence. The Building Official will approve the fence if it complies with
the provisions of this section, or it will be rejected. All fences constructed
under the provisions of this section shall be maintained so as to comply with
the requirements of this section at all times. Fences shall be maintained by
the owner or person in charge of the property in as near as possible the
condition of the fence when installed and accepted as provided herein, and
shall be maintained as follows:
         (a)   The fence shall not be out of vertical alignment more than 20%;
and
         (b)   All damaged, removed, or missing portions of the fence shall be
replaced or repaired with comparable materials of a comparable color to the
remaining portions of the fence.
      (5)   Materials.
         (a)   Permitted materials. Materials permitted are wood, concrete,
masonry, chain link, wrought iron, metal tubing, vinyl, fiberglass composite,
barbed wire, or other materials approved by the Building Official for exterior
exposure as fence material.
         (b)   Prohibited materials. Materials prohibited are razor ribbon,
sheet metal, corrugated steel and fiberglass panel, plywood, or any other
similar material manufactured for other uses.
      (6)   Certain locations, construction prohibited.
         (a)   Within easements. No fence shall be located within any easement
except by prior written approval of those agencies having interest in that
easement.
         (b)   Electric fences. No fence erected shall be electrically charged
in a manner to be dangerous to humans.
      (7)   Swimming pool enclosures. A building permit is required for the
construction of all swimming pools, and all pools and their associated safety
fences shall be built according to the building code.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 508, passed 7-10-2001; Am. Ord. 697,
passed 8-6-2013; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.34 MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose; MH.
      (1)   The manufactured housing district is designated in order to provide
an adequately controlled area for the placement of manufactured homes, and to
ensure an environment suitable for family living. The terms “HUD-Code
manufactured home,” “mobile home,” “manufactured housing,” and “recreational
vehicle” as used herein are as defined in Tex. Occupation Code, Ch. 1201 and
Tex. Trans. Code, § 522.004(b), as amended.
      (2)   Any violations of the provisions of the manufactured housing
district ordinance passed September 19, 1995 which occurred prior to the date
of any amendments to this chapter are not waived or released by those
amendments. The provisions of this chapter in effect on the date of any
violation of this chapter shall be interpreted as still being in effect on the
date any violation is prosecuted. Further, no amendments to this chapter shall
waive, accept, or approve any nonconforming use which existed immediately prior
to September 19, 1995, the date the preceding manufactured housing district
ordinance was enacted. Any nonconforming use on the date this manufactured
housing district ordinance was originally passed by the city is a nonconforming
use solely for the size of the tract, the number of mobile homes, or
manufactured homes, located on the manufactured housing tracts, or the mobile
home tracts, on the date this chapter was passed. No additional manufactured
housing or mobile homes are permitted without strict compliance with this
chapter.
   (B)   Principal permitted uses; MH.
      (1)   (a)   Individually owned manufactured homes and lots in an approved
manufactured housing district subdivision; and
         (b)   Commercial manufactured home parks providing, either on a rental
or as an outright sale, lots for placement of manufactured homes with utilities
for those manufactured homes.
      (2)   Supporting service facilities for the exclusive use of the
residents will be permitted within the manufactured home park.
   (C)   General provisions; MH.
      (1)   Mobile homes constructed prior to June 15, 1976. No mobile home may
be installed for use or occupancy as a residential dwelling unit within the
city, effective the date of this chapter. Any mobile home previously legally
permitted and used or occupied as residential dwelling unit within the city is
deemed a nonconforming use. A permit for that legal nonconforming use and
occupancy shall be granted for a lawful nonconforming mobile home within the
city, so long as a replacement is a HUD- Code manufactured home.
      (2)   No HUD-Code manufactured homes constructed on or after June 15,
1976. No HUD-Code manufactured homes (constructed on or after June 15, 1976)
shall be permitted in the city as a residential dwelling, or otherwise, unless
the installation is within a manufacturing housing district approved by the
city. An application to install a new HUD-Code manufactured home for use and
occupancy as a residential dwelling is deemed approved and granted unless the
city denies the application in writing, within 45 days of the receipt of the
application, setting forth the reason for denial.
      (3)   Recreational vehicles. No recreational vehicle may be installed,
used, or occupied as a residential dwelling within the corporate limits of the
city.
      (4)   Wastewater requirements. All wastewater connections, septic
systems, plumbing, and drainage shall meet the highest standards of federal,
state, and county regulations adopted above.
      (5)   Individual manufactured home lots and subdivisions.
         (a)   Any individual desiring to place a manufactured home on a lot
within the area designated as a manufactured housing district may do so without
meeting the requirements of a commercial manufactured home park except for
structural protection, under the conditions that the manufactured home be
placed on a lot of no less than one acre and that all other applicable
provisions of the single-family residential district (SF) regulations are met
(such as use, setbacks, building code requirements). The conditions set forth
for structural protection of manufactured homes in manufactured home parks will
apply to individual manufactured home lots.
         (b)   Individual manufactured home lots and subdivisions shall comply
with all requirements of the subdivision regulations in
Chapter 155 and the city’s other ordinances.
      (6)   Commercial manufactured home parks.
         (a)   Site plan required. All applications for development of a
manufactured home park or manufactured housing district subdivision shall be
accompanied by a site plan and constructions plans (12 copies) drawn to scale,
acceptable to the City Engineer, complying with the requirements of
Chapter 155 of this code. A preliminary and final plat are required on all
manufactured home parks. The boundary survey shall be prepared by a registered
professional land surveyor and layout and design shall be prepared by a
registered professional engineer. The manufactured home park shall comply with
the design and construction requirements of
Chapter 155 regarding supporting data, drainage, paving, and utility
facilities. The site plan and construction plans shall show:
            1.   The area and dimensions of the tract of land, with
identification of location and boundaries;
            2.   The number, location, and size of all manufactured home
spaces;
            3.   The location and specifications of sewer lines and riser
pipes;
            4.   The location and specifications of water lines and service
connections;
            5.   The location and details of lighting, electrical, and gas
systems;
            6.   The location and specifications of all buildings constructed
or to be constructed within the park;
            7.   Existing and proposed topography;
            8.   The location of fire mains, including the size, the hydrants,
and any other equipment which may be provided;
            9.   Proposed pavement section;
            10.   Proposed storm drainage facilities, with calculations; and
            11.   Proposed wastewater treatment facilities.
         (b)   Park and lot size requirements.
            1.   Minimum park size. A site to be developed as a manufactured
home park shall have a minimum area of ten acres.
            2.   Minimum manufactured home lot size. Each manufactured home
space shall have a minimum area of one acre exclusive of any floodplain or
easements; however, no manufactured home space shall have dimensions less than
80 feet on the narrow dimension nor 100 feet on the long dimension, not
including off-street parking required.
         (c)   Temporary hookups. No temporary hookups will be permitted.
Power, water, and sewer service must be supplied to every lot.
         (d)   Streets, parking, and traffic.
            1.   Streets.
               a.   An internal street system (which shall also be drainage,
utility, fire, and emergency access easement) shall provide access to each
manufactured home space. This internal street system shall comply with
requirements of
Chapter 155 of this code regarding streets, including construction
requirements.
               b.   Driveways and parking areas are considered private.
Maintenance of driveways and parking areas shall be a private responsibility.
All other streets shall be dedicated as public.
            2.   Tenant parking. Tenants shall be provided with at least three
off-street parking spaces for each manufactured home space. Each parking space
shall be hard surfaced and located so as to eliminate interference with access
to parking areas provided for either manufactured homes or for public parking
in the manufactured home park.
            3.   Visitor and supplemental parking. In addition to parking
spaces required for each manufactured home unit, there shall be provided for
the manufactured home park: one visitor space for every four manufactured home
spaces; and one supplemental parking or vehicle storage space for every two
manufactured home spaces for the parking or storage of boats, recreational
vehicles, and similar vehicles or equipment.
               a.   These visitor and supplemental spaces may be located
anywhere within the manufactured home community, provided that no manufactured
home space shall be situated farther than 150 feet from a visitor space.
               b.   All supplemental parking areas shall be screened by fencing
or landscaping.
            4.   General parking space size. Each parking space will be not
less than 17 feet by ten feet.
         (e)   Signs. All signage will comply with
Chapter 153 of this code. Private streets shall indicate that they are private.
         (f)   Access.
            1.   Every manufactured home park shall have at least two points of
direct access to and from a public street, and each manufactured home space
shall have direct access to an internal public street. Where an internal street
provides access, the same shall be used as an emergency access easement to
allow for the rapid and safe movement of vehicles used for purposes of
providing emergency health or public safety services.
            2.   Each emergency access easement shall have a clear,
unobstructed width in compliance with city ordinances on street and road
design, shall connect to a dedicated public street, or shall have a turnaround
radius with a minimum of at least 40 feet in radius of paving. Corners of
intersecting streets shall have sufficient turning area to permit free movement
of emergency vehicles.
         (g)   Walkways. Designated, paved walkways will be provided on both
sides of roadways or streets.
         (h)   Numbering. Within each manufactured home park, all streets shall
be named, and manufactured homes numbered in a logical and orderly fashion
according to the city’s numbering system. Street signs shall be of a color and
size conforming with those on public streets. These signs and numbers shall be
of standard size and placement to facilitate location by emergency vehicles.
         (i)   Intersections. Street lighting within the manufactured home park
shall be provided along all emergency access easements. Light standards shall
have a height not to exceed 20 feet and spacing to ensure an average
illumination level of not less than 1.0 foot candles.
         (j)   Electric and telephone service. All distribution and service
lines of electrical, telephone, television, and other wire-carrier type
utilities shall be underground, except that the system of supply lines for
multiple subdivision service by utilities may be overhead. Transformers,
amplifiers, or similar devices associated with the underground lines shall be
located upon the ground or below the ground level. Where the underground
installation of these facilities is not a standard practice of the utilities
involved, the subdivider or developer shall make all arrangements for payments
associated with the nonstandard installation.
         (k)   Drainage and soil protection.
            1.   The ground surface in all parts of a manufactured home park
shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient
manner. Each manufactured home space shall provide adequate drainage for
placement of a manufactured home.
            2.   Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every manufactured
home park shall be paved, covered with stone screening or other solid material,
or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil
erosion and of eliminating dust.
            3.   No portion of any lot shall be located below the 100-year
floodplain. Drainage facilities shall comply with
Chapter 155 of this code.
         (l)   Fire safety. Storage and handling of flammable gases and liquids
shall be as follows:
            1.   Whenever liquefied petroleum gases are stored or dispensed,
their handling and storage shall comply with requirements of the city
ordinances as applicable; and
            2.   Wherever gasoline, fuel, oil, or other flammable liquids are
stored or dispensed, their handling and storage shall comply with requirements
of the city ordinances and state regulations.
         (m)   Water supply facilities. Water supply facilities for fire
protection service shall meet the minimum requirements of the key rate schedule
for a standard city as last adopted by the State Board of Insurance and the
minimum requirements of the city.
         (n)   Firefighting.
            1.   Approaches to all manufactured homes shall be kept clear for
firefighting.
            2.   The owner or agent of a manufactured home park shall be
responsible for the instruction of his or her staff in the use of the park fire
protection equipment and in their specific duties in the event of a fire. The
owner shall provide standard city fire hydrants located within 300 feet of all
manufactured home spaces, measured along the driveways or streets.
            3.   The owner or agent of a manufactured home park shall be
responsible for maintaining the entire area of the park free of dry brush,
leaves, and weeds.
            4.   The owner or agent of a manufactured home park shall provide
an adequate system of collection and safe disposal of rubbish, approved by the
Fire Marshal.
         (o)   Manufactured home spacing standards. In order to provide
adequate separation of manufactured homes and of other buildings and structures
for the purposes of safety against the hazards of fire and explosion, and to
promote structural safety in the placement of manufactured homes on their
respective sites, the following spacing standards shall apply.
            1.   The minimum front yard setback shall be 75 feet from the
nearest corner of the manufactured home to the front line of the manufactured
home space.
            2.   No manufactured home shall be closer than 75 feet to the outer
perimeter property line. If the manufactured housing district is adjacent to a
non-manufactured housing district, the setback from the outer perimeter
property line shall be at least the setback of the adjacent district, if the
setback of the adjacent district is greater than 25 feet.
            3.   Other structures on each manufactured home space must be
placed to the back of the manufactured home space and must be a minimum of 75
feet away from any line of the manufactured home space.
            4.   The minimum distance between manufactured homes at any point
shall be 75 feet.
            5.   The average vertical clearance height of the manufactured home
frame above the finished ground elevation shall not exceed three feet.
         (p)   Landscaping. The park will provide attractively and esthetically
designed and installed screening and landscaping to ensure privacy and suitable
environments for manufactured home occupants. The proposed screening and
landscape plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the city.
Landscaping areas will be not less than 5% of the gross site area.
         (q)   Community buildings and service facilities.
            1.   Structural and other requirements for buildings.
               a.   Construction of all buildings shall comply with applicable
ordinances of the city. All portions of structures shall be properly protected
from damage by ordinary uses and by decay, corrosion, termites, and other
destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be of such materials and be so
constructed and protected as to prevent entrance or penetration of moisture and
weather.
               b.   All rooms containing sanitary or laundry facilities shall:
                  i.   Have sound-resistant walls extending to the ceiling
between male and female sanitary facilities. Walls and partitions around
showers, lavatories, and other plumbing fixtures shall be constructed of dense,
nonabsorbent, waterproof materials or covered with moisture-resistant
materials;
                  ii.   Have at least one window or skylight facing directly to
the outdoors. The minimum aggregate gross area of windows for each required
room shall not be less than 10% of the floor area served by them; and
                  iii.   Have at least one window which can be opened easily or
have a mechanical device which will adequately ventilate the room.
            2.   Sanitary facilities.
               a.   Toilets shall be located in separate compartments equipped
with self-closing doors. The rooms shall be screened to prevent direct view of
the interior when the exterior doors are open.
               b.   Hot and cold water shall be furnished in every lavatory,
sink, and laundry fixture, and cold water shall be furnished in every water
closet and urinal.
            3.   Lighting. Illumination level shall be maintained as follows:
               a.   General seeing tasks: at least 5 foot candles;
               b.   Laundry room work area: at least 40 foot candles;
               c.   Toilet room in front of mirrors: at least 40 foot candles;
               d.   Pedestrian walkways: at least 5 foot candles;
               e.   Visitor and supplemental parking areas: at least 5 foot
candles; and
               f.   Recreation areas: at least 5 foot candles.
         (r)   Storage facilities. Storage facilities with a minimum size of
200 square feet per manufactured home space shall be provided on the space, or
in compounds located within 100 feet of each space. Wherever provided, storage
facilities shall be faced with masonry, porcelanized enamel, baked enamel,
steel, or other material equal in fire resistance, durability, and appearance.
All storage facilities shall be anchored to a concrete slab.
         (s)   Incinerators. Incinerators will be specifically prohibited.
Incineration of trash and garbage will be prohibited.
         (t)   Recreational areas. Every manufactured home park shall have at
least one visibly identifiable recreation area for the benefit and use of its
residents. Not less than 5% of the gross site area of the manufactured home
park shall be devoted to recreational facilities. Playground space shall be
protected from traffic, thoroughfares, and parking areas. This space shall be
maintained in a sanitary condition and free of safety hazards. Lighting must be
provided for all recreation areas.
         (u)   Water system.
            1.   Supply.
               a.   An adequate, safe, and potable supply of water shall be
provided by the owner or agent. Connection shall be made to the city water
system.
               b.   The manufactured home park shall have a compound commercial
water meter from the city, regardless of the distribution of the water within
the manufactured home park.
            2.   Connections.
               a.   The water supply system shall be connected by pipes to all
manufactured homes, buildings, and other facilities requiring water. All water
piping, fixtures, and other equipment shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with state and city regulations and requirements.
               b.   All water line mains will be eight inches or larger.
               c.   Individual water riser pipes and connections shall be
constructed and maintained in accordance with the city ordinances, as
applicable.
         (v)   Electrical utilities.
            1.   The wiring, fixtures, equipment, and appurtenances of every
electrical wiring system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with
applicable ordinances and regulations for those systems.
            2.   Power distribution lines shall be located underground. All
power distribution lines, individual electrical connections, and grounding of
the manufactured homes and equipment, shall comply with the city ordinances, as
applicable.
         (w)   Sewage or wastewater facilities.
            1.   An approved sewage treatment system shall be provided to meet
the minimum city, state, and county requirements. A connection to municipal
sanitary sewage service shall be required if access to a sanitary sewer line is
available to the site, at the landowner’s cost. On-site sewage or wastewater
treatment and disposal systems will be approved. Spray effluent shall not be
used for any treatment facility.
            2.   All requirements of the county, city, and the state as to
sanitation, water quality preservation, and pollution will be met. Where any
such statutes or regulations are in conflict, the more restrictive statute or
regulation shall apply, as determined by the Building Inspector of the city,
subject to the review and approval of the Mayor. Unless otherwise stated in
those regulations, each residential unit within a manufactured housing district
shall be connected to either:
               a.   An approved septic system, either for the individual unit
or a group of units, which shall be designed and shall operate to treat an
average of 250 gallons of wastewater per day from each unit, and shall further
be designed to appropriately treat wastewater discharged at peak times of the
days and evenings; or
               b.   In the event a sanitary sewer line is available for use by
a manufactured housing district, all residential units located lawfully within
the manufactured housing district shall be connected to the sanitary sewer
line.
            3.   An adequate and safe sewage system shall be provided for
conveying sewage to the treatment plant. The sewer system shall be constructed
in accordance with applicable local and state health regulations. Effluents
from sewage treatment facilities shall not be discharged into any waters of the
state except with prior approval of the State Natural Resource Conservation
Commission.
            4.   For sewage or wastewater connections, where public sanitary
sewer system is available, all materials used for sewer connections shall be in
accordance with the city ordinances, as applicable.
               a.   Each manufactured home stand shall be provided with at
least four-inch diameter sewer riser pipe. The sewer riser pipe shall extend at
least four inches above the ground and shall be so located on each stand that
the sewer connection to the manufactured home drain outlet will approximate a
vertical position.
               b.   The sewer connection to the manufactured home from the
sewer riser pipe and any other sewer connections shall be in accordance with
the requirements of the city ordinances, as applicable.
               c.   Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe
when no manufactured home occupies the space. Surface drainage shall be
diverted away from the riser.
         (x)   Fuel supply and storage.
            1.   Natural gas piping systems shall be installed underground and
maintained in accordance with applicable ordinances and regulations governing
those systems. Each manufactured home space provided with piped gas shall have
a cap on the outlet when not in use to prevent accidental discharge of gas and
shall be in accordance with applicable city ordinances.
            2.   Liquefied petroleum gas systems shall be installed only if an
available natural gas system is more than 1,000 feet from the manufactured home
park. The liquefied petroleum gas systems shall be maintained in accordance
with applicable ordinances of the city and regulations of the State Railroad
Commission pertaining thereto.
         (y)   Refuse handling and collections. The storage, collection, and
disposal of refuse shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent
harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards, or air pollution.
            1.   Storage facilities. One or both of the following systems shall
be used:
               a.   If refuse is gathered at the individual manufactured home
spaces, it shall be stored in fly-tight, watertight, rodent-proof containers,
which shall be located at each manufactured home site. Containers for this use
shall be provided by the park in sufficient number and capacity to properly
store all refuse; or
               b.   In lieu of storage at individual sites, centrally located
refuse containers, appropriately screened, and having a capacity of three cubic
yards or larger, may be provided. These containers shall be so designed as to
prevent spillage or container deterioration, and to facilitate cleaning around
them.
            2.   Removal. Refuse and garbage shall be removed from the park at
least once each week. The licensee or agent shall ensure that containers in the
park are emptied regularly and are maintained in a usable, sanitary condition.
         (z)   Insect and rodent control. Grounds, buildings, and structures
shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and infestation. Parks
shall be maintained free of accumulation of debris which may provide rodent
harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, and other pests. The growth
of brush, weeds, and grass shall be controlled to prevent harborage of noxious
insects or other pests. Parks shall be maintained so as to prevent the growth
of noxious weeds detrimental to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of
heavy undergrowth.
         (aa)   Structural protection; anchorage. To ensure against natural
hazards such as tornadoes, high winds, and electrical storms, anchorage at each
manufactured home shall be provided according to the following schedule.
            1.   Ties. For each manufactured home space designed to accommodate
the length of unit shown, frame ties shall be provided in the number indicated.
In addition, over-the-unit ties shall be provided as close to each end as
possible with straps at stud and rafter locations.
 
Length        Number of Ties
Up to 30 feet 2 per side
30 to 50 feet 3 per side
50 to 70 feet 4 per side
Over 70 feet  5 per side
 
            2.   Anchors.
               a.   Soil tests shall be made to ensure that the following types
of anchorage will withstand 3,750 pounds of pull per ten-foot length of
manufactured home.
                  i.   Cross-section: auger or dead man, six inches in
diameter; arrowhead eight inches.
                  ii.   Depth: auger or arrowhead four feet; dead man five
feet.
               b.   Anchor rod shall be at least 5/8 inch in diameter with
welded eye at tip, and shall be hooked into concrete when used in dead man
anchors.
               c.   Anchors in slabs shall equal above in pull resistance.
            3.   Connectors. Connectors of the following design minimums shall
be used.
               a.   Galvanized or stainless steel cable: 3/8 inch of seven
strands of seven wires each (7 x 7).
               b.   Galvanized aircraft cable: 1/4 inch seven strands of 19
wires each (7 x 19).
               c.   Steel strap: 1.25 inch by 0.035 inch galvanized with
tensioning device.
               d.   Cable ends: Secured by two U-bolt clamps.
               e.   Steel rods: 5/8 inch with ends welded and closed to form an
eye.
               f.   Turnbuckles: 5/8 inch drop forged with closed eyes, or
other tensioning devices of equivalent strength.
            4.   Piers and footings. The location and design of piers and
footings shall satisfy the following standards.
               a.   Spaced at ten-foot intervals on both frame rails with end
ones no farther than five feet from end of manufactured home.
               b.   Footings of solid concrete 16 inches by 16 inches by four
inches (16 x 16 x 4).
               c.   Piers of standard eight inches by eight inches by 16 inches
(8 x 8 x 16) of solid concrete.
               d.   Treated trim shingles may be used for leveling.
               e.   Pier or footing designs equivalent to the above when
approved by the City Engineer.
            5.   Permanent structures. Park buildings, patio awnings, and
cabana roofs. All permanent park buildings, patio awnings, and cabana roofs
hereafter constructed and all extensions to existing structures shall comply
with applicable ordinances of the city.
            6.   General application. These provisions for structural
protection shall also apply to individual manufactured home lots.
         (bb)   Responsibilities of park management.
            1.   Operation. The licensee, or his or her agent, of every
manufactured home park located within the corporate limits of the city shall
operate and maintain the park in compliance with these regulations and with all
other applicable ordinances of the city. He or she shall provide adequate
supervision to maintain the park, its facilities, and equipment in good repair
and in a clean and sanitary condition.
            2.   Information; responsibility for violations. The licensee or
agent shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of these
regulations and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under these
regulations. The licensee or agent shall bear final responsibility for any
violations of the ordinances set forth for manufactured home parks, except as
specifically outlined as the responsibility of park occupants.
            3.   Registration; information required. The licensee or agent
shall maintain a register of park occupancy which shall contain the following
information:
               a.   The names and addresses of park residents;
               b.   Manufactured home registration data including make, length,
width, year of manufacture, and identification number;
               c.   The location of each manufactured home within the park by
space or lot number and street address; and
               d.   Dates of arrival and departure.
            4.   Information to Tax Assessor-Collector. The licensee or agent
shall furnish to the Tax Assessor-Collector for the city, no later than January
10 and July 10 of each year, a list of all manufactured home residents in the
park on the last day of the preceding month. The register shall provide
information on the make, length, width, year of manufacture, and identification
number of the manufactured home, the address or location description of the
manufactured home within the park, and information on manufactured homes which
have moved out of the park since the last report including the foregoing data
plus the departure dates of each manufactured home and, if known, its
destination. These lists shall be prepared using forms provided by the Tax
Assessor-Collector for the city.
         (cc)   Responsibilities of owner. The owner or agent shall ensure that
every occupant of a space in a manufactured home park located within the
corporate limits of the city shall maintain his or her manufactured home space,
its facilities and equipment, in good repair and in a clean, sanitary
condition. He or she shall be responsible for proper placement of his or her
manufactured home in its manufactured home space and proper installation of all
utility connections in accordance with the instructions of the park management.
            1.   Skirting and additions. Fire-resistant skirting with the
necessary vents, screens, and openings shall be required on all manufactured
homes in manufactured home parks and shall be installed within ten days after
emplacement of the manufactured home. Skirting, porches, awnings, and other
additions, when installed, shall be maintained in good repair.
            2.   Prohibition of storage under homes. The use of space
immediately underneath a manufactured home for storage shall be prohibited.
         (dd)   Inspections.
            1.   Inspections by public officials. The Mayor or his or her
designee and the Fire Marshal or his or her designee, are hereby authorized and
directed to make inspections as are necessary to determine compliance with
these regulations.
            2.   Authority to inspect. The Mayor or the Mayor’s designee, the
Fire Marshal or his or her designee, the Tax Assessor-Collector, and the Water
Superintendent shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any
private or public property for the purpose of inspecting or investigating
conditions relating to the enforcement of this section. They shall have the
power and authority in discharging their official duties to inspect the
register containing a record of all residents of the manufactured home park.
            3.   Access to premises. It shall be the duty of every occupant of
a manufactured home park to give the licensee, his or her agent, or authorized
employee access to any part of the park at reasonable times for the purpose of
making repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this
section.
   (D)   Nonconforming manufactured housing parks; MH. Any manufactured home
park in existence at the time of the addition of the manufactured housing
district to the city’s zoning regulations (September 19, 1995), which does not
meet the regulations as set forth herein, shall not be enlarged in size or
number of units in place, extended in land area or number of units, or
improved, unless the enlargement, extension, or improvement complies with all
regulations contained herein.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.35 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
   (A)   The purpose of Planned Development (PD) is to provide an alternative
zoning district to ensure flexible, innovative developments under controlled
conditions which preserve the natural features of individual tracts and
encourage developers to provide for open space in all areas not otherwise
attainable under conventional base zoning districts.
   (B)   Review procedure. The following procedure shall be used for PDs:
      (1)   Step one: pre-application activities.
         (a)   Pre-application conference. A pre-application conference is
required to be held. In addition, the applicant shall include a concept/
schematic plan for review by the Director to help determine whether or not a
proposed PD is the appropriate procedure for the applicant and the city. The
concept/schematic plan shall include at a minimum the following:
            1.   Proposed uses;
            2.   Number and type of units;
            3.   Floor area of all buildings;
            4.   Floor area of each use for mixed-use buildings (if
applicable);
            5.   Proposed parking capacity and configuration;
            6.   General site planning layout and phasing; and
            7.   Summary of proposed deviations from the City's Code of
Ordinance standards and a description of compensating public benefits achieved
through the PD process.
      (2)   Step two: application submittal and processing.
         (a)   Generally.
            1.   The PD application shall be submitted and accepted, and may be
revised or withdrawn.
            2.   An application for rezoning to a PD shall include a PD plan.
         (b)   PD plan.
            1.   Generally.
               a.   The PD Plan establishes the development regulations for a
planned development and specifically identifies where there are deviations from
the Code of Ordinances.
               b.   The PD Plan shall include a development plan map.
               c.   Unless specifically modified by the PD Plan, the PD shall
comply with all standards in the Code of Ordinances, as amended.
               d.   Where the applicant is proposing deviations from the zoning
provisions of the Code of Ordinances, the applicant shall specify both the
existing regulations and the wording of each corresponding substitution, as
proposed. The proposed PD district shall represent a quality development when
weighed overall against the standards in the Code or the alternative
regulations proposed by the applicant.
               e.   The PD plan shall be reviewed by the Director of Public
Works and the Planning and Zoning Commission, whose recommendations are
forwarded to the City Council for review and approval.
               f.   Approval of the PD plan is required prior to approval of a
development permit in a PD zoning district.
            2.   Public benefits to be provided. When an applicant is proposing
deviations from the zoning provisions of this code to establish a PD zoning
district, the applicant shall demonstrate how the proposed PD zoning district
will generally provide public benefits to justify the increased flexibility
offered by the city through the PD procedure.
         (c)   Concurrent comprehensive plan amendment review. A comprehensive
plan amendment application may be reviewed concurrently with a PD application.
         (d)   Concurrent subdivision review. A subdivision application
submitted under
Chapter 155 may be reviewed concurrently with a PD application. A preliminary
plat for a PD shall only be approved following approval of the rezoning to PD.
      (3)   Step three: staff review and action. The Director of Public Works
shall review the PD application and prepare a staff report and recommendation
in accordance with the approval criteria below.
      (4)   Step four: scheduling and notice of public meetings/hearings. The
PD application shall be scheduled for public hearings before the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council, and noticed in accordance with applicable
law.
      (5)   Step five: review and decision.
         (a)   Planning and Zoning Commission review and recommendation. The
Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the PD application in accordance
with the approval criteria below, and shall forward its recommendation to the
City Council.
         (b)   City Council review and decision.
            1.   The City Council may review and approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the PD application in accordance with the approval criteria
below.
            2.   If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends denial of the
PD application, the rezoning shall become effective only by a 3/4 vote of all
members of the City Council.
            3.   The City Council may also remand the PD application back to
the Director of Public Works or the Planning and Zoning Commission for further
consideration.
            4.   If the City Council remands the PD application back to the
Director of Public Works or Planning and Zoning Commission, additional public
hearings will be required before final adoption.
         (c)   Protest procedure.
            1.   The rules governing amendment over protest are contained in
Tex. Local Gov’t Code, Chapter 211. The Director of Public Works may prescribe
forms for protest petitions.
            2.   Property owners within 200 feet of a proposed rezoning, as
indicated on the most recently approved city tax roll, may file a written
protest against the rezoning. If written protests are received by owners of 20%
or more of the area within 200 feet of the proposed rezoning, approval shall
require three-fourths vote of the City Council for a rezoning to become
effective. In such case, a supermajority vote shall not be required by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (6)   Step six: post-decision actions and limitations.
         (a)   Adoption of a planned development district. At the time a PD
zoning document is approved by the City Council, it becomes an integral part of
this code for that PD district established by the city on the property. All
future development within the adopted PD district shall thereafter be in
conformity with the PD zoning document for that property.
         (b)   Future development. Upon adoption of the PD district, the
applicant may proceed with the development of the property in accordance with
the PD zoning document and the PD development standards document by applying
for preliminary and final plat(s) approval in accordance with the phasing plan
in the PD district.
         (c)   Administration and enforcement.
            1.   While ownership of a project may subsequently be transferred
(in whole or in part), PD zoning will continue to be implemented and maintained
on the total acreage of the PD district. It is the responsibility of the owner
to notify all prospective purchasers of the existence of the PD district and
the PD development plan.
            2.   In the event that the applicant has failed to comply with the
conditions adopted by the City Council in conjunction with the approved PD
zoning document, the city may enforce the conditions of the PD under applicable
law.
         (d)   Amendments to a planned development.
            1.   Generally.
               a.   The applicant or its successors may request amendments to
the PD zoning document and or PD development standards document.
               b.   Amendments to the approved PD documents shall be delineated
as major or minor amendments, according to the criteria set forth in this
division.
               c.   Amendments to the approved PD documents will not affect
development units not included in the proposed amendment.
               d.   Upon receipt of a PD amendment application, the Director
shall determine if the proposed amendment constitutes a major or minor
amendment subject to the criteria in divisions 2. and 3. below.
            2.   Major amendments.
               a.   An amendment will be deemed major if it involves any one of
the following:
                  i.   A change in the overall PD district boundary;
                  ii.   A significant change to the approximate boundary of one
or more development unit(s) from that approved in the PD district, as
determined by the Director of Public Works. A change to an individual
development unit generally shall be deemed to be significant if it represents a
10% increase to the approximate gross area of the development unit as approved
in the PD district;
                  iii.   An increase of 10% or more of the approved number of
projected dwelling units or gross leasable area (GLA) for an individual
development unit;
                  iv.   Any change in land use or density that is likely to
negatively impact or burden public facilities and utilities infrastructure as
determined by the Director of Public Works;
                  v.   Any change in land use or density that is likely to
negatively impact or burden mobility adjacent to the PD district or to the
overall major street system; or
                  vi.   Any other proposed change to the development plan,
which substantively alters one or more components of the PD district.
               b.   If the Director of Public Works determines the amendment to
be major, the amendment request shall be processed under the rezoning procedure
described in division (B) of this section.
            3.   Minor amendments.
               a.   Amendments not meeting one or more of the criteria listed
above for major amendments shall be considered minor. If the Director of Public
Works determines the amendment to be minor, the Director may administratively
act on the amendment and attach stipulations or conditions of approval thereto,
to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
               b.   At least 15 days prior to consideration of a requested
minor amendment by the Director of Public Works, notice of the proposed minor
amendment shall be mailed to each owner of property wholly or partly within 200
feet of the affected development unit(s) to which the amendment relates.
               c.   If written protest to any minor amendment is received from
any notified property owner within ten days of the notification mailing date
and such protest cannot be resolved, then the minor amendment shall be
reclassified as a major amendment. No additional application shall be required;
however, all provisions governing major amendments shall then apply.
               d.   If written protest is not received as described above, the
Director of Public Works shall render a decision on the minor amendment
request.
               e.   The Director's decision shall be final unless appealed to
the Planning and Zoning Commission in division 4. below.
            4.   Administrative decision appeals.
               a.   The applicant or a property owner within 200 feet may
appeal an action or decision by the Director of Public Works on minor
amendments to the Planning and Zoning Commission within ten days from the date
of the Director's decision.
               b.   Appeals shall be in writing on a form provided by the
Director of Public Works and shall include only the specific items being
appealed.
      (7)   Rezoning to PD approval criteria. In reviewing a proposed rezoning
to a PD district, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall
consider the general approval criteria in Chapter 156 and whether and to what
extent the proposed PD district:
         (a)   Complies with the goals of the comprehensive plan;
         (b)   Complies with this Code, except where modifications are
expressly authorized through the PD zoning document, the PD development
standards document, and in the PD development plan map;
         (c)   Provides a greater level of building design quality, community
amenities, and connectivity than would be required if the project were not
being developed in a PD district;
         (d)   In the case of proposed residential development, that the
development will promote compatible buildings and uses and that it will be
compatible with the character of the surrounding area;
         (e)   In the case of proposed non-residential uses or mixed-uses, that
such development will be appropriate in area, location, and overall planning
for the purpose intended; and
         (f)   The provisions for public facilities such as schools, fire
protection, law enforcement, water, wastewater, streets, public services and
parks are adequate to serve the anticipated population within the PD district.
   (C)   Planned development standards.
      (1)   Unless specifically modified by the PD Plan during the rezoning to
PD procedure established above, the PD shall comply with all standards of this
code, as amended.
      (2)   Where the PD standards conflict with the standards in this code,
the regulations of the approved PD Plan shall control.
   (D)   Before a Final Plat is approved, capital improvement fees currently
due shall be escrowed with the city in accordance with the capital improvement
fee ordinances.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022)
§ 156.36 SPECIAL ACTIVITIES DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose; SA. The purpose of the special activities district is to
provide for tourist-related commercial uses that are integrated through site
planning and architectural design guidelines. A site plan shall be required for
all land to be zoned special activities district, and shall be approved at the
time the district is approved, and attached to the ordinance establishing a
special activities district, in accordance with the provisions in division (B)
(3). A site plan shall be required for all new construction for land zoned
special activities district and shall conform in all respects to the site plan,
in accordance with the provisions in division (B)(4). The acreage of a special
activities district shall be not less than 175 acres.
   (B)   Concept plan; SA.
      (1)   Procedures. The City Council may, after receiving the report of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, approve by ordinance the creation of a special
activities district based upon a concept plan prepared in accordance with
provisions of this section and processed in accordance with the procedures for
establishing zoning districts. The approved plan shall be made part of the
ordinance establishing the district. Any amendments to a concept plan must be
in harmony with the plan for the entire district and must be approved by the
City Council by ordinance. An amendment to a Council approved plan will be
considered an amendment to the special activities zoning district and be
processed in accordance with zoning amendment procedures. The City Council
shall have full legislative discretion in its consideration of any type of
plan.
      (2)   Criteria. In determining whether a special activities district
should be established and the concept plan should be approved, the Planning and
Zoning Commission in making its recommendations and the City Council in making
its decision shall consider the following criteria:
         (a)   The plan of development is consistent with the future land use
policies and map in the city’s Comprehensive Plan;
         (b)   The proposed uses and project design are compatible with
existing and planned adjoining uses;
         (c)   Adequate public facilities, including open space, will be
provided in a timely manner to support each phase of the development;
         (d)   The proposed uses and development standards are consistent with
the purposes and standards of these zoning regulations; and
         (e)   The proposed timing of the development is consistent with the
overall growth and development of the city.
      (3)   Designation. The ordinance establishing a special activities
district shall set forth the following provisions. The general site plan shall
be incorporated as an exhibit to the ordinance.
         (a)   A statement as to the purpose and intent of the district;
         (b)   The general land uses and acreage of each use authorized in the
district, by use category, the location of these uses, the residential
densities and nonresidential densities associated with phases of the project,
in conformance with the approved site plan;
         (c)   General conditions and standards applicable to development
within the district; and
         (d)   Required dedications or public improvements, if any.
      (4)   Site plan. A site plan shall be required for all new construction,
exterior remodeling, or additions to any structure which exceed 10% of either
the structure’s size or assessed value for tax purposes, in a special
activities district. No building permit shall be issued for a development
subject to site plan review until that site plan has been approved in
accordance with this section.
         (a)   Application. The property owner or designated representative may
initiate site plan review by filing an application with the City Administrator
and submitting the required review fee and five copies of the site plan and
related documents.
         (b)   Contents of application. Applications shall contain drawings to
scale to indicate:
            1.   The location of existing and anticipated new structures on the
subject property and adjoining property;
            2.   Landscaping and fencing, setback areas, uses of landscaping
and walls or fences for screening purposes, and landscaping of parking areas,
if applicable;
            3.   The design of ingress and egress to minimize interference with
traffic flow on abutting streets;
            4.   The height of all structures;
            5.   The proposed uses for all structures;
            6.   The location and types of all signs including lighting and
heights; and
            7.   The facade elevations of each building, including descriptions
of materials and colors for finishes.
         (c)   Standards. The site plan shall conform to all zoning
regulations, all additional requirements of the ordinance creating the
district, and any supplemental or special regulations applicable to the
particular use.
         (d)   Decision on site plan and appeal. The City Council shall
designate the official responsible for review and action in the ordinance
creating the district. The official so designated may approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the site plan. Appeals from denial of administrative site
plan shall be to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, and shall be made within 15
days. Procedures governing the appeal shall be in accordance with §
156.68.
   (C)   Uses; SA. The following uses shall be permitted of right or by special
use permit in the special activities district.
      (1)   Permitted uses.
         (a)   The following uses shall be allowed in a special activities
district; provided, however, that these uses may be restricted by the City
Council in the ordinance creating the district:
            1.   Hotel;
            2.   Motel;
            3.   Bed and breakfast establishments;
            4.   Retail and service uses:
               a.   Arts and crafts galleries;
               b.   Photography studio;
               c.   Retail shops for clothing and souvenirs, gourmet foods,
antiques, or florist shops; and
               d.   Cafes, restaurants, and catering facilities, excluding fast
food restaurants or drive-throughs.
            5.   Dinner playhouse;
            6.   Farmers’ market;
            7.   Conference or events facilities;
            8.   Indoor or outdoor special events, such as the following:
rodeos, livestock exhibitions, and auctions;
            9.   Tennis club or golf course;
            10.   Single-family residence for on-site caretaker or staff;
            11.   Facilities for the mixing of personal care products from
natural and raw agricultural products, such as an aloe vera products mixing
facility. This use does not include any animal processing, raw material
processing, uses which emit odors, or heavy manufacturing or industrial uses;
and
            12.   Private club for the serving of alcoholic beverages, where
properly permitted by the State Alcoholic Beverages Commission, and where the
facility is not less than 300 feet from a church, public school, or public
hospital. Only one private club shall be approved per site plan.
         (b)   The City Council shall have full legislative discretion in
determining whether these uses are appropriate with adjacent land uses, and
shall have discretion to impose conditions as may be necessary to protect
adjacent land uses and ensure compatibility.
      (2)   Conditional uses. All uses listed as conditional uses in the SF
district may be requested in accordance with the provisions of that section.
      (3)   Temporary outdoor uses. The following temporary use may be allowed
upon application for and issuance of a special use permit from the City
Building Official or other designated official: seasonal fireworks displays.
Request for a special use permit for a seasonal fireworks display shall be
accompanied by a properly issued permit from the Fire Marshal, and may only be
denied in times of drought or when the safety of the public is endangered by
the activity. Fireworks displays shall be limited to no more than four per
year, including one each for Independence Day weekend and New Year’s Eve.
      (4)   Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited:
         (a)   Sexually oriented businesses, including adult bookstores, adult
theaters, nude modeling or photography studios, adult dancing or entertainment
at private clubs; and
         (b)   Strip commercial development or shopping centers.
   (D)   Area and dimensional requirements; SA.
      (1)   Building setbacks.
         (a)   Structures shall be set back from existing residential
structures on or adjacent to the property zoned as special activities district
a minimum of 300 feet, measured from roof overhang to roof overhang. Structures
shall be set back 300 feet from any major roadway, including FM 2551, FM 2514,
Park Boulevard, and other roads as the city may from time to time designate.
         (b)   Enclosures such as outdoor or rodeo arenas, riding areas, or
similar outdoor uses which do not require the construction of a building, shall
be set back 100 feet from all roadways.
         (c)   Buildings shall have the following setbacks.
 
Yard       Setback from Roadway Setback from Buildings
Front yard 300 feet             100 feet
Rear yard  150 feet             50 feet
Side yard  100 feet             50 feet
 
         (d)   Building setbacks may be modified by City Council on the site
plan, provided that public safety objectives are preserved.
      (2)   Height limitations.
         (a)   Buildings for hotel use only may be three stories, not to exceed
35 feet.
         (b)   Buildings for all other uses shall not exceed one story, or 18
feet.
         (c)   Where new buildings are constructed on property which has
existing buildings on the date the property is zoned special activities
district, new construction shall not exceed the height of the existing
buildings, or three stories, whichever is less. In this instance, the City
Council may modify the height limitation in division (D)(2)(b) above, if
existing buildings are higher than the buildings existing on the property when
the district is created.
   (E)   Parking regulations; SA. Off-street parking shall be required for all
new construction, based on the following standards.
      (1)   Where necessary for fire safety purposes, specially designated fire
or traffic lanes may be required by the Fire Chief or the Building Official.
The designated area shall be kept clear of all parking, storage, and other
obstructions at all times.
      (2)   For parking areas which are hard surfaced, parking areas shall be
subdivided into smaller lots. No more than 100 spaces shall be included in a
single lot area. Accessible parking shall be provided as required by state and
federal standards.
      (3)   Overflow parking for special events or recreational activities of a
short-term, non- permanent nature may be located on grassy areas.
   (F)   Design elements; SA.
      (1)   Facade. Facade treatments and colors shall conform to the
following, subject to any exceptions which may be approved by the City Council
on the site plan:
         (a)   Wood materials;
         (b)   Overhangs and colonnades;
         (c)   Canopies are required, projecting from colonnades;
         (d)   All buildings must be constructed in uniform rural style, as
that term is defined by the city. No modern or post-modern styles will be
permitted. New construction shall be consistent with any existing buildings in
the district;
         (e)   Colors of building materials must be neutrals, earth tones, or
as are consistent with adjacent buildings. Any deviation from this standard
must be approved by the City Council on the site plan;
         (f)   Shingle or tile roofs;
         (g)   Painted metal building materials, stucco, stone, or brick may be
allowed where they are provided for in the ordinance establishing the district
or on an approved site plan; and
         (h)   Prohibited building materials, which may not be permitted on a
site plan: concrete or concrete block surfaces.
      (2)   Sidewalk. Sidewalks shall be installed in accordance with state or
federal statutes.
      (3)   Lighting. Light fixtures located in parking areas must not exceed
15 feet in height, and may not be directed or placed so that the illumination
circle falls outside the district boundary; provided, however, that fixtures
for outdoor sporting events may not exceed 30 feet in height.
      (4)   Signs. Signs shall meet the following standards.
         (a)   Monument style signs, constructed of the same or similar
materials as other improvements on the property, and no more than five feet
high from the ground, are permitted in this district. Total size of the sign
shall not exceed 32 square feet.
         (b)   No illumination elements are allowed on sign surfaces; provided,
however, that the signs may be backlit or illuminated from a light installed on
the ground, and designed to shine upwards only on the face of the sign.
         (c)   Signs shall be placed only at driveway entrances and shall not
be allowed on buildings.
         (d)   Temporary signs for directions or events shall be permitted in
accordance with the regulations contained in §
153.05, or as the same may be amended. Illuminated signs, as they are defined
in
Chapter 153 of this code, are specifically not allowed in this district.
      (5)   Loading zones and storage. All loading and unloading shall be
conducted at the rear of any building or structure. Loading zones shall be
placed on the property as required by the city’s building code. No outdoor
storage is allowed, unless approved by City Council on the site plan, and
where, due to the nature of the items being stored, it is necessary to keep
them outside.
   (G)   Landscaping requirements; SA.
      (1)   Open space must constitute 40% of the gross area covered by the
site plan.
      (2)   Parking lots shall be landscaped as follows.
         (a)   Landscaping requirements may be waived or modified by the City
Council at the site plan stage if a finding is made that the site plan provides
sufficient permeable surfaces and adequately addresses the drainage and visual
impacts of impermeable surfaces.
         (b)   There shall be a minimum of one tree planted in the parking area
for each 400 square feet or fraction thereof of hard surfaced area. Trees shall
be a minimum of a four-inch caliper, and shall be conifers or hardwoods.
         (c)   The perimeter of all parking areas should be effectively
screened to a minimum depth of 15 feet from streets, driveways, drop-off areas,
buildings, and open spaces.
         (d)   An area equal to 15% of the total size of the parking lot must
be landscaped and permeable, exclusive of perimeter plantings.
   (H)   Manufactured housing limitations; SA. No mobile homes or HUD-Code
manufactured homes shall be permitted.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.37 SUPPLEMENTARY ZONING REGULATIONS.
   The following supplementary zoning regulations are hereby adopted and shall
apply in all cases where specified by this section.
   (A)   Visibility at intersections in all districts. On a corner lot in any
district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such
a manner as materially to impede vehicle drivers’ vision at intersections.
   (B)   Fences, walls, and hedges. Notwithstanding other provisions of this
chapter, fences, walls, and hedges may be permitted in any required yard, or
along the edge of any yard, provided that the fences, walls, or hedges along
lot lines at street intersections do not impair visibility at the intersection
within an area defined by lines of joining points located 20 feet back from the
intersection of all curb lines extended.
   (C)   Offensive trade activity. No offensive trade activity shall be carried
on upon any lot, nor shall anything be done which may be or become an annoyance
or nuisance. No lot shall be used or maintained as a dumping ground for
rubbish.
   (D)   Lot maintenance. In all districts, lots shall be maintained in such a
manner as to be free and clear of debris. The following provisions relate only
to the height of grass and weeds:
      (1)   On tracts of land, whether platted or described by metes and
bounds, grass and weeds are not permitted to grow to a height in excess of 12
inches unless the vegetation is for agricultural operations and may then exceed
12 inches.
      (2)   The practice of agriculture includes the following activities:
         (a)   Cultivating the soil (tilling soil in order to better prepare it
for planting);
         (b)   Producing crops for human food, animal feed, planting seed, or
fiber;
         (c)   Floriculture (cultivation and management of ornamental and
flowering plants);
         (d)   Viticulture (the cultivation or culture of grapes especially for
wine making);
         (e)   Horticulture (growing fruits, vegetables, flowers, or ornamental
plants - wildflowers may exceed 12 inches when growing, but shall be mowed to a
maximum height of 12 inches after seeding);
         (f)   Silveculture (dealing with the development and care of forests);
         (g)   Current wildlife management;
         (h)   Current raising or keeping livestock or poultry.
      (3)   Regularly cultivated crops shall not be allowed to grow within the
public road right-of-way of any public street or easement but shall be kept
mowed. It shall be the duty of any person owning, claiming, occupying, or
having supervision or control of any real property to cut and remove all weeds,
brush, or other objectionable or unsightly matter as often as may be necessary;
provided that the removing and cutting same at least once in every 30 days
shall be deemed a compliance with this chapter; and to use every precaution to
prevent the same growing on the premises to become a nuisance.
   (E)   Exceptions to height regulations. The height limitations do not apply
to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys, or
other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not
intended for human occupancy.
   (F)   Structures to have access. Every building erected or moved shall be on
a lot with direct access on a public street, or with access to a municipally
approved street. All structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe
and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required on-site
parking.
   (G)   Yard definitions. Yards as required in this chapter are open spaces on
the lot on which a building is situated and which are open and unobstructed to
the sky, except as herein provided.
      (1)   Front yard. A yard facing and abutting a street and extending
across the full width of the front of the lot and having a minimum horizontal
depth measured from the front property line equal to the depth of the minimum
front yard specified for the district in which the lot is located. The required
yard line represents the line in front of which no building or structure may be
erected. Balconies, decks, and marquees located more than eight feet from the
ground may project up to six feet into the required front yard.
      (2)   Rear yard. A yard extending across the full width of the lot
between the side lot lines and having a minimum depth measured from the rear
lot line as specified for the district in which the lot is located. There shall
be no intrusion into the rear yard by stairways, balconies, or other building
extensions to more than four feet.
      (3)   Side yard. A yard located on a lot extending from the required rear
yard to the required front yard and having a minimum width measured from the
side lot line as specified for the district in which the lot is located.
   (H)   Use of major recreational equipment.  
      (1)   No recreational equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, or
housekeeping purposes for more than:
         (a)   21 days (consecutive or non-consecutive) in any 30-day period
not to exceed a total of 63 days in a 12 month period.
         (b)   Recreational equipment must be parked or stored on a residential
lot or in a location approved for such use.
   (I)   Parking and storage of certain vehicles. Automotive vehicles or
trailers bearing license plates or state motor vehicle inspection stickers
which are more than three months out of date shall not be parked or stored on
any residentially designated property except in completely enclosed buildings
or covered with protective cloth specifically made for that use.
   (J)   Parking of large vehicles. No vehicle larger than that of a two-ton
capacity shall be parked upon any lot or premises in a residentially zoned
district.
   (K)   District changes. Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be
changed so as to transfer an area from one district to another district of a
different classification, or when boundaries or districts are changed as a
result of annexation of new territory or changes in the regulations or
restrictions of this chapter, the foregoing provisions shall also apply to any
nonconforming uses existing therein which may so become nonconforming.
   (L)   Off-street parking.  
      (1)   Non-residential. Off-street parking must be provided for all
nonresidential uses in accordance with the following schedule.
         (a)   Religious facility: one space for each four fixed seats in the
sanctuary or auditorium, or one space for each 28 square feet in the sanctuary
or auditorium if fixed seats are not provided.
         (b)   School (public or private):
            1.   One and one-half spaces for each kindergarten/elementary
school classroom;
            2.   Three and one-half spaces for each junior high/middle school
classroom; and
            3.   Nine and one-half spaces for each senior high school
classroom.
         (c)   All other nonresidential uses: one space for each 200 square
feet of floor area.
      (2)   Residential.
         (a)   Passenger vehicles may be parked anywhere behind the front
facade of the house, or, if in front of the house, on the driveway, or the
entire vehicle shall be within 15 feet of the centerline of the driveway.
         (b)   Recreational vehicles and equipment (including, but not limited
to, recreational vehicles, motor homes, travel trailers, pickup campers, boats
and boat trailers, horse or stock trailers, and similar equipment).
            1.   On lots of two acres or less, must be parked behind the front
line of the house, on either an improved or unimproved surface.
            2.   On lots greater than two acres, may be parked or stored within
50 feet of the front building line of the house, so long as the RVs are not
parked within 100 feet of the front property line.
         (c)   Industrial/commercial vehicles over a GVWR (gross vehicle weight
rating) of 10,000 pounds must be parked behind the front line of the house,
either on an improved or unimproved surface.
         (d)   Farm equipment.
            1.   On lots of two acres or less, must be parked behind the front
line of the house, on either an improved or unimproved surface.
            2.   On lots greater than two acres, may be parked behind the
frontline of the house, or up to 50 feet in front of the house, but not closer
than 100 feet from the front building line, either on an improved or unimproved
surface.
         (e)   Prohibited vehicles. Semi tractors and their trailers.
   (M)      Home occupation. 
      (1)   No residential structure, and/or lot in any Parker zoning district,
except SA -- Special Activities, may be used for business purposes, unless and
except in cases meeting the strict wording of the home occupation definition.
      (2)   Use of a residential property for a home occupation is allowed only
under the following conditions:
         (a)   There shall be not more than one employee who does not reside
permanently at the residence. Staging or gathering of employees at the
residence for work assignments away from the residence is not allowed.
         (b)   No signage is permitted for a home occupation (with the
exception of state-approved/licensed vineyard).
         (c)   No raw materials, scrap, inventory, equipment, work in progress
and/or finished goods may be visible from the street, or adjacent properties.
         (d)   No building alterations shall be allowed that will alter the
residential design or use of the residence or the property.
         (e)   No toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible, corrosive,
radioactive, or other hazardous materials shall be used or stored on the site
for home occupation purposes, unless approved by the city Fire Marshal.
         (f)   All home occupations must comply with the city nuisance
ordinance.
         (g)   No traffic shall be generated by a home occupation in greater
volumes than normally expected for the zoning classification of that
neighborhood.
   (N)   Accessory buildings. See definition.
      (1)   Accessory buildings shall be constructed of materials similar in
appearance to the main dwelling or with any of the following exterior
materials:
         (a)   Brick, pre-finished metal, wood siding or simulated wood,
masonry products, Portland cement plaster, stucco or exposed aggregate
concrete.
         (b)   Corrugated sheet metal siding and roofing are expressly
prohibited.
      (2)   All construction of accessory buildings requires the issuance of a
building permit by the city. All construction shall meet the building code
requirements of the city.
      (3)   Accessory buildings shall be located according to the most
restrictive of the following:
         (a)   In the rear portion of the lot, behind the rear building line of
the main dwelling.
         (b)   If on a corner, no closer to a street than the main dwelling.
         (c)   In compliance with the setbacks requirement required by the
zoning classification or final plat of the lot.
      (4)   Maximum height.
         (a)   The maximum height of an accessory building is measured from the
peak of the roof of the accessory building to finished foundation elevation.
         (b)   The maximum height shall be 40 feet, or the height of the peak
of the roof of the main dwelling, whichever is lower.
         (c)   The maximum height of a sidewall of an accessory building shall
not exceed 20 feet.
      (5)   Additional requirements.
         (a)   The building area of an accessory building shall not exceed the
lesser of 2,500 square feet or 3% of the lot area.
         (b)   The applicant shall submit a fully dimensioned site plan,
showing the location and the dimensions of the accessory building, the property
lines, easements and all structures within 100 feet of the property line. The
sketch shall include a depiction of the size and location of all doors in the
accessory building.
         (c)   Accessory buildings of any size used to shelter animals shall be
at least 100 feet from the primary dwelling of adjacent residents on contiguous
lots.
         (d)   No accessory building shall be closer to the front of the lot
than the dwelling on an adjacent lot. This rule is waived if the residence on
the adjacent lot is at least 200 feet from the proposed accessory building.
         (e)   Lots of less than two acres are limited to one accessory
building. Lots greater than two acres are limited to one accessory building per
acre. A variance is required for more than two accessory buildings per lot, or
one accessory building larger than 2,500 square feet.
      (6)   Usage and occupancy. Accessory buildings shall not be used for
accessory dwellings, unless converted in accordance with all provisions
governing accessory dwellings.
      (7)   A greenhouse is an accessory building, but because of its function,
building options are different from other accessory buildings. Greenhouses
shall be used only for the purpose of growing plants. Greenhouses exceeding 120
square feet shall be constructed in accordance with the following requirements:
         (a)   The exterior of a greenhouse must be constructed of fiberglass,
glass, carbonite, or other rigid material approved by the Building Inspection
Department. Such materials will be mounted in frames of steel, aluminum, cedar,
or treated wood, suitable for building purposes, and in accordance with the
applicable building code.
   (O)   Accessory dwellings. See definition.
      (1)   Accessory dwelling regulations. Each single lot may have one
accessory dwelling (either attached, or detached).
      (2)   Detached dwellings.
         (a)   No detached dwelling may be constructed on less than two acres.
         (b)   Detached dwellings must be designed, constructed, and used for
single family use, not multi-family use.
         (c)   Detached dwellings may not be larger than 2,500 square feet of
living space, or 25% of the living space of the primary residence, whichever
area is less.
         (d)   Detached dwellings require a special use permit (SUP), with
annual renewal.
            1.   Architectural design, features, and construction materials
must match the primary dwelling.
            2.   The detached dwelling must meet all setback and side yard
requirements.
            3.   Detached dwellings shall be located according to the most
restrictive of the following:
               a.   In the rear portion of the lot, behind the rear building
line of the main dwelling.
               b.   If on a corner, no closer to the street than the main
dwelling.
               c.   In compliance with the setbacks requirement required by the
zoning classification or final plat of the lot.
            4.   The ingress and egress to the detached dwelling by vehicle
must be shown on the site plan, and any driveway must connect with the main
residence driveway.
      (3)   Attached dwellings. Attached dwellings must meet all requirements
set forth above for detached dwellings, and an attached dwelling must also
comply with the following:
         (a)   The attached dwelling may be constructed on a lot of one acre or
larger.
         (b)   The attached dwelling must be architecturally designed and
constructed to be incorporated into the structure of the primary residence,
connected by an enclosed walkway, or other means of attachment as approved in
the SUP for the dwelling.
         (c)   The front of the attached dwelling must not be located a
distance greater than 20 feet from the rear or side of the primary dwelling.
      (4)   General conditions for accessory dwellings.
         (a)   No accessory dwelling, either attached or detached, may be
rented or leased to third parties by the owners or residents of the primary
residence. The owners of the primary residence may not live in the accessory
dwelling, and rent to third parties the primary residence.
         (b)   No portion of a garage, bonus room, cabana, accessory, or any
other structure on the property may be used as a dwelling for any person other
than the occupants of the primary residence, and their family members of the
first or second degree of affinity or consanguinity, other than as a short term
(no longer than one month) guest room.
         (c)   An attached or detached dwelling may be provided, without
monetary charge, to domestic or agricultural workers providing services to the
residents of the primary residence or for farm and livestock care on the
property.
         (d)   There must be a fire hydrant within 450 feet of a detached
dwelling, or an eight-inch water line must be laid.
   (P)   Storage units and construction containers.
      (1)   Temporary storage units and trash containers.
         (a)   No shipping containers, PODS, or trash containers may be located
on residential lots for more than 30 days. A lot owner may apply to the city
for a permit for a longer period of use. The City Administrator or his/her
designee may issue a permit for an additional time period, not to exceed 60
days.
         (b)   Temporary storage units and trash containers must not be in the
right-of-way or public easement.
      (2)   Construction storage and trash containers.
         (a)   Storage and trash containers, or other containers in use for a
permitted construction project, must be removed within ten days of the project
completion or issuance of a CO (certificate of occupancy).
         (b)   Construction storage units and trash containers must not be in
the right-of-way or public easement.
      (3)   Non-temporary storage units.
         (a)   Shipping containers, PODS, railroad cars, or transportation
storage equipment may not be located on a residential lot in a permanent
manner.
         (b)   Storage sheds of less than 200 square feet of floor area are
allowed on residential properties. Not more than one per acre will be allowed.
The shed must be placed behind the rear building line of the principal
dwelling, and, on a corner lot, no closer to the street than the main dwelling.
Building setbacks do not apply to storage sheds described in this division (P)
(3).
      (4)   Non-temporary trash containers. All non-temporary trash containers
require an SUP, must be screened on all four sides, with access on one side,
and must be out of the right-of-way and/or city easement.
      (5)   Portable toilets.
         (a)   Portable toilets are required for permitted construction
projects, and must be removed within ten days of the project completion or CO.
         (b)   Portable toilets are allowed on a residential lot for special
events of up to three days without a permit.
         (c)   Portable toilets are allowed on agricultural zoned lots (non-
residential) without a permit, but not be placed within 100 feet of the
property lines.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 508, passed 7-10-2001; Am. Ord. 638,
passed 2-17-2009; Am. Ord. 653, passed 3-16-2010; Am. Ord. 696, passed 5-21-
2013; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022) Penalty, see §
156.99
NONCONFORMING, CONDITIONAL, AND SPECIAL USES
§ 156.50 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Existing buildings, structures, and uses. Except as hereinafter
specified, any use, building, or structure existing at the time of the
enactment of this chapter may be continued, even though that use, building, or
structure may not conform with the provisions of this chapter for the district
in which it is located; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to
any use, building, or structure established in violation of any ordinance
previously in effect in the city, unless that use, building, or structure now
conforms with this chapter.
   (B)   Conditional uses. Any use existing on the effective date of Ord. 242A
which is listed as a conditional use in the use district where it is located
shall remain a nonconforming use until a special use permit is obtained as
provided in this chapter.
   (C)   Alteration of nonconforming uses. No existing building or premises
devoted to a use that is not permitted by this chapter in the use district in
which the building or premises is located shall be enlarged or improved, except
when required to do so by law or written order, unless the use thereof is
changed to a use that is permitted in the district in which the building or
premises is located, and except as follows.
      (1)   When authorized by the City Council in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, the substitution for a nonconforming use of another
nonconforming use, or an extension of a nonconforming use, may be made.
      (2)   Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use,
that use shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use.
      (3)   When authorized by the City Council in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, enlargement or completion of a building devoted to
a nonconforming use may be made upon the lot occupied by that building, where
that extension is necessary and incidental to the existing use of the building
and does not exceed 25% of its area of nonconformity, as measured by the square
footage of the building or land area.
   (D)   Cessation of use of building or land. For the purposes of the
succeeding divisions, a use shall be deemed to have ceased when it has been
discontinued for 12 months, whether with the intent to abandon the use or not.
      (1)   No building or structure which was originally designed for a
nonconforming use shall again be put to a nonconforming use, where that use has
ceased for six months or more.
      (2)   No building or structure which was not originally designed for a
nonconforming use shall again be put to a nonconforming use, where that use has
ceased for six months or more.
   (E)   Construction approved prior to ordinance. Nothing herein shall be
construed to require any change in the overall plans, construction, or
designated use of any development, structure, or part thereof, where official
approval and the required building permits were granted before the enactment of
this chapter, or any amendment thereto, where construction thereof, conforming
with those plans, shall have been started prior to the effective date of this
chapter or the amendment, and where that construction shall have been completed
in a normal manner within the subsequent six-month period, with no
interruption, except for reasons beyond the builder’s control.
   (F)   Repair of unsafe buildings. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
to prohibit the strengthening or repair of any part of any building or
structure declared unsafe by proper authority.
   (G)   Nonconforming signs. All nonconforming signs, billboards, or
commercial advertising structures may be continued only for a period of one
year from the adoption of this chapter, unless in violation of other ordinances
or shorter periods are provided for in other ordinances or code provisions.
   (H)   Damage or destruction.
      (1)   Any nonconforming structure except a dwelling, which is damaged as
measured by the cost to repair as more than 60% of the then appraised value for
tax purposes above its foundation, by fire, flood, explosion, wind, earthquake,
war, riot, or other calamity or act of God, shall not be restored or
reconstructed and used as it was before that happening. If the structure is
damaged less than 60% of its then appraised value for tax purposes, it may be
restored, reconstructed, or used as before, provided that the restoration or
reconstruction is completed within 12 months of the damaging event.
      (2)   Dwellings may be restored or reconstructed provided that the
reconstruction or restoration is at least to the same size and quality as the
damaged or destroyed dwelling.
   (I)   Repairs and maintenance.
      (1)   A nonconforming structure may be repaired and maintained as
necessary to keep it in sound condition, but no structural alterations shall be
made unless required by law or ordinance or unless authorized by the Council.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the total structural
repairs and alterations that may be made to a nonconforming structure shall not
exceed 50% of its appraised value for tax purposes. This restriction on
rebuilding does not apply to accessory dwellings or single-family residences.
   (J)   Moving of nonconforming structure or building. No nonconforming
building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location
on the lot, or on any other lot, unless every portion of the building or
structure is made to conform to all the regulations of the district where
relocated.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.51 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   The following uses may be permitted in any district when they meet
special regulations and conditions prescribed by the Commission and are
approved by the City Council through the issuance of a special use permit.
Detailed examination of proposed location and use characteristics is necessary
to maximize compatibility.
   (B)   These uses include:
      (1)   Community building; meeting or recreational;
      (2)   Temporary signs;
      (3)   Public library;
      (4)   Municipal service facilities and buildings;
      (5)   Parks, playfields, and playgrounds;
      (6)   Public swimming pool;
      (7)   Temporary structure (construction, real estate, and the like);
      (8)   Church;
      (9)   School; and
      (10)   Guest ranches or party pavilions; parking areas.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.52 SPECIAL USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the regulations described by this section is
to allow the compatible and orderly development within the city of uses which
may be suitable only in certain locations in a designated district if developed
in a specific way or only for a limited period of time.
   (B)   Requirement. A special use permit is required for all conditional
uses. A special use permit may have a specified time limitation attached and
may impose conditions other than those which are specifically set forth in this
chapter.
   (C)   Approval responsibility.
      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the initial
responsibility for recommending all special use permits required for the
conditional uses.
      (2)   The City Council shall have the final authority for approval or
denial of all special use permits.
      (3)   The following procedures shall be complied with prior to the
approval or denial of any special use permit.
         (a)   Application concerning special use permits for those uses which
are conditional in any district shall be submitted to the Administrator in
writing and be automatically referred to the Commission for a public hearing on
same. The Administrator shall investigate conditions, arrange hearing
notification, and obtain any expert advice needed to achieve agreement between
the applicant and the city.
         (b)   After receiving an application for a special use permit,
notification of that request by mail shall be made to all owners of real
property located within 200 feet of the property on which application has been
made. The names and addresses of the affected parties shall be supplied by the
applicant.
         (c)   After a public hearing, the Commission may recommend an
application for a special use permit not be approved, if the proposed use fails
to meet one of the criteria set forth in division (E) below. In recommending a
special use permit be approved, the Commission, on the basis of recommendations
from the Administrator, may impose requirements and conditions with respect to
locations, construction, maintenance, and operation, in addition to those
expressly stipulated in the ordinance for the particular use, as it deems
necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public interest.
         (d)   When application has been denied by the Commission, the
applicant may appeal for a hearing before the City Council.
   (D)   Appeals from decisions of the Commission. Any person or persons,
jointly or severally, aggrieved by a decision of the Commission, may present
the City Council a petition, duly verified, setting forth that the decision is
unjust, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of injustice. The petition
shall be presented to the body within ten days after the final decision of the
Commission and not thereafter.
   (E)   Prerequisites for approval by City Council.
      (1)   No structure or property in any district shall be used for a use
listed as a conditional use without first having obtained a special use permit
for that use from the City Council.
      (2)   The City Council, after receipt of report and recommendation of the
Commission, may permit a conditional use subject to appropriate conditions and
safeguards, when, after public notice and a hearing, the City Council finds:
         (a)   The proposed use meets all the minimum standards established in
this chapter for this type of use;
         (b)   The proposed use is in harmony with the purpose and intent of
this chapter; and
         (c)   The proposed use will not be detrimental to the health, welfare,
and safety of the surrounding neighborhood or its occupants, nor be
substantially or permanently injurious to neighboring property.
      (3)   Each use permitted by the City Council shall be evidenced by a duly
adopted ordinance granting the special use permit and containing those
conditions as may be prescribed by the City Council.
      (4)   The City Council may impose additional reasonable restrictions or
conditions to carry out the spirit and intent of this chapter and to mitigate
adverse effects of the proposed use. These requirements may include, but are
not limited to, increased open space, loading and parking requirements,
suitable landscaping, and additional improvements such as drainage, trails, and
fencing.
      (5)   Prior to any public hearing before the City Council for a special
use permit, notification shall be made by mail to all property owners within
200 feet of the property on which the application was made.
   (F)   Application filing procedure. Application shall be made by the
property owner or certified agent thereof to the Administrator on a form
prescribed for this purpose by the city. The application shall be accompanied
by drawings as provided herein. Granting a special use permit does not exempt
the applicant from complying with requirements of
Chapter 151 of this code or other code provisions.
   (G)   Development and time limits. Following the issuance of a special use
permit, the Building Official shall ensure that if the development is
undertaken, it is commenced in compliance with the permit within one year. If
the development is not commenced within one year of issuance of the applicable
special use permit, the special use permit shall expire without notice.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022) Penalty, see §
156.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 156.65 CONSTRUCTION; SITE PLAN REQUIRED.
   (A)   Requirement. A site plan shall be required for all new construction,
exterior remodeling, or additions to any structure. No building permit shall be
issued for a development subject to site plan review until the site plan has
been approved in accordance with this section.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of the site plan is to ensure compliance with
this chapter and to assist in the orderly and harmonious development of the
city, to protect and enhance the general welfare, and to help prevent the
impairment or depreciation of land values and development by the erection of
structures, additions, or alterations thereto without proper attention to site
planning and preserving the intent of this chapter.
   (C)   Application. The property owner or designated representative may
initiate site plan review by filing an application with the City Administrator,
and submitting the required review fee and five copies of the site plan and
related documents.
   (D)   Contents of application. Applications shall contain drawings to scale
to indicate:
      (1)   The location of all structures on the subject property and
adjoining property;
      (2)   Landscaping and fencing, setback areas, uses of landscaping and
walls or fences for screening purposes, and landscaping of parking areas;
      (3)   Design of ingress and egress to minimize interference with traffic
flow on abutting streets;
      (4)   The height of all structures;
      (5)   The proposed uses for all structures;
      (6)   The location and types of all signs including lighting and heights;
and
      (7)   The facade elevations of each building, including descriptions of
materials and colors for finishes.
   (E)   Standards. The construction plan shall conform to the concept plan,
all zoning regulations, all additional requirements for the ordinance creating
the district, and any supplemental or special regulations applicable to the
particular use.
   (F)   Decision on site plan and appeal. The City Council, the Building
Official, or other official as may be designated by the City Council, shall
review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the site plan. Appeals
from denial of site plan shall be to the Board of Adjustment, made within 15
days. Procedures will be in accordance with §
156.67.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.66 ADMINISTRATION AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Building Official, City Planner, City Engineer, City
Administrator, or other administrative official of the city shall be designated
Administrator by the City Council to administer the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   If the Administrator shall find, or if any person files with him or
her a complaint in writing alleging that any of the provisions of this chapter
are being violated, he or she shall immediately investigate and when necessary
give written notice to the person responsible to cease those violations
forthwith.
   (C)   Notice may be delivered in person, by mail, or by certified mail to a
violator or to any occupant of property where a violation is occurring.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.67 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby created a Board of Adjustment which
shall be organized, appointed, and function as follows.
   (B)   Organization.
      (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members who are
residents of the city, each to be appointed by resolution of the City Council
for a two-year term and removable for cause by the appointing authority upon
written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term of any member whose place becomes vacant for any cause, in the
same manner as the original appointment was made. The City Council may provide
for the appointment of two alternate members of the Board who shall serve in
the absence of one or more of the regular members when requested to do so by
the Mayor or City Secretary, as the case may be. All cases to be heard by the
Board of Adjustment will always be heard by a minimum number of four members.
The alternate members, when appointed, shall serve for a two-year term, and any
vacancy shall be filled in the same manner, and they shall be subject to
removal the same as the regular members.
      (2)   The person acting as Ordinance Administrator for the city shall be
an ex-officio member of the Board of Adjustment without power of vote, and as
an ex-officio member of the Board shall set up and maintain a separate file for
each application for appeal and variance received and shall record therein the
names and addresses of all persons, firms, and corporations to whom notices are
mailed, including the date of mailings and the person by whom the notices were
delivered to the mailing clerk, post office, or mail box, and further keep a
record of all notices published as required herein. All records and files
herein provided for shall be permanent and official files and records of the
city.
      (3)   The Board shall forthwith notify in writing the City Council, the
Commission, and the City Building Inspector of each decision, interpretation,
and variance granted under the provisions of this chapter.
      (4)   The terms of the Zoning Board of Adjustment members and alternates
shall commence December 1 of the two-year term, and shall expire on November
30.
   (C)   Operational procedure.
      (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules to govern its
proceedings; provided, however, that the rules are not inconsistent with this
chapter or state law. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the
chairperson and at other times as the Board may determine. The chairperson, or
in his or her absence, the acting chairperson, may administer oath and compel
the attendance of witnesses.
      (2)   All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board
shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each
question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall
keep record of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall
be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record.
      (3)   Appeals to the Board may be made in writing by any person aggrieved
or by any municipal officer, department, or board affected by any decision of
the designated Administrator. The appeal shall be filed with the Board by the
Administrator within 15 days after the original decision rendered by the
Administrator. The appeal shall be accompanied by all papers constituting the
record pertaining to that appeal. Formal notice of the appeal shall be issued
by the Administrator, this notice to specify the grounds upon which the appeal
is made.
      (4)   Appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the Administrator from whom the appeal is taken certified
to the Board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her,
that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In these cases, proceedings
shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted
by the Board or a court of record on application, on notice to the
Administrator from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown.
      (5)   Upon notice of appeal being given to the Administrator and before
the appeal shall be construed as having been perfected, the applicant must file
with the notice of appeal to the Board an amount of money estimated by
Administrator to be sufficient to mail and publish all notices required herein,
that amount in no case to be less than $25.
      (6)   No appeal to the Board for the same or related variance on the same
piece of property shall be allowed prior to the expiration of six months from
the previous ruling by the Board on any appeal to that body unless other
property in the immediate vicinity has, within that six-month period, been
changed or acted on by the Board or City Council so as to alter the facts and
conditions on which the previous Board action was based. Such a change of
circumstances shall permit the rehearing of an appeal by the Board prior to the
expiration of the six-month period, but those conditions shall in no wise have
any force in law to compel the Board, after a hearing, to grant a subsequent
appeal. The subsequent appeal shall be considered entirely on its merits and
the peculiar and specific conditions related to the property on which the
appeal is brought.
      (7)   At a public hearing relative to any appeal, any interested party
may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. The burden of proof shall be
on the applicant to establish the necessary facts to warrant favorable action
of the Board on any appeal. Any variance granted or authorized by the Board
under the provisions of this chapter shall authorize the issuance of a building
permit or a certificate of occupancy, as the case may be, for a period of 180
days from the date of the favorable action of the Board, unless the Board shall
have in its action approved a longer period of time and has so shown that
specific longer period of time in the minutes of its action. If the building
permit or certificate of occupancy shall not have been applied for within the
180-day period or extended period as the Board may have specifically granted,
then the variance shall be deemed to have been waived and all rights thereunder
terminated. This termination and waiver shall be without prejudice to a
subsequent appeal, and the subsequent appeal shall be subject to the same
regulations and requirements for hearing as herein specified for the original
appeal.
   (D)   Actions of the Board.
      (1)   In exercising its powers, the Board of Adjustment may, on
conformity with the provisions of the statutes of this state as existing or
hereafter amended, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the
order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and make such an
order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and shall
have all the powers of the Administrator from whom the appeal is taken. The
Board shall have the power to impose reasonable conditions to be complied with
by the applicant.
      (2)   The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary
to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of any such
administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter
upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to effect any variance
in this chapter.
   (E)   Notice of hearing before the Board required. The Board of Adjustment
shall hold a public hearing on all appeals made to it, and written notice of
the public hearing shall be sent to the applicant and all other persons who are
owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the property on which the
appeal is made. This notice shall be given not less than ten days nor more than
30 days before the date set for the hearing to all above-mentioned owners who
have rendered their property for city taxes as the ownership appears on the
last city tax roll. The notice may be served by depositing the same, properly
addressed and postage paid, in the U.S. post office. Notice shall be given by
publishing the same in official publication of the city at least ten days and
not more than 30 days prior to the date set for the hearing, which shall state
the time and place of the hearing.
   (F)   Authority of the Board.
      (1)   A variance is an authorization by the Board of Adjustment granting
relief and doing substantial justice in the use of the applicant’s property by
a property owner where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship.
      (2)   When, in its judgment, the public convenience and welfare will be
substantially served and the appropriate use of the neighboring property will
not be substantially or permanently injured, the Board may, in specific cases,
after public notice and public hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions
and safeguards, authorize the following variances to the regulations herein
established and take action relative to the continuance or discontinuance of a
nonconforming use.
      (3)   (a)   A variance may be granted an applicant when the Board finds:
            1.   There are special circumstances or conditions applying to the
land or building for which the variance is sought, which circumstances or
conditions are peculiar to that land or building and do not apply generally to
lands or buildings in the same district or neighborhood, and that those
circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the
provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of
the land or building;
            2.   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the zone or
neighborhood in which the property is located;
            3.   The granting of the variance is necessary for the reasonable
use of the land or building, and the variance as granted by the Board is the
minimum variance that will accomplish this purpose; and
            4.   The literal enforcement and strict application of the
provisions of this chapter will result in an unnecessary hardship inconsistent
with the general provisions and intent of this chapter, and in granting the
variance the spirit of the chapter will be preserved and substantial justice
done.
         (b)   The Board may, after public notice and hearing and subject to
the conditions and safeguards herein contained, vary or adapt the strict
application of any of the terms of this chapter under the power and authority
herein granted.
         (c)   In granting any variance under the provisions of this chapter,
the Board may designate conditions in connection therewith which, in its
opinion, will secure substantially the purpose and intent of this chapter.
      (4)   The Board may:
         (a)   Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error on
any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning
Administrator in the enforcement of this chapter;
         (b)   Interpret the intent of the Zoning Map where uncertainty exists
because the physical features on the ground vary from those on the Zoning Map
and none of the rules set forth herein apply;
         (c)   Initiate on its motion, or cause to be presented by interested
property owners, action to bring about the discontinuance of a nonconforming
structure or use under any plan whereby full value of the structure can be
amortized within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the
general character of the neighborhood and the necessity for all property to
conform to the regulations of this chapter;
         (d)   Permit the change of occupancy from one nonconforming use to
another nonconforming use when the extent of the second nonconforming use is
found to be less detrimental to the environment than the first;
         (e)   Permit the enlargement of a nonconforming use only when the
enlargement will not prolong the life of the nonconforming use. A specific
period of time for the return to conformity can be required;
         (f)   Permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming structure or
building on the lot or tract occupied by that building; provided the
reconstruction does not, in the judgment of the Board, prevent the return of
the property to a conforming use or increase the nonconformity of a
nonconforming structure;
         (g)   Require the vacation and demolition of a nonconforming structure
which is deemed to be obsolete, dilapidated, or substandard; and
         (h)   Permit variance of the front yard, side yard, rear yard, lot
width, lot depth, coverage, minimum setback standards, off-street parking, or
off-street loading regulations where the literal enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter would result in an unnecessary hardship, and where the variance
is necessary to permit a specific parcel of land which differs from other
parcels of land in the same district by being of such a restricted area, shape,
or slope that it cannot be developed in a manner commensurate with the
development permitted upon other parcels of land in the same district. A
modification of the standard established by this chapter shall not be granted
to relieve a self-created or personal hardship, nor for financial reason only,
nor shall a modification be granted to permit any person a privilege in
developing a parcel of land not permitted by this chapter to other parcels of
land in the district.
   (G)   Appeals from the Board. Any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer,
department, board, or bureau of the city aggrieved by any decision of the Board
of Adjustment, may seek review by a court of record of that decision, in the
manner provided by the laws of this state.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 604, passed 10-10-2006; Am. Ord. 709,
passed 2-4-2014; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.68 APPEALS; BOARD AND COUNCIL RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   It is the intent of this chapter that all questions of interpretation
and enforcement shall be first presented to the Ordinance Administrator in
writing and that these questions shall be presented to the Board only on appeal
from the decision of Ordinance Administrator, and that recourse from the
decisions of the Board shall be to the courts as provided by law.
   (B)   It is further the intent of this chapter that the duties of the City
Council in connection with this chapter shall not include hearing and deciding
questions of interpretation that may arise. The procedure for deciding those
questions are stated herein.
   (C)   Under this chapter, the City Council shall have only the following
duties:
      (1)   Considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the
repeal of this chapter, as provided by law;
      (2)   Establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in §
156.69 below;
      (3)   Appointing members of a Board and designating an Ordinance
Administrator; and
      (4)   Hearing appeals on and approving or rejecting special use permits.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022)
§ 156.69 FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES; ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The City Council shall establish from time to time by resolution or
ordinance a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses and a collection procedure
for building permits, certificates of compliance, appeals, and other such
matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the
office of the Ordinance Administrator and may be altered or amended only by the
City Council.
   (B)   Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in
full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022)
§ 156.70 AMENDMENT.
   (A)   The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this
chapter may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, modified, or
repealed upon initiation by the Commission, the City Council, or by a petition
of a property owner or owners or their authorized agents, submitted to the City
Administrator; provided however, that no such action may be taken until:
      (1)   The question has been referred to the Commission for consideration
and public hearing on the question and its recommendation received; and
      (2)   A public hearing has been held in relation thereto, before the City
Council, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to
be heard.
   (B)   At least ten days but not more than 30 days prior to the hearings,
notice of the time and place of these hearings and description of the proposed
change shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and
on the city website.
   (C)   When a proposed amendment affects the zoning classification or
redistricting of property, the Commission shall give written notice to property
owners within a distance of at least 200 feet from the boundaries of the
subject property, at least ten days prior to the hearing date. In case of a
written protest against the change, signed by the owners of 20% or more either
of the area of the lots or land included in the proposed change, or of the lots
or land immediately adjoining the same and extending 200 feet therefrom, then
the amendments shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of at
least 3/4 of all members of the City Council.
   (D)   The same procedure for notifying property owners as provided in
division (C) above shall be followed by the City Council for hearings on
proposed amendments that affect the zoning classification, redistricting
petitions, and for special use permit applications, except that the City
Council may notify all property owners of record within the city, as shown on
the current tax roll, by letter at least ten days before the hearing.
   (E)   If a petition for redistricting is denied either by the Commission or
by the City Council, another petition for reclassification of the same property
or any portion thereof shall not be filed within a period of 1 year from the
date of final denial, except with permission of the Commission or upon
initiation by the Commission or City Council.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022)
§ 156.71 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION MEETINGS.
   All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public. The Commission
shall keep the minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon
each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall
keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall
be immediately filed in the office of the Administrator and shall be a public
record.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022)
Cross-reference:
   Planning and Zoning Commission, see §
150.02
§ 156.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   (1)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates or fails to comply
with the requirements of this chapter or who builds or alters any building in
violation of any plan or statement submitted and approved hereunder, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine of not more than $2,000
for each offense. Each day the violation shall be permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 483, passed 6-6-2000; Ord. 508, passed 7-10-2001; Am. Ord. 562, passed 2-
8-2005; Am. Ord. 737, passed 7-20-2016; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-2-2022)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
[Reserved]
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Texas Codes
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO TEXAS CODES
TEXAS ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
 
Statutory Reference 2005 Code
Title 25, § 337.20651.16
Title 30, § 305.44 54.02
Title 30, § 305.12854.02
Title 31, Ch. 307   54.02
                    
 
CIVIL PRACTICE AND REMEDIES CODE
 
Statutory Reference 2005 Code
Ch. 125             94.02
                    
 
CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
 
Statutory Reference 2005 Code
                    
                    
 
ELECTION CODE
 
Statutory Reference 2005 Code
61.003              153.05
85.036(a)           153.05
Ch. 255             153.05
                    
 
FAMILY CODE
 
Statutory Reference 2005 Code
                    
 
GOVERNMENT CODE
 
Statutory Reference 2005 Code
Ch. 29              Ch. 31
Ch. 551             150.02
Ch. 552             32.03
                    
 
HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE
 
Statutory Reference     2005 Code
Ch. 342                 94.04
Ch. 826                 Ch. 92
Ch.822, subch. E        92.03
822.041 through 822.047 92.03
822.101 through 822.116 92.03
                        
 
LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE
Statutory Reference 2005 Code
Statutory Reference 2005 Code
Title 2             30.01
Title 6             32.03,
                    32.08
22.071              30.30,
                    30.31
43.052              150.03
Ch. 53              10.01
54.001              10.99
Ch. 205             32.14
Ch. 211             156.16,
                    156.35
211.007             150.02
Ch. 212, subch. A   155.004
Ch. 212, subch. B   155.004
212.0115            155.005
212.044             155.084
214.001             152.06
214.001(f)          152.06
214.001(n)          152.06 
214.191 et seq.     Ch. 91
Ch. 216             153.02
Ch. 217             Ch. 94
229.001             130.01,
                    130.02
Ch. 242             155.030
342.003             Ch. 93
Ch. 395             51.85
395.0575            51.85
                    
 
OCCUPATION CODE
 
Statutory Reference 2005 Code
Ch. 1201            156.34
                    
 
PENAL CODE
 
Statutory Reference 2005 Code
9.31 through 9.43   130.01
Ch. 30              110.11
Ch. 42              92.06,
                    94.02
46.01(3)            130.01
                    
 
TAX CODE
 
Statutory Reference 2005 Code
Ch. 321             34.01
321.102             34.01
                    
 
TRANSPORTATION CODE
Statutory Reference 2005 Code
Statutory Reference 2005 Code
Ch. 392             153.05
Ch. 393             153.05,
                    153.11
Ch. 394             153.11
522.004(b)          156.34
Ch. 601             70.02
683.012             90.02
683.051             90.02
683.071 et seq.     90.03
Ch. 685             71.02
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed 2005 Code
Ord. No. Date Passed 2005 Code
102      3-24-1970   53.01,
                     53.99
137      5-1-1972    130.03,
                     130.99
166      4-16-1974   30.15
185      12-17-1974  53.03,
                     53.99
192      5-20-1975   30.01
193      6-3-1975    90.01 -
                     90.03
198      10-21-1975  30.02
                     93.20 -
201      5-4-1976    93.22,
                     93.99
229      7-17-1979   70.15,
                     70.99
238      7-15-1980   95.01,
                     95.99
242A     1-13-1987   156.50
                     93.01 -
244      6-9-1981    93.05,
                     93.99
264      11-15-1983  151.22,
                     151.99
284      6-10-1986   33.02
300      1-13-1987   150.01
302      1-20-1987   30.45
308      11-24-1987  70.02
313      5-10-1988   34.04
320      1-10-1989   52.01,
                     52.99
320A     8-28-1990   52.01
322      5-9-1989    151.35,
                     151.99
325      8-22-1989   30.45
326      8-22-1989   30.45
329      11-14-1989  51.56
333      9-25-1990   155.006
                     32.01 -
335      2-12-1991   32.14,
                     32.99
                     51.01 -
                     51.04,
                     51.15 -
                     51.18,
                     51.30 -
337      4-9-1991    51.33,
                     51.45 -
                     51.49,
                     51.51 -
                     51.55,
                     51.99
344      12-10-1991  30.45
                     51.01 -
                     51.04,
                     51.15 -
                     51.18,
                     51.30 -
345      2-11-1992   51.33,
                     51.45 -
                     51.49,
                     51.51 -
                     51.55,
                     51.99
345A     1-12-1993   51.50
346      7-14-1992   130.01,
                     130.99
347      9-8-1992    53.02,
                     53.99
350      1-12-1993   156.36
353      8-10-1993   30.45
                     91.01 -
358      2-8-1994    91.06,
                     91.99
359      2-8-1994    151.22
360      2-22-1994   33.01
379      12-13-1994  30.45
381-95   3-14-1995   31.01 -
                     31.05
382      7-11-1995   70.01,
                     70.99
392      11-14-1995  31.06
395      12-12-1995  130.02,
                     130.99
401      5-14-1996   34.01
403      9-27-1996   156.16
410      11-19-1996  150.01
                     92.01 -
414      12-17-1996  92.06,
                     92.99
415      3-25-1997   33.03
418      8-8-1997    34.02
422      8-26-1997   154.01,
                     154.99
428      10-14-1997  71.02,
                     71.99
429      10-14-1997  30.45
                     51.70 -
439      7-14-1998   51.77,
                     51.99
445      9-8-1998    30.45
455      4-13-1999   155.051,
                     155.999
                     50.01-
458      4-27-1999   50.07,
                     50.99
                     110.01,
                     110.02,
459      5-11-1999   110.04 -
                     110.17,
                     110.99
462      6-8-1999    71.01,
                     71.99
469      10-5-1999   51.56
                     151.01 -
477      11-16-1999  151.05,
                     151.99
478      1-18-2000   34.03
                     95.15 -
480      3-21-2000   95.25,
                     95.99
481      5-2-2000    30.46
                     156.01,
                     156.02,
                     156.15 -
                     156.18,
                     156.30 -
483      6-6-2000    156.37,
                     156.50 -
                     156.52,
                     156.65 -
                     156.71,
                     156.99
                     155.001 -
                     155.010,
                     155.025 -
                     155.032,
                     155.045 -
                     155.050,
487      7-18-2000   155.052 -
                     155.062,
                     155.075 -
                     155.077,
                     155.090 -
                     155.093,
                     155.999,
                     Ch. 155 Appendix
495      12-19-2000  52.02,
                     52.99
498      3-13-2001   33.02
                     152.01 -
505      5-29-2001   152.07,
                     152.99
507      6-12-2001   33.04
                     156.01,
                     156.32,
508      7-10-2001   156.33,
                     156.37,
                     156.99
510      9-4-2001    151.20,
                     151.99
515      12-4-2001   33.03
516      12-11-2001  151.02,
                     151.99
517      1-8-2002    151.37,
                     151.99
522      7-23-2002   52.03,
                     52.99
523      8-13-2002   51.75,
                     51.99
524      8-27-2002   151.02,
                     151.99
534      4-15-2003   151.36,
                     151.99
537      4-1-2003    30.30
540      4-29-2003   30.31
543      6-24-2003   151.36,
                     151.99
549      9-9-2003    31.06
                     94.01 -
553      1-20-2004   94.04,
                     94.99
557      7-13-2004   150.02
560      10-26-2004  92.03
562      2-8-2005    156.01,
                     156.99
571      6-28-2005   94.02
577      9-20-2005   151.36
584      12-13-2005  70.16,
                     70.99
591      3-28-2006   90.01
592      3-28-2006   51.56,
                     51.99
593      3-28-2006   52.02,
                     52.99
                     153.01 -
595      5-23-2006   153.11,
                     153.99
604      10-10-2006  156.67
605      10-10-2006  30.02
                     97.01 -
608      2-27-2007   97.16,
                     97.99
                     51.49,
                     51.56,
618      1-22-2008   52.02,
                     91.03,
                     95.20
622      5-13-2008   Adopting Ordinance
625      7-1-2008    92.01 -
                     92.03
626      7-8-2008    151.36
                     98.01 -
634      10-14-2008  98.04,
                     98.99
638      2-17-2009   156.37
640      4-7-2009    53.04
648      12-1-2009   51.56
649      2-2-2010    94.04
650      3-16-2010   52.02
653      3-16-2010   156.37
658      10-5-2010   97.02 ,
                     97.05
661      9-21-2010   Adopting Ordinance
666      4-19-2011   53.04,
                     53.99
667      5-3-2011    151.21,
                     151.99
683      9-4-2012    97.05
688      10-30-2012  97.02,
                     97.05
696      5-21-2013   156.37
                     92.03,
697      8-6-2013    156.32,
                     156.33
699      7-15-2013   33.03
706      10-15-2013  53.04
709      2-4-2014    156.67
711B     4-15-2014   153.05
713      9-2-2014    51.77
717      12-2-2014   Adopting Ordinance
720      1-22-2015   51.56
721      3-3-2015    150.01
                     97.09 -
722      1-20-2015   97.12,
                     97.14,
                     97.99
725      3-17-2015   53.04,
                     53.99
                     155.001 -
                     155.010,
                     155.025 -
                     155.032,
                     155.045 -
                     155.061,
                     155.075 -
737      7-20-2016   155.077,
                     155.080 -
                     155.086,
                     155.090 -
                     155.093,
                     155.999,
                     Ch. 155, Appendix,
                     156.99
739      8-10-2016   51.56
                     51.85 -
746      4-4-2017    51.87,
                     51.99
750      7-11-2017   94.02,
                     94.03
755      10-24-2017  52.02
758      3-20-2018   70.16
762      7-17-2018   30.45
766      8-20-2019   97.01 -
                     97.08
769      5-21-2019   33.02
770      5-21-2019   33.02
771      12-4-2018   70.16
777      8-4-2020    53.04
785      6-2-2020    54.01 -
                     54.11
786      11-19-2019  94.02
787      11-19-2019  30.45
791      5-19-2020   150.03
801      6-1-2021    70.17
803      7-20-2021   155.030
804      7-20-2021   30.45
Res.     9-7-2021    30.02
2021-676
809      1-11-2022   70.16
                     91.01 -
813      3-15-2022   91.06,
                     91.99
814      3-15-2022   53.03,
                     53.99
                     156.01,
                     156.02,
                     156.15 -
                     156.18,
                     156.30 -
820      8-2-2022    156.37,
                     156.50 -
                     156.52,
                     156.65 -
                     156.71,
                     156.99
826      9-20-2022   150.03
827      9-20-2022   156.16
832      11-15-2022  33.02
840      3-21-2023   51.56
Res.     9-19-2023   30.02
2023-756
                    
 
