SUNSET VALLEY, TEXAS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-30 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 251202-B, passed 12-2-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
CITY OFFICIALS
OF
SUNSET VALLEY, TEXAS
CITY COUNCIL
MAYOR              Marc Bruner
MAYOR PRO TEM      Charles Young
COUNCILMEMBER      David Bourell
COUNCILMEMBER      Robert Johnson
COUNCILMEMBER      Karen Medicus
COUNCILMEMBER      Rudi Rosengarten
                   
CITY OFFICIALS
CITY ADMINISTRATOR Matt Lingafelter
CITY SECRETARY     Melissa Marquez
CHIEF OF POLICE    Lenn Carter
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 110322-A
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF SUNSET VALLEY,
RESTATING AND CODIFYING EXISTING ORDINANCES, PROVIDING FOR SEVERANCE AND AN
EFFECTIVE DATE
WHEREAS, the existing general ordinances of the City, other than those codified
in its current Land Development Code, are inadequately organized for convenient
reference by the public;
WHEREAS, pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 53, the City is
authorized to codify its civil and criminal ordinances;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SUNSET
VALLEY:
Section 1.
The general ordinances of the City are hereby codified and compiled in book
form as attached to this Ordinance, and adopted as the Code of Ordinances of
the City of Sunset Valley. This Ordinance shall not affect the City's Land
Development Code, which shall remain in effect as a separate code of the City's
land development regulations.
Section 2.
On the effective date of this Ordinance the Code of Ordinances consists of the
following Titles:
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section 3.
The codification of the City's general ordinances adopted by this Ordinance
shall not affect: (i) the enforcement of any ordinance hereby codified as to
any past act, omission or circumstance; (ii) any right established in any
ordinance hereby codified; (iii) any appropriation or expenditure of funds,
approvals, or any other action lawfully taken by the governing body or any
official of the City pursuant to any ordinance hereby codified; or (iv) any
ordinance of the City of a temporary or special nature or any ordinance not
included in the Code of Ordinances.
Section 4.
The City Administrator shall cause a copy of this Ordinance to be published in
the newspaper adopted as the official publication of the City.
Section 5.
If any provision of this Ordinance or the Code of Ordinances hereby adopted is
found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be void or unenforceable, such
void or unenforceable provision shall be severed as though it never formed a
part of this Ordinance or the Code of Ordinances, as applicable, and all other
provisions hereof and in the Code of Ordinances shall remain in full force and
effect.
Section 6.
This Ordinance and the Code of Ordinances shall be effective immediately upon
adoption.
PASSED AND APPROVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF SUNSET VALLEY, TEXAS, on the 22nd
day of March, 2011.
                                          Barbara Wilson /s/
                                          Mayor Barbara Wilson
Attest:
Rae Gene Greenough /s/
Rae Gene Greenough, City Secretary
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
      
11.   CITY STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.19   Altering or tampering with code
   
10.20   Liability for penalty
   
10.21   Copies of code as evidence
   
10.22   Burden of proving exception
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Sunset Valley, Texas,
shall be designated as the Code of Sunset Valley and may be so cited.
Statutory reference:
   Authority of municipality to codify ordinances, see Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code Ch.
53
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Sunset Valley,
Texas.
      CITY SECRETARY, CHIEF OF POLICE or OTHER CITY OFFICERS or DEPARTMENTS.
The City Secretary/Administrator, Chief of Police or other municipal officers
or department, respectively, of the City of Sunset Valley, Texas.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COUNTY. Travis County, Texas.
      HIGHWAY or STREET. When used in this code, shall include any street,
alley, highway, avenue, public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel,
underpass, overpass and causeway in the city dedicated or devoted to public
use.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath and, in such cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of the municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
      OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named in this code,
they shall mean Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Saving Time,
whichever is in current use in the city.
      OWNER. Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety, of the whole or of the part of the building or land, except as
otherwise defined in this code.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual human, partnership, co-
partnership firm, company, limited liability partnership or other partnership
or other company, joint venture, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity, association or corporation or any other legal entity, or
their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall
include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by
the context. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty,
the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as applied to any unincorporated entity, shall
mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers or agents thereof.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every species of property, except real
property, as defined in this section.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property, or a mixture of the two,
if the sense used so indicates.
      REAL PROPERTY. Includes land, tenements and hereditaments.
      ROADWAY. The portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular traffic and that portion of a street used for drainage.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIDEWALK. Any portion of the street between the curb or the lateral lane
of the roadway and the adjacent property line, all or a part of which is
intended for the use of pedestrians.
      SIDEWALK AREA. The space between the lateral lane of the roadway and the
boundary separating the public right-of-way and the adjacent private property.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Texas.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of the city shall be by the following
rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND  or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in a section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within the municipality for the transaction of all
municipal business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of that act or the giving of that notice.
   (B)   (1)   (a)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last.
         (b)   If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
      (2)   Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done in a
certain length of time before any proceeding or step in a proceeding shall be
had, the day on which the notice is given, or the act is done, shall be counted
in computing the time, but the day on which the proceeding or step in a
proceeding is to be had shall not be counted, except as otherwise expressly
provided in this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   (A)   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced.
   (B)   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   (A)   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication, including, but not limited to, the following types of ordinances:
      (1)   Any ordinance guaranteeing or promising the payment of money for
the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence
of the municipality’s indebtedness;
      (2)   Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for an annual
budget or prescribing salaries for city officers and employees;
      (3)   Any ordinance annexing territory to the municipality or
discontinuing territory as a part of the city;
      (4)   Any ordinance designating or otherwise relating to city
depositories;
      (5)   Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right;
      (6)   Any ordinance approving, prescribing or otherwise relating to rates
to be charged by private utility companies;
      (7)   Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any
contract or agreement;
      (8)   Any ordinance accepting, dedicating, vacating or otherwise relating
to any easement; and
      (9)   Any ordinance establishing or amending the zoning designation of
land.
   (B)   All ordinances mentioned in division (A) above are hereby recognized
as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at
length herein.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
   (B)   Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their
passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall, in any way, be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force,
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   (1)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section.
      (2)   In addition to the indication thereof as may appear in the text of
the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above
the ordinance.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, § 54.001)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      Inspection of public records, see Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, §§ 552.001 et
seq.
§ 10.19 ALTERING OR TAMPERING WITH CODE.
   It shall be an offense for any unauthorized person to change or amend, by
addition or deletion, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or delete
pages or portions thereof, or to alter or to tamper with this code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause a law of the city to be misrepresented
thereby.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 10.20 LIABILITY FOR PENALTY.
   Whenever a corporation or association violates any provision of this code or
other ordinance of the city, the president, vice-president, secretary,
treasurer, manager or any agent or employee of the corporation or association
shall be severally liable for the penalty prescribed for the violation.
§ 10.21 COPIES OF CODE AS EVIDENCE.
   In any prosecution for a violation of any provision of this code, the code
or a copy, certified by the City Administrator, may be admitted in evidence
without further proof and shall be prima facie evidence of the existence and
regular enactment of the provision, without the necessity of introducing in
evidence the entire code.
§ 10.22 BURDEN OF PROVING EXCEPTION.
   In any prosecution for a violation of any provision of this code, upon proof
of the provisions of the code, it shall not be necessary to negate any
exception, excuse, proviso or exemption contained in the code and the burden or
proof of any exception, excuse, proviso or exemption shall be upon the
defendant.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Municipal Court jurisdiction. The Municipal Court of the city
shall have exclusive original jurisdiction within the corporate limits of the
city in all criminal cases in which the punishment is a fine only and where the
maximum of the fine does not exceed $2,000 in all cases arising under
ordinances of the city that govern fire safety, zoning or public health and
sanitation, including dumping of refuse and where the maximum of the fines does
not exceed $500 in all other cases arising under the ordinances of the city.
The Municipal Court of the city shall have concurrent jurisdiction with any
Justice of the Peace in any precinct in which the city is situated in all other
criminal cases arising under the criminal laws of the state, in which
punishment is by fine only and where the maximum of the fine may not exceed
$500 and arising within the corporate limits.
      (2)   Penalties for violations of regulations governing fire safety,
zoning or public health and sanitation.
         (a)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provisions of
the ordinances of the city relating to fire safety, zoning or public health and
sanitation including dumping of refuse or any order made under the authority of
the ordinances or who causes or permits any violation, or who fails to perform
any act required under the ordinances of the city or does any prohibited act or
takes any action contrary to plans approved by the City Council or fails to
take any action required, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,000. Each and every
day on which any violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
         (b)   The owner or tenant of any building, structure or premises and
any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who knowingly
commits, participates in, assists in or maintains the violation may each be
found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided and
shall likewise be subject to civil penalties as provided in the ordinances.
      (3)   Penalties for violation of all other ordinances.
         (a)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provisions of
the ordinances of the city not specifically relating to fire safety, zoning or
public health and sanitation including the dumping of refuse, or any order made
under the authority of the ordinances or who causes or permits any violation,
or who fails to perform any act required under the ordinances of the city or
does any prohibited act or takes any action contrary to plans approved by the
City Council or fails to take any action required, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $500. Each and every day on which any violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such.
         (b)   The owner or tenant of any building, structure or premises and
any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who knowingly
commits, participates in, assists in or maintains the violation may each be
found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided and
shall likewise be subject to civil penalties as provided herein.
      (4)   Effective date. This division (A) shall become effective on 10-4-
1987.
   (B)   (1)   Pursuant to Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure Art. 102.011(a),
there is hereby assessed a special expense for the issuance and service of each
warrant of arrest, after due notice, of $50 against the defendant.
      (2)   The Municipal Court shall collect the assessment and pay it into
the City Treasury for the use and benefit of the city.
(Ord. 870217, passed 2-17-1987; Ord. 870915A, passed 9-15-1987; Ord. 891003A,
passed 1-3-1989; Ord. 911105, passed 11-5-1991; Ord. 9206156, passed 6-16-1992;
Ord. 990907A, passed 9-7-1999)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal penalties, see Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, § 54.001
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   Legal incorporation
   
11.02   Certificate of ordinance
§ 11.01 LEGAL INCORPORATION.
   (A)   It is hereby officially found, determined and declared that the city
is legally incorporated under the laws of the state and that the city contains
at least one manufacturing establishment.
   (B)   In accordance with Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Art. 961, 1925, the city
hereby accepts the provisions of Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Title 28, 1925, as
amended, relating to cities and towns, including particularly Chapters 1
through 10 thereof.
   (C)   The city shall hereafter be known as the “City of Sunset Valley,
Texas” and shall be subject to the provisions of Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Title 28,
1925, as amended, relating to cities and towns, including particularly Chapters
1 through 10 thereof, and shall be vested with all rights, powers, privileges
and immunities and franchises therein conferred.
   (D)   This section shall be entered upon the journal of the proceedings of
the City Council and a copy of this section shall be signed by the Mayor and
attested by the City Secretary under the corporate seal of the city and shall
be filed and recorded in the office of the County Clerk.
(Ord. 27, passed 3-12-1974)
Statutory reference:
   Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 961 and Title 28 have been replaced with the Tex.
Loc. Gov’t Code. Under Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code § 5.001, the city continues to
operate as a Type General-Law Municipality
§ 11.02 CERTIFICATE OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   The certificate of ordinance is hereby readopted, reconfirmed and
ratified in all aspects.
   (B)   The recitals contained in the preamble of the ordinance codified
herein are hereby found to be true and the recitals are hereby made a part of
this section for all purposes and are adopted as a part of the judgment and
findings of the City Council.
   (C)   This section shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the
laws of the state and the United States of America.
CERTIFICATE OF ORDINANCE
   I, the undersigned Secretary of the City of Sunset Valley, Texas, do hereby
certify that the attached and foregoing is a true and correct copy of Ordinance
#           passed             day of                 , 20         , at the
City Council meeting of the City of Sunset Valley, the original of which is on
file in the office of the City Secretary of the City of Sunset Valley.
Witness my hand and seal of the City of Sunset Valley, Texas, this the       
day of                 , 20       .
(city seal)
                                                                                             
                     City Secretary
                     City of Sunset Valley, Texas
(Ord. 980413, passed 4-13-1998)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   CITY COUNCIL
      
31.   OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   FISCAL YEAR; FINANCE AND TAXATION; FEES
      
33.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
      
34.   PERSONNEL
      
35.   LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
      
36.   [RESERVED]
      
37.   SURPLUS AND SALVAGE PROPERTY
      
38.   SMOKING POLICIES
      
39.   POLICY FOR RECORDS MANAGEMENT
      
40.   CITY POLICIES
      
41.   IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM
      
42.   COMPREHENSIVE CONSERVATION STRATEGIES AND REBATES
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Regular meetings
   
30.02   Special meetings
   
30.03   Agenda
   
30.04   Presiding officer duties
   
30.05   Call to order; presiding officer
   
30.06   Quorum
   
30.07   Order of business
   
30.08   Reading of minutes
   
30.09   Rules of debate
   
30.10   Addressing the Council
   
30.11   Silence constitutes affirmative vote
   
30.12   Decorum; enforcement
   
30.13   Members may file protest against Council action
   
30.14   Ordinances, resolutions, motions and contracts; official newspaper
   
30.15   Reports and resolutions to be filed with Secretary
   
30.16   Adjournment
   
30.17   Effective date
   
30.18   Change of date for general election
Vacancies; Appointments
   
30.30   Governance
   
30.31   Definitions
   
30.32   Election versus appointment
   
30.33   Appointment process
   
30.34   Factors to be considered in appointing candidates to serve on Council
   
30.35   Effective date
Cross-reference:
   Certificate of ordinance, see §
11.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   (A)   Time. The City Council shall hold regular meetings on the first and
third Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. or any other time the Mayor may
designate, excepting the third Tuesday of June and the first Tuesday of July;
provided however, that the day fixed for any regular meeting of the Council may
be cancelled or rescheduled at the discretion of the Council. Further, no City
Council meeting shall be held on the day on which an election is being held. If
at all possible, the Council will conclude regular meetings by 9:00 p.m. unless
there are significant issues on the agenda which require the meeting to
continue until 10:00 p.m.
   (B)   Place. All regular meetings of the Council shall be held in the
Council Chambers at City Hall, located at 3205 Jones Road, City of Sunset
Valley, Texas.
(Ord. 900731, passed 7-31-1990; Ord. 080624-A, passed 6-24-2008; Ord. 090721,
passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 100706, passed 7-6-2010; Ord. 160112, passed 1-12-2016;
Ord. 231017-B, passed 10-17-2023)
§ 30.02 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   The Mayor shall call special meetings of the Council whenever in his or her
opinion the public business may require it, or at the express written or oral
request of two Council Members. When a special meetings is called, each Council
Member will be notified either in person, by telephone, by electronic mail, or
by hand-delivered notification to the Council Member’s residence, stating the
date and hour of the meeting and the purpose for which the meeting is called,
and no business shall be transacted thereat, except such as is stated in the
notice.
(Ord. 080624-A, passed 6-24-2008; Ord. 090721, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 100706,
passed 7-6-2010; Ord. 160112, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 30.03 AGENDA.
   (A)   Who may place items on agenda. Any member of Council or the Mayor may
place any item on the agenda of any specific meeting for discussion and or
action. No part of this subchapter shall be interpreted in such a manner that
allows any person to prevent, restrict or inhibit a member of Council or the
Mayor from placing any item on the agenda. Any item submitted for the agenda by
a Council Member or the Mayor must be preserved in its original form and may
not be edited, censored or altered in any way without the express permission of
the submitting party.
   (B)   Items to submitted to City Secretary. All reports, communications,
ordinances, resolutions, contract documents, or other supporting documentation
regarding the requested agenda item to be submitted to the Council shall be
delivered to the City Secretary, if at all physically possible, at least 11
calendar days preceding each regular Council meeting whereupon the City
Secretary shall prepare a list of the matters submitted for consideration.
Committee or informative reports not requiring City Council action may be
submitted by City Council Members for inclusion on the agenda prior to the
posting of the agenda. The Mayor shall determine the order and scheduling of
matters to appear on the agenda for Council consideration at a regular meeting
not later than 5:00 p.m. on the fifth calendar day before the regular meeting,
with assistance, as needed, from the City Administrator.
   (C)   Submission prior to meeting. A party sponsoring or submitting a matter
for Council consideration may agree to defer, either before or at the Council
meeting, consideration of the matter in favor of any other matter. A copy of
the agenda along with the appropriate supporting documentation shall be
furnished to each Council Member and the Mayor prior to the Council meeting as
far in advance of the meeting as time for preparation will permit. Each agenda
will note the Council Member sponsor(s) of any matter for Council
consideration, and will note the Council Member or Mayor who authorized
inclusion of any matter presented or proposed by the City Administrator, a
department head or the City Attorney. Meetings and postings of meetings will be
made in accordance with state law.
   (D)   Submission of matters for agenda. The Mayor and any member of the
Council may submit a matter for consideration or action by the Council. The
City Attorney, the City Administrator or any department head (in coordination
with the City Administrator) may submit a matter for consideration or action by
the Council by first obtaining the authorization/sponsorship of a Council
Member or the Mayor for inclusion of the matter on an agenda. The authority of
a department head to submit a matter for Council consideration shall include
only matters within the purview of the Department Head, and shall not include a
grievance or matter affecting the department head's employment with the city,
except as otherwise provided by the city's personnel policies.
   (E)   Rescheduled meeting. In the event that a regular meeting is
rescheduled to a day other than the first or third Tuesday, all deadlines for
submission of matters to be included on the agenda shall be adjusted
accordingly.
   (F)   Vote deferred. In the event that the Mayor or Council Member who
sponsored a matter is not present at the Council meeting during which such
matter is taken up, the matter may be discussed but any vote on the matter
shall be deferred unless the sponsoring member has agreed that the matter
should proceed to a vote in their absence or if the members present deem it a
matter of exigent circumstances. An example of an exigent circumstance would be
one in which the city, a citizen, property or staff are in peril and immediate
action is required to avert injury, loss or damage.
   (G)   Submissions to be in paper form and electronic form. All submission of
matters to the city for consideration by the Council shall be made in
electronic form if practicable. Electronic submission may be made in a standard
format specified by the City Secretary.
(Ord. 080624-A, passed 6-24-2008; Ord. 090721, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 100706,
passed 7-6-2010; Ord. 160112, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 30.04 PRESIDING OFFICER DUTIES.
   The presiding officer of the Council shall be the Mayor. In the absence of
the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall become the Presiding Officer. The Mayor Pro
Tem shall also serve all the functions of the Mayor pursuant to §
30.03 above in the Mayor's absence. The Presiding Officer shall preserve strict
order and decorum at all meetings of the Council. He or she shall state every
question coming before the Council, announce the decision of the Council on all
subjects and decide all questions of order, subject, however, to an appeal to
the Council, in which event a majority vote of the Council shall govern and
conclusively determine such question of order. He or she shall sign all
ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Council during his or her presence.
In the event of the absence of the Mayor, the Presiding Officer shall sign
ordinances or resolutions as adopted.
(Ord. 080624-A, passed 6-24-2008; Ord. 090721, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 100706,
passed 7-6-2010)
§ 30.05 CALL TO ORDER; PRESIDING OFFICER.
   (A)   The Presiding Officer shall take the chair at the hour appointed for
the meeting, and shall call the Council to order.
   (B)   In the absence of a Presiding Officer, a temporary chairperson shall
be elected by the Council Members present.
   (C)   Upon the arrival of a Presiding Officer, the temporary chairperson
shall relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the business item before
Council.
(Ord. 080624-A, passed 6-24-2008; Ord. 090721, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 100706,
passed 7-6-2010)
§ 30.06 QUORUM.
    A majority of all the voting Council Members elected to the Council shall
constitute a quorum at any regular meeting of the Council. In the absence of a
quorum, the Presiding Officer, may declare the meeting cancelled due to lack of
quorum and reschedule or shall compel, at the instance of any two Council
Members present, the attendance of the absent Council Member(s). At a called or
special meeting or any meeting to consider taxes, two-thirds of Council
constitutes a quorum.
(Ord. 080624-A, passed 6-24-2008; Ord. 090721, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 100706,
passed 7-6-2010)
§ 30.07 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   All meetings of the Council shall be open to the public. On the day of
each scheduled meeting and upon determination that a quorum is present, the
Council Members, the City Secretary, City Attorney (as needed), and Presiding
Officer shall take their regular stations in the Council Chambers, and the
business of the Council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition.
   (B)   The Mayor shall have the authority to indicate on the agenda that
certain agenda items will be taken up by Council at a time certain.
   (C)   At the appointed time, any matter then under discussion shall be
postponed and the agenda item designated for a time certain will be taken up by
Council. For each agenda item, unless a different format is prescribed by law,
the following protocol may be used:
      (1)   Introduction of Item by the Presiding Officer;
      (2)   Presentation by staff (or sponsoring Council Member);
      (3)   Citizen Communication;
      (4)   Council Deliberation and Possible Action.
   (D)   In the event that there is new information or a new direction
considered during Council deliberation, citizens may request that additional
citizen communication be permitted. The Presiding Officer may allow additional
citizen communication to be followed again by additional Council deliberation.
The Presiding Officer may request that the item be postponed to a future
meeting to allow for a public hearing to be posted prior to further Council
deliberation.
(Ord. 080624-A, passed 6-24-2008; Ord. 090721, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 100706,
passed 7-6-2010; Ord. 120710-B, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 30.08 READING OF MINUTES.
   Unless a reading of the minutes of a Council meeting is requested by a
Council Member, the minutes may be approved without reading if the City
Secretary has previously furnished each Council Member with a copy thereof. The
following procedure may be followed with regard to preparation of minutes of
Council meetings. The City Secretary may provide a draft of proposed minutes of
a Council meeting to the Mayor and all Council Members, who may submit any
proposed additions, deletions, or corrections directly to the City Secretary.
The City Secretary shall prepare the minutes with all additions, deletions, and
corrections proposed by the Mayor or any Council Member noted in redline or any
other reasonable means for highlighting such changes, and present same to the
Council at a public meeting.
(Ord. 080624-A, passed 6-24-2008; Ord. 090721, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 100706,
passed 7-6-2010)
§ 30.09 RULES OF DEBATE.
   (A)   Getting the floor. Improper references are to be avoided. Every
Council Member desiring to speak shall address the Presiding Officer, and upon
recognition by the Presiding Officer shall confine himself or herself to the
question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language. All
Council Members have the right to be recognized, to make motions, and to speak.
   (B)   Interruptions. A Council Member, once recognized, shall not be
interrupted when speaking unless it is to call to order, or as herein otherwise
provided. If a Council Member, while speaking, be called to order, he or she
shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined, and, if in
order, he or she shall be permitted to proceed.
   (C)   Amending a motion. A Council Member, upon being recognized to speak,
may request that a motion on the floor for discussion be amended. Upon such a
request, the Mayor shall ask the Council Members that made and seconded the
original motion if they are willing to accept the amendment to the original
motion. If both Members agree to accept the amendment, then the original maker
of the motion will restate the original motion to include the amendment; the
motion will be considered to be amended; and debate will continue on the
amended motion. If either Member does not accept the amendment, then debate
continues on the original motion.
   (D)   Previous question. Any Council Member, upon being recognized to speak,
may move to call the question on the motion on the floor. A motion to call the
question requires a second. If there is a motion and a second on the motion to
call the question, then debate ends and there is a vote to consider ending
debate on the original motion. A majority vote of Members present is required
to end debate on a motion. Either the maker or the sponsor will be recognized
by the Mayor to make a closing comment for correction or clarification which
will be two minutes or less if needed.
   (E)   Motion to reconsider. A motion to reconsider any action taken by the
Council may be made only on the day the action was taken. It may be made either
immediately during the same session or at a recessed or adjourned session
thereof. The motion must be made by one of the prevailing side, but may be
seconded by any Council Member, and may be made at any time and have precedence
over all other motions or while a Council Member has the floor; it shall be
debatable. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any Council Member from
making or remaking the same or any other motion at a subsequent meeting of the
Council.
   (F)   Remarks of Council Member when entered in minutes. A Council Member
may request, through the Presiding Officer, the privilege of having a statement
on any subject under consideration by the Council entered in the minutes.
   (G)   Format of meeting minutes. The City Secretary shall enter in the
minutes a description of the agenda item; the names and addresses of any
citizens speaking for or against the item; and any motions or votes taken by
the Council, on any question coming before the Council.
(Ord. 080624-A, passed 6-24-2008; Ord. 090721, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 100706,
passed 7-6-2010; Ord. 110705, passed 7-5-2011; Ord. 120710-B, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 30.10 ADDRESSING THE COUNCIL.
   (A)      (A)   Written communication. Interested parties or their authorized
representative may address the Council by written communications regarding any
matter involving the business or affairs of the city or otherwise within the
scope of authority of the City Council.
   (B)   Oral communication. Any person desiring to address the Council at a
public meeting may do so in accordance with applicable procedures and
restrictions of this chapter. A person making a presentation to the Council
will comply with any direction of the Presiding Officer for the order of
speakers, and commencement or interruption of the person's presentation to the
Council. A person may address the Council at the beginning of a Council meeting
on any matter concerning the city's business that is not included on the agenda
for the meeting. In accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act ("Act"),
deliberation by the Council of such unscheduled matters may not occur except
for the limited purposes provided by the Act. A person may address the Council
regarding a matter included on the agenda for the meeting either at the
beginning of the meeting when citizen comments are taken, or at the time the
particular matter is taken up by the Council.
   (C)   Manner of addressing Council; time limit. Each person addressing the
Council shall give his or her name and address in an audible tone of voice, and
unless further time is granted by the Council, shall limit his or her address
to four minutes. Applicants for permits or approvals or their representatives
may be given a longer time to present an application. Special procedures for
dividing a fixed amount of time for each side on an issue or question, to be
allocated among those on each side by the proponents of the side, may be
established when an unusually large number of speakers have indicated a desire
to address the Council on a matter. Unless the city provides equipment that
simultaneously translates a presentation and allows the Council to hear such
translation simultaneously, persons making a presentation to the Council
through a translator shall be permitted twice the amount of time to make a
presentation as is provided to those not presenting through a translator. All
remarks shall be addressed to the Council as a body and not to any Council
Member thereof. No person, other than the Council Members and the person then
addressing the Council shall be permitted to enter into any discussion without
the permission of the Presiding Officer. No question may be asked of a Council
Member except through the Presiding Officer.
(Ord. 080624-A, passed 6-24-2008; Ord. 090721, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 100706,
passed 7-6-2010; Ord. 191029-B, passed 10-29-2019)
§ 30.11 SILENCE CONSTITUTES AFFIRMATIVE VOTE.
   Unless a Council Member states that he or she is not voting, his or her
silence shall be recorded as an affirmative vote.
(Ord. 080624-A, passed 6-24-2008; Ord. 090721, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 100706,
passed 7-6-2010)
§ 30.12 DECORUM; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Decorum in public meetings of the Council.
      (1)   By Council Members. Council Members shall preserve order and
decorum at Council meetings by refraining from: (i) delaying or interrupting
the proceedings or the peace of the Council by any means; (ii) disturbing any
Council Member while the Council Member is speaking; or (iii) refusing to obey
the orders of the Council or its Presiding Officer, except as otherwise herein
provided.
      (2)   By other persons. No person shall do any of the following in a
public meeting of the Council while addressing the Council or in a manner as to
disrupt a Council meeting: (i) make offensive personal insults or comments;
(ii) use foul language or language not appropriately uttered in front of
children; (iii) use intimidating gestures or postures; (iv) make slanderous
remarks; (v) threaten harm to any person or property; or (vi) refuse to comply
with the direction of the Presiding Officer. A person who engages in such
conduct may be ordered escorted from the premises of the Council meeting by the
Presiding Officer. If the Presiding Officer orders any person to be escorted
from the premises, the Council may upon the motion of a Council member and
majority vote of the Council, rescind such order, with or without conditions.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to either prohibit
public criticism of the Council or the act, omission, policy, procedure,
program, or service authorized by the Council or put in effect by the city. No
person may be ordered to be removed from a Council meeting only as a result of
engaging in such public criticism.
   (B)   Enforcement. A member of the Police Department may be the Sergeant-at-
Arms of the Council meetings, as needed. He or she shall carry out all orders
and instruction given by the Presiding Officer for the purpose of maintaining
order and decorum at the Council meeting.
(Ord. 080624-A, passed 6-24-2008; Ord. 090721, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 100706,
passed 7-6-2010; Ord. 191029-B, passed 10-29-2019)
§ 30.13 MEMBERS MAY FILE PROTEST AGAINST COUNCIL ACTION.
   Any Council Member shall have the right to have the reasons of his or her
dissent from, or protest against any action of the Council entered on the
minutes.
(Ord. 080624-A, passed 6-24-2008; Ord. 090721, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 100706,
passed 7-6-2010)
§ 30.14 ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, MOTIONS AND CONTRACTS; OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER.
   (A)   Introduction of ordinance and amendments of ordinances. All Council
Members have the right to introduce new ordinances and amendments to existing
ones.
   (B)   Prior approval by city attorney. All contract documents shall, before
presentation to the Council, be approved as to form and legality by the City
Attorney or his or her authorized representative. All the instruments shall
have first been referred to the head of the department under whose jurisdiction
the administration of the subject matter of the contract document would be
affected and be approved by the department head; provided, however, that if
approval is not given, then the same shall be returned to the Mayor with a
written memorandum of the reasons why the approval is withheld. In the event
the questioned instrument is not redrafted to meet a department head objection,
or objection is not withdrawn and approval in writing given, then the Mayor
shall so advise the Council and give the reasons advanced by the department
head for withholding approval. No contract affecting the city may be changed
after previously being approved by the City Attorney without getting his or her
approval as to form and legality of the change.
   (C)   Introducing for passage or approval.
      (1)   Ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects requiring
action by the Council must be introduced and sponsored as provided in §
30.03 above.
      (2)   No ordinance shall relate to more than one subject, which shall be
clearly expressed in its title, and no ordinance, or section thereof, may be
amended or repealed unless the new ordinance contains the number of the
ordinance amended or repealed, and when practicable all ordinances shall be
introduced as amendments to existing ordinances or sections thereof.
(Ord. 851112A, passed 11-12-1985; Ord. 080624-A, passed 6-24-2008; Ord. 090721,
passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 100706, passed 7-6-2010)
§ 30.15 REPORTS AND RESOLUTIONS TO BE FILED WITH SECRETARY.
   All reports and resolutions shall be filed with the City Secretary and
entered in the minutes.
(Ord. 080624-A, passed 6-24-2008; Ord. 090721, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 100706,
passed 7-6-2010)
§ 30.16 ADJOURNMENT.
   A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate. A
majority vote of the Council is required to adjourn if there is unfinished
business, and any unfinished business shall be placed on an agenda of the next
meeting.
(Ord. 080624-A, passed 6-24-2008; Ord. 090721, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 100706,
passed 7-6-2010)
§ 30.17 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall take effect immediately upon adoption by a majority
vote of the City Council.
(Ord. 080624-A, passed 6-24-2008; Ord. 090721, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 100706,
passed 7-6-2010)
§ 30.18 CHANGE OF DATE FOR GENERAL ELECTION.
   (A)   The date for the general election of the Mayor and members of the City
Council is hereby changed from the May uniform election date, the second
Saturday in May each year, to the November uniform election date, the first
Tuesday of November each year. The term of each such office shall remain two
years except as provided in this section. The staggering of offices in effect
immediately before December 11, 2012, the effective date of this section, shall
continue in effect, so that the term of each office will expire in the even or
odd year applicable before the effective date of this section.
   (B)   For those holding such an office on the effective date of this
section, the term of office shall extend to the later of:
      (1)   The next November uniform election date after the date an election
would have been scheduled to elect a successor to such office but for the
change effected by this section; and
      (2)   When a successor has duly been qualified and is authorized to
assume the office in accordance with applicable law.
(Ord. 121211, passed 12-11-2012)
VACANCIES; APPOINTMENTS
§ 30.30 GOVERNANCE.
   Except as may be required by applicable state law, the provisions of this
subchapter shall govern the appointment or election to fill a vacancy in an
office of a City Council member resulting from a resignation, removal, failure
to qualify, death or for any other reason.
(Ord. 080318, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 30.31 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NOMINATION PERIOD. The period beginning on the date a vacancy in an office
covered by this subchapter occurs and ending on the date that is 14 days after
the date notice to all residential addresses is completed in compliance with
this subchapter.
   PROSPECTIVE CANDIDATE. A person who has either been nominated or has
delivered a statement of interest during the nomination period in compliance
with the terms of this subchapter.
(Ord. 080318, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 30.32 ELECTION VERSUS APPOINTMENT.
   If an election can be held, in compliance with applicable law regulating the
holding of elections, within a reasonable time from the date of an event that
has created a vacancy, then the Council may call an election to fill a vacancy.
If an election cannot lawfully be held within a reasonable time from the event
resulting in a vacancy, then the City Council shall fill the vacant position by
appointment.
(Ord. 080318, passed 3-18-2008; Ord. 160719-D, passed 7-19-2016)
§ 30.33 APPOINTMENT PROCESS.
   When an appointment is required under §
30.32, the following process shall be used to make any appointment.
   (A)   The City Council shall provide a written notice to all residential
addresses within the city that it is accepting nominations or statements of
interest for the vacant position as soon as practicable after the position has
become vacant. Notice shall be deemed completed on the date notice is deposited
in the mail to each residential address in the city as disclosed in records
maintained or reasonably relied upon by the city for the purpose.
   (B)   Nominations or statements of interest will be received by the City
Council up to the date that is 14 days after the date public notice is
completed. All nominations or statements of interest must be in writing and
delivered to City Hall during the nomination period.
   (C)   A public meeting of the City Council shall be held during which each
prospective candidate shall have the opportunity to provide information to
Council and the citizens of the reason(s) why he or she would like to serve on
Council and to answer questions posed by Council and any interested citizens. A
prospective candidate may choose to provide information to Council and the
citizens orally or in writing, or both. This meeting shall be held no later
than the first available meeting after the nomination period and may be held
during a regular scheduled or a called meeting of Council.
   (D)   After the public meeting has been held, the City Council shall appoint
a person from among the prospective candidate(s) to fill the vacancy. If
permitted by law, the City Council may appoint a prospective candidate at the
same meeting as the public meeting; provided that, each prospective candidate
has first had the opportunity at that meeting to provide and inform Council and
citizens of the reason(s) why the prospective candidate would like to serve on
Council.
   (E)   In the event that the procedure provided in this section results in no
prospective candidate applying who meets the minimum qualifications set by law,
the City Council may appoint any qualified person to fill a vacancy.
   (F)   If permitted by applicable law, vacancies in more than one City
Council position may be filled concurrently by appointment pursuant to the
procedures provided in this section.
   (G)   The vote to fill a vacancy pursuant to this subchapter, including the
requirement of a quorum and participation of the Mayor or, if applicable, the
Mayor Pro Tem, shall be governed by the law applicable to a vote of the
governing body to enact an ordinance.
(Ord. 080318, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 30.34 FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED IN APPOINTING CANDIDATES TO SERVE ON COUNCIL.
   (A)   When deciding which prospective candidate to appoint, the City Council
may consider the following factors:
      (1)   Whether the candidate has unique qualifications, experiences or
skills that will be useful to the city;
      (2)   The extent of public support for the candidate, taking into account
recent election results if the candidate recently ran for election or re-
election to City Council;
      (3)   Whether the candidate has prior experience serving on city
committees or prior experience serving on the City Council;
      (4)   Whether the candidate resides in an area of the city that is
currently under represented on the Council, taking into consideration all
elected positions;
      (5)   Whether the candidate is currently engaged in business with the
city or has other financial interests that may present ethical issues or
require the candidate to recuse himself or herself from Council actions;
      (6)   Each candidate’s presentation before Council and citizens, and
responses to any questions posed by Council or citizens, including, in
particular, the effectiveness and responsiveness of those responses; and
      (7)   The recommendation, if any, of the Council member whose seat is
being filled.
   (B)   Each member of the City Council may consider other factors that are
not included in this section and may exercise his or her discretion in weighing
these factors and any others.
(Ord. 080318, passed 3-18-2008; Ord. 160112, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 30.35 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be effective upon adoption by the City Council and
execution by the Mayor.
(Ord. 080318, passed 3-18-2008)
CHAPTER 31: OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Term of office of elected officials
   
31.02   Duties and responsibilities of elected officials
   
31.03   Change of date for general election
Standing and Special Committees
   
31.14   Boards, commissions and committees; appointment disclosure statement
   
31.15   Establishing standing committees
   
31.16   Purpose of committees
   
31.17   Appointment of members
   
31.18   Structure of committees
   
31.19   Rules of committees
   
31.20   Reporting to Council
   
31.21   Special committees
   
31.22   Effective date
Organizations
   
31.35   Arts Commission
   
31.36   Municipal Court
   
31.37   Board of Adjustment
   
31.38   Police Department
   
31.39   Zoning Commission
   
31.40   Community Engagement Team
Officers
   
31.55   City Secretary
   
31.56   Assessor; Tax Collector
   
31.57   Municipal Attorney
   
31.58   Treasurer
   
31.59   City Administrator
   
31.60   Municipal Engineer
Code of Ethics
   
31.70   Purpose
   
31.71   Scope
   
31.72   Definitions
   
31.73   Standards of conduct
   
31.74   Disclosure of interest
   
31.75   Administration and enforcement
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 TERM OF OFFICE OF ELECTED OFFICIALS.
   The term of office for all elected officials of the city shall be for a
period of two years.
(Ord. 190702-C, passed 7-2-2019)
§ 31.02 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF ELECTED OFFICIALS.
   (A)   Office of the Mayor.
      (1)   The Mayor is the city's Chief Executive Officer.
      (2)   The Mayor is the Budget Officer and is charged with the duty of
proposing a budget each year for consideration and adoption by the City
Council.
      (3)   Subject to the limitations provided in the City Human Resources
Policy Manual and such other limitations adopted from time to time by the City
Council, the Mayor has general and final authority for management of
administrative and human resource functions.
      (4)   The Mayor shall perform the duties and exercise the powers
prescribed by the City Council.
      (5)   Subject to applicable state laws and ordinances, resolutions, and
directives adopted or approved from time to time by the City Council, the
Mayor:
         (a)   Shall actively ensure that the laws and ordinances of the city
are properly carried out;
         (b)   Is authorized to exercise all powers in compliance with Ch. 418
of the Tex. Gov't Code in case of a public calamity, after the Mayor has
declared a local disaster or asked the Governor to declare a state of
emergency;
         (c)   May sign bonds, certificates of obligation, warrants, and other
evidence of debt, and contracts and other documents and instruments approved or
authorized by the City Council, and may execute instruments of payment for
routine and recurring obligations such as city employees' salaries, wages, and
costs of employee benefit programs in conformance with compensation and
benefits approved and budgeted by the City Council, and such non-routine
obligations authorized by the City Council;
         (d)   May exercise such other authority conferred by applicable law as
modified or limited by action of the City Council; and
         (e)   Is allowed to vote only in the event of a tie vote.
   (B)   Office of the Mayor Pro Tem:
      (1)   Is a member of the Council who performs the Mayor's duties during
the Mayor's incapacity or absence;
      (2)   Is selected by majority vote of the Council from among its own
membership;
      (3)   Serves for a term of office of one year;
      (4)   Retains the right to vote on all matters before the Council while
performing the duties of the Mayor.
   (C)   Office of Council Member (Alderperson).
      (1)   Council members are the city's legislators. Their primary duty is
policymaking, which includes identifying the needs of residents, formulating
programs to meet the changing requirements of the community, and measuring the
effectiveness of ongoing municipal services.
      (2)   The Council has the authority to adopt and amend the budget.
      (3)   Subject to an obligation to recuse as a result of a conflict of
interest pursuant to applicable law, each Council Member is entitled to vote or
abstain on every question decided at a Council meeting, and has full
parliamentary privileges in Council meetings, including the right to speak and
make motions when recognized by the Presiding Officer and the right to
introduce new ordinances and amendments to existing ones, in accordance with
procedures of chapter 30 of this code and such other regulations adopted by the
City Council from time to time for such purpose.
      (4)   The City Council exercises regulatory powers with regard to the
health, safety, and welfare of the public and for the good government of the
city in compliance with all applicable law.
      (5)   The City Council may levy taxes, assess fees and charges, and
authorize the sale of bonds and other instruments of indebtedness of the city
to finance the functions of the city government.
   (D)   Provisions applicable to all elected officers.
      (1)   Pursuant to Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 22.041, if a member of the
governing body is absent for three regular consecutive meetings, the member's
office is considered vacant unless the member is sick or has first obtained a
leave of absence at a regular meeting.
      (2)   The Mayor or a member of the City Council may be removed from
office as set forth in § 21.002 of the Tex. Loc. Gov't Code.
      (3)   A vacancy in office shall be filled in accordance with §
30.30.
(Ord. 190702-C, passed 7-2-2019)
§ 31.03 CHANGE OF DATE FOR GENERAL ELECTION.
   (A)   The date for the general election of the Mayor and members of the City
Council is hereby changed from the May uniform election date, the second
Saturday in May each year, to the November uniform election date, the first
Tuesday of November each year. The term of each such office shall remain two
years except as provided in this section. The staggering of offices in effect
immediately before December 11, 2012, the effective date of this section, shall
continue in effect, so that the term of each office will expire in the even or
odd year applicable before the effective date of this section.
   (B)   For those holding such an office on the effective date of this
section, the term of office shall extend to the later of:
      (1)   The next November uniform election date after the date an election
would have been scheduled to elect a successor to such office but for the
change effected by this section; and
      (2)   When a successor has duly been qualified and is authorized to
assume the office in accordance with applicable law.
(Ord. 190702-C, passed 7-2-2019)
STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES
§ 31.14 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES; APPOINTMENT DISCLOSURE STATEMENT.
   Prior to appointment to any city board, commission, or committee, all
applicants shall submit an application form as prescribed by the City Council
and on file in the office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. 190702-C, passed 7-2-2019)
§ 31.15 ESTABLISHING STANDING COMMITTEES.
   (A)   The following standing committees shall be established:
      (1)   Public Safety;
      (2)   Budget and Finance;
      (3)   Public Works; and
      (4)   Planning and Environmental.
   (B)   A member of the city staff will be assigned to assist each of the
standing committees.
(Ord. 070619-B, passed 6-19-2007; Ord. 100706-B, passed 7-6-2010; Ord. 170110-
A, passed 1-10-2017; Ord. 190108-A, passed 1-8-2019; Am. Ord. 190702-C, passed
7-2-2019; Ord. 250603-D, passed 6-3-2025)
§ 31.16 PURPOSE OF COMMITTEES.
   The purpose of committees are to serve in an advisory capacity to assist and
make recommendations to Council and department heads to research, develop,
implement, and evaluate policies, programs, and projects in accordance with
approved Council goals.
(Ord. 070619-B, passed 6-19-2007; Ord. 100706-B, passed 7-6-2010; Ord. 170110-
A, passed 1-10-2017; Am. Ord. 190702-C, passed 7-2-2019; Ord. 200204, passed 2-
4-2020)
§ 31.17 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   Committee members shall be appointed by the City Council.
   (B)   Committee members will be appointed at the last meeting in September
in alignment with the fiscal year so that committees may be seated at the
commencement of the fiscal year. Additional appointments may be made from time
to time as determined by the Council to fill a vacancy or to add additional
member(s) or alternate(s).
   (C)   Committee member appointments will be for a term of one year.
   (D)   In the event of the resignation of a regular member, the City Council
shall give consideration to appointing sitting alternate members as regular
members, prior to appointment of new regular members.
   (E)   No individual may serve concurrently as a regular member on more than
two Standing or Special Committees.
   (F)   No individual may serve concurrently as a regular or alternate member
of a Standing Committee while also serving on the City Council, Zoning
Commission, or Board of Adjustment.
   (G)   There are four categories of committee appointments:
      (1)   Regular members shall be residents of the city and will have full
voting privileges and count toward a meeting quorum.
      (2)   Alternate members shall be residents of the city and will not have
voting privileges or count toward a meeting quorum except as provided in §
31.19(B).
      (3)   Honorary members are not required to be city residents and do not
have voting privileges or count toward a quorum.
      (4)   City Council Liaison is the City Council member assigned to a
committee as a non-voting member. The City Council Liaison provides
communication between the City Council and the committee. The City Council
Liaison cannot be an officer of the committee. The City Council Liaison shall
have the following roles:
         (a)   Serves as the primary two-way communications channel between
Council and standing committees, and the Arts Commission.
         (b)   Advises the City Council of any activities conducted by the
committee or commission upon request from City Council.
         (c)   Helps resolve questions the committee or commission may have
about the role of Council or municipal government.
         (d)   Advises the committee or commission on most recent Council
action or activities related to the committee or commission.
         (e)   Establishes formal or informal contact with the chairperson of
the committee or commission and effectively communicates the role of the City
Council Liaison.
         (f)   Provides procedural direction and relays Council's position to
the committee or commission.
         (g)   Assists the committee or commission in staying on track and
focused on council outcomes/goals assigned to them.
         (h)   Encouraged to attend all meetings of the assigned committee or
commission.
      (5)   The Liaison shall provide written reports to City Council upon
request.
(Ord. 70619-B, passed 6-19-2007; Ord. 100706-B, passed 7-6-2010; Ord. 140805,
passed 8-5-2014; Ord. 141217-B, passed 12-17-2014; Ord. 170110-A, passed 1-10-
2017; Ord. 181218-B, passed 12-18-2018; Ord. 200204, passed 2-4-2020; Ord.
210105, passed 1-5-2021; Ord. 220419-A, passed 4-19-2022; Ord. 220503, passed
5-3-2022; Ord. 250401-A, passed 4-1-2025)
§ 31.18 STRUCTURE OF COMMITTEES.
   (A)   Each City Council member shall be appointed as the Liaison of a
different standing committee.
   (B)   Committees shall be composed of at least five regular members who
shall be residents of the city.
   (C)   Alternate members may be appointed who shall also be residents of the
city.
   (D)   One honorary member may be appointed who has experience in a field
relating to the standing committee and may or may not be a resident of the
city. Honorary members are not voting members and do not count toward a quorum.
   (E)   The committee shall select a chairperson and a vice-chairperson from
the regular members of the committee.
   (F)   The committee shall select a secretary who is responsible for
preparing the minutes of each committee meeting. The secretary may be the city
staff member assigned to the committee.
(Ord. 070619-B, passed 6-19-2007; Ord. 100706-B, passed 7-6-2010; Ord. 110419-
A, passed 4-19-2011; Ord. 141217-B, passed 12-17-2014; Ord. 170110-A, passed 1-
10-2017; Ord. 200204, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 31.19 RULES OF COMMITTEES.
   (A)   If the chairperson and vice-chairperson of the committee are not in
attendance at a committee meeting, the committee may select a temporary
chairperson for that particular meeting as long as a quorum of the regular
members is in attendance.
   (B)   A quorum shall be a majority of the number of regular members of a
committee. In the event that one or more regular members are absent, the
Committee Chair may designate alternate members to serve in the place of
regular members for a particular meeting. Alternate members will count toward
the quorum and will have voting privileges of a regular member when designated
to serve in the place of a regular member.
   (C)   Any committee that is purely advisory in nature shall not be required
to conduct their meetings in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act.
   (D)   Members will hold a meeting as soon as possible after appointment by
the Council, to review committee actions of the previous year and plan for the
current year.
   (E)   At the first meeting after appointment by the Council, the committee
may approve a regular committee meeting schedule.
   (F)   Upon request by any member, the Chairperson shall call a meeting
within 30 days or other time period that is reasonable under the circumstances.
   (G)   Members do not possess legislative powers and are vested only with the
authority to fulfill the purposes of the Committee as set forth in §
31.16.
   (H)   Committees shall establish a regular monthly meeting date and time. If
there is not any pending business, the regular monthly meeting may be
cancelled, but each committee shall meet a minimum of once every three months.
   (I)   The agenda for each committee meeting shall contain an agenda item for
public comments.
   (J)   The agenda for committee meetings shall be drafted by the city staff
member assigned to the Committee for the review and approval of the Chairperson
and shall be posted in the same manner as the city's other meetings at least 72
hours in advance of the meeting.
   (K)   Minutes shall be taken at each meeting and shall be filed with the
City Secretary within 24 hours of being approved.
   (L)   Any regular committee member, or the City Council Liaison, may request
items be placed on the committee's meeting agenda. The Chairperson will
coordinate the scheduling of requested agenda items. If there is disagreement
about placing items on the agenda, an item shall be placed on the earliest
available committee agenda to allow committee members to discuss whether the
requested item merits consideration by the Committee.
   (M)   Any committee meeting may be held virtually or in a hybrid in-person
and virtual format, so long as the following provisions are adhered to:
      (1)   All meetings shall be open to the public through a link published
on the agenda;
      (2)   All meetings shall require a quorum of the members to attend,
whether virtually or hybrid;
      (3)   All meetings shall allow members of the public to comment during
the appropriate comment period;
      (4)   Agendas shall be posted at least 72 hours in advance of the
meeting, shall include the virtual link, and shall be recorded through the
platform that they are held within, with the recording link available upon
request; and
      (5)   Minutes shall be taken at each meeting and filed with the City
Secretary within 24 hours after approval by the committee.
   (N)   The Staff Liaison is the member of city staff that is assigned to each
of the standing committees. The Staff Liaison serves as a key representative,
advocating for the city's interests while ensuring committee initiatives align
with the overall vision and goals of the municipality and City Council. The
Staff Liaison shall have the following roles:
      (1)   Serves as the primary point of contact for committee members,
addressing inquiries, concerns, and requests for information.
      (2)   Attends committee meetings to actively participate and stay
informed about their activities.
      (3)   Facilitates two-way communication between committees and city
departments, ensuring accurate and timely dissemination of information.
      (4)   Collaborates with committee chairs and members to gather feedback,
input, and recommendations on relevant city projects, policies, and
initiatives.
      (5)   Prepares and distributes official correspondence, reports, and
updates to both internal stakeholders and committee representatives.
      (6)   Represents the city's broader interests within committee
discussions, ensuring that decisions made consider the broader municipal
context.
      (7)   Collects feedback and suggestions from committees and relays them
to the appropriate city departments for consideration.
(Ord. 070619-B, passed 6-19-2007; Ord. 100706-B, passed 7-6-2010; Ord. 131203-
A, passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 141217-B, passed 12-17-2014; Ord. 170110-A, passed 1-
10-2017; Ord. 170606-C, passed 6-6-2017; Ord. 200204, passed 2-4-2020; Ord.
211005, passed 10-5-2021; Ord. 240116-C, passed 1-16-2024)
§ 31.20 REPORTING TO COUNCIL.
   (A)   Committee reports will be made at a City Council meeting.
   (B)   Subjects and any supporting material must be given to the City
Secretary not later than noon Thursday preceding the regular Council meetings.
(Ord. 070619-B, passed 6-19-2007; Ord. 100706-B, passed 7-6-2010; Ord. 200204,
passed 2-4-2020; Ord. 250401-A, passed 4-1-2025)
§ 31.21 SPECIAL COMMITTEES.
   “Ad Hoc” or “Special” Committees may be temporarily set up by the City
Council to deal with specific short term items that cannot be handled by a
regular standing committee. These committees will be dissolved as soon as the
purpose for which the committee was formed has been fulfilled.
(Ord. 070619-B, passed 6-19-2007; Ord. 100706-B, passed 7-6-2010)
§ 31.22 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall become effective from and after the day of 7-6-2010.
(Ord. 070619-B, passed 6-19-2007; Ord. 100706-B, passed 7-6-2010)
ORGANIZATIONS
§ 31.35 ARTS COMMISSION.
   (A)   Appointment of members to Sunset Valley Arts Commission.
      (1)   Commission members shall be appointed by the City Council.
      (2)   Commission members will be appointed at the last meeting in
September in alignment with the fiscal year so that the Commission may be
seated at the commencement of the fiscal year.
      (3)   Commission member appointments will be for a term of one year.
   (B)   Structure of Commission.
      (1)   The City Council Liaison is the City Council member assigned to the
Arts Commission as a non-voting member. The City Council Liaison provides
communication between the City Council and the committee. The City Council
Liaison cannot be an officer of the committee. The City Council liaison shall
have the following roles:
         (a)   Serves as the primary two-way communications channel between
Council and standing committees, and the Arts Commission.
         (b)   Advises the City Council of any activities conducted by the
committee or commission at the request of City Council.
         (c)   Helps resolve questions the committee or commission may have
about the role of Council or municipal government.
         (d)   Advises the committee or commission on most recent Council
action or activities related to the committee or commission.
         (e)   Establishes formal or informal contact with the chairperson of
the committee or commission and effectively communicates the role of the City
Council Liaison.
         (f)   Provides procedural direction and relays Council's position to
the committee or commission.
         (g)   Assists the committee or commission in staying on track and
focused on council outcomes/goals assigned to them.
         (h)   Encouraged to attend all meetings of the assigned committee or
commission.
      (2)   The Commission shall be composed of at least five regular members
who shall be residents of the city.
      (3)   Alternates may be appointed who shall also be residents of the
city.
      (4)   One honorary member may be appointed who has experience in a field
relating to the standing Commission and may or may not be a resident of the
city.
      (5)   The Commission shall select a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson
who will serve as Chairperson in the Chairperson's absence.
      (6)   The Commission shall select a secretary who is responsible for
preparing the minutes of each Commission meeting. The secretary may be the city
staff assigned to the Commission.
      (7)   The Staff Liaison is the member of city staff that is assigned to
the Arts Commission. The Staff Liaison serves as a key representative,
advocating for the city's interests while ensuring Commission initiatives align
with the overall vision and goals of the municipality and City Council. The
Staff Liaison shall have the following roles:
         (a)   Serves as the primary point of contact for Commission members,
addressing inquiries, concerns, and requests for information.
         (b)   Attends Commission meetings to actively participate and stay
informed about their activities.
         (c)   Facilitates two-way communication between the Commission and
city departments, ensuring accurate and timely dissemination of information.
         (d)   Collaborates with Commission chair and members to gather
feedback, input, and recommendations on relevant city projects, policies, and
initiatives.
         (e)   Prepares and distributes official correspondence, reports, and
updates to both internal stakeholders and committee representatives.
         (f)   Represents the city's broader interests within Commission
discussions, ensuring that decisions made consider the broader municipal
context.
         (g)   Collects feedback and suggestions from the Commission and relays
them to the appropriate city departments for consideration.
   (C)   Purpose of Sunset Valley Arts Commission. The purpose of the
Commission is to serve in an advisory capacity to assist and make
recommendations to Council and department heads to research, develop,
implement, and evaluate policies, programs, and projects related to the arts,
and in particular encourage and promote tourism in the city.
   (D)   Rules of Sunset Valley Arts Commission.
      (1)   The Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson of the Commission shall be in
attendance at all Commission meetings.
      (2)   A majority of regular Commission members shall constitute a quorum.
      (3)   The Commission shall not be required to conduct their meetings in
accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act; however, the Commission shall
adhere to the following, whether the meeting is held in-person, virtually, or
in a hybrid in-person and virtual format:
         (a)   All meetings shall be open to the public; if held virtually or
hybrid, a link shall be published on the posted agenda;
         (b)   All meetings shall require a quorum of the regular Commission
members;
         (c)   All meetings shall allow members of the public to comment during
the appropriate comment period;
         (d)   Agendas shall be posted at least 72 hours in advance of the
meeting, and if the meeting is virtual shall include the virtual link and shall
be recorded through the platform that they are held within with the recording
link available upon request; and
         (e)   Minutes shall be taken at each meeting and shall be filed with
the City Secretary within 24 hours of being approved.
      (4)   Members will hold a meeting as soon as possible after appointment
by the Council, to review Commission actions of the previous year and plan for
the current year.
      (5)   At the first meeting after appointment by the Council, the
Commission may approve a regular Commission meeting schedule.
      (6)   Upon request by any member, the Chairperson shall call a meeting
within 30 days or other time period that is reasonable under the circumstances.
      (7)   Members do not possess legislative powers and are vested only with
the authority to fulfill the purposes of the Commission as set forth in
division (C) above.
      (8)   Commissions shall meet a minimum of once each three months.
   (E)   Hotel Occupancy Tax Funds. In addition to complying with the
requirements of Tex. Tax Code Ch. 351, and any other applicable law, with
respect to any expenditures of funds collected by the city pursuant to Tex. Tax
Code Ch. 351, the Commission must present any and all proposed expenditures to
the City Council for approval.
(Ord. 070717, passed 7-17-2007; Ord. 100622-A, passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 200204,
passed 2-4-2020; Ord. 211005, passed 10-5-2021; Ord. 220419-A, passed 4-19-
2022; Ord. 240116-C, passed 1-16-2024; Ord. 250401-A, passed 4-1-2025)
§ 31.36 MUNICIPAL COURT.
   (A)   Establishment of the Court. There is hereby created and established
the “Municipal Court of the City of Sunset Valley, Texas”, which shall have
jurisdiction within the territorial limits of the city in all criminal cases
arising under the ordinances of the city, and shall have concurrent
jurisdiction with any justice of the peace in any precinct in which the city is
situated in all criminal cases arising out of the criminal laws of the state,
in which the punishment is by fine only, and where the maximum of the fine may
not exceed $200 and arising within the territorial limits; and further
jurisdiction as may lawfully be conferred upon the Court.
   (B)   Judge of the Court.
      (1)   Appointment. The Court shall be presided over by a judge to be
known as the “Judge of the Municipal Court”, who shall be appointed by the City
Council and who shall be a resident of Travis County.
      (2)   Term. The Judge first appointed to assume the post shall hold
office for a term corresponding to the unexpired term of the Mayor who is in
office at the time of the assumption of the post. Upon the expiration of the
term of the Judge first appointed hereunder, and every two years thereafter, a
Judge shall be appointed for a term of two years. All Judges of the Municipal
Court shall hold office for the term appointed and until their successors have
been appointed and qualified.
      (3)   Vacancy. A vacancy in the Office of Judge of the Municipal Court
shall be filled by the City Council for the unexpired term only.
      (4)   Alternate Judge appointment. While the Judge of the Municipal Court
is temporarily unable to act for any reason, the City Council may appoint a
person meeting the qualifications for the position, to be known as “Alternate
Judge of the Municipal Court”, to sit for the regular Municipal Judge. The
alternate Judge shall have all the powers and duties of the office and shall
receive the same compensation as is payable to the regular Municipal Court
Judge, while he or she is so acting. An alternate Judge shall be appointed for
a term of one year to correspond with the first regular meeting held after the
general city election of each year.
      (5)   Duties. The Judge of the Municipal Court shall perform all duties
and have all powers prescribed by law.
      (6)   Continuing education. The Judge of the Municipal Court shall comply
with the requirements of Tex. Gov’t Code § 81.113, or any amendments thereto,
relating to continuing legal education. Notice from the State Judicial Council
that the Judge of the Municipal Court has failed to comply with the statute
shall result in suspension of the Judge from the position until the time as he
or she presents satisfactory evidence to the Council of his or her compliance.
      (7)   Compensation. The Judge of the Municipal Court shall receive
compensation for his or her services as may be authorized by the City Council.
   (C)   Clerk. The City Secretary shall be ex-officio clerk of the Municipal
Court, who shall hold the position for the same term as he or she holds the
position of City Secretary. The Clerk of the Court shall keep minutes of the
proceedings of the Court, issue all process and generally perform all the
duties of the clerk of a court as prescribed by law for a county clerk, as far
as may be applicable.
   (D)   Commitment. A defendant who shall be committed to custody by authority
of the Municipal Court shall be committed to the custody of the Chief of Police
of the city and held by him or her as provided by law.
   (E)   Rules of procedure.
      (1)   All provisions of state law relating to procedures of justice of
the peace courts in criminal matters are hereby adopted, insofar as applicable
and not inconsistent with this section or other law specifically related to
municipal courts.
      (2)   The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure relating to
collection of fines by justices of the peace are hereby specifically adopted on
behalf of the city and its Municipal Court for collection and enforcement of
fines imposed by the Court, insofar as the provisions may be applicable, and
not inconsistent with this section or other law related to municipal courts.
   (F)   Construction. To the extent that state law may now or hereafter grant
greater power or authority than prescribed herein, this section should not be
construed to limit the authority, but it is intended that the Court and the
officers herein referred shall have the fullest power authorized by law.
(Ord. 810302, passed 3-2-1981; Ord. 870217A, passed 2-17-1987; Ord. 230905-C,
passed 9-5-2023)
Cross reference:
   Municipal Court Building Security Fund, see §
32.02
   Municipal Court Technology Fund, see §
32.03
§ 31.37 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   For Board of Adjustment information, see the Land Development Code.
§ 31.38 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby created and established a Police Department for the
city.
   (B)   The Police Department of the city shall consist of one Chief of Police
and additional regular police officers as the City Council may from time to
time deem necessary and proper.
   (C)   The appointment of the Chief of Police is subject to approval of the
City Council. Members of the Police Department will be appointed by the Chief
of Police and City Administrator.
   (D)   The Chief of Police and each members of the Police Department shall
hold a valid basic certificate from the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement
Officer Standards and Education (TCLEOSE) at the time of his or her
appointment.
   (E)   The Chief of Police and all members of the Police Department shall
take and subscribe to the official oath prescribed by the Constitution of the
state.
   (F)   The appointment of a Chief of Police shall be made and entered in the
minutes of the City Council at any regular or special meeting of the Council.
   (G)   The Chief of Police shall report to the City Administrator, as
necessary on a daily basis. The Chief of Police shall report to the City
Council, at its regular or special meetings, on the activities of the Police
Department, or on the matters that the City Council may request or that the
Chief of Police desires to communicate to the City Council. The Chief of Police
will make full-time and reserve police officer hiring recommendations to the
City Administrator.
   (H)   Reserve police officers are volunteer officers who must meet all the
same hiring, discipline, evaluation and professional standards as those of a
full-time police officer. A reserve officer will perform the same duties as a
full-time police officer, but he or she does not receive an hourly wage for
those duties. He or she will work those hours and duties assigned by the Chief
of Police, or his or her designee, and as required by TCLEOSE regulations and
under the most current reserve program policy for the Department.
      (1)   Reserve officers shall serve the Department at the discretion of
the Chief of Police. The volunteer's services and status as a reserve office
can be revoked or terminated at any time by either party without reason.
      (2)   A commission for reserve police officers shall not be for a
specific term, but shall continue until that commission is revoked. All
personnel serving as reserve police officers shall be subject to annual
evaluations by the Chief of Police or his or her designee.
      (3)   A reserve police officer shall possess the same authority as a
full-time police officer per the standards issued by the Texas Commission on
Law Enforcement Officer Standards and Education (TCLEOSE), and the standards
outlined in the Code of Criminal Procedures, as well as under Department
policy.
      (4)   The City Council may limit the number of personnel serving as
reserve police officers. There shall be no more than ten persons serving as
reserve police officers at any given time.
      (5)   A reserve officer may be eligible for employment if a position
should become available. However, the mere fact the reserve officer has served
does not guarantee the reserve officer will be selected for employment.
      (6)   Reserve officers may be reimbursed through Department allocation of
budgeted funds to pay for reserve officer equipment, uniforms or training.
      (7)   A metallic badge, identifying the Police Chief and each police
officer, shall be issued to each member of the Police Department.
   (I)   The Chief of Police shall be the chief police officer of the city, and
as such, shall have supervision over the other members of the Police
Department.
   (J)   Employees of the Police Department shall receive the compensation as
the City Council may from time to time determine.
   (K)   It is the duty of every member of the Police Department to preserve
the peace within the limits of the city and, to effect this purpose, the
officer may use all lawful means, in conformance with all applicable Police
Department policies and guidelines.
   (L)   Every member of the Police Department shall have authority:
      (1)   To execute warrants of arrest or other process issued out of the
Municipal Court in the city;
      (2)   To arrest without warrant in all cases where authorized by the laws
of the state; and
      (3)   To arrest without warrant when offenses against the laws or
ordinances are committed in his, her or their presence, or where persons are
found in suspicious places, and under circumstances which reasonably show that
the persons have been guilty of some felony or breach of the peace, or threaten
or are about to commit some offense against the law.
(Ord. 800212, passed 2-12-1980; Am. Ord. 130205, passed 2-5-2013)
§ 31.39 ZONING COMMISSION.
For the Zoning Commission, see the Land Development Code.
§ 31.40 COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT TEAM.
   (A)   Purpose. The Community Engagement Team is a collaborative working
group established to support community events and foster resident engagement
through inclusive and coordinated efforts. The team is not a formal advisory
body and does not operate under the rules applicable to standing committees or
commissions. Instead, it serves in a flexible, staff-supported capacity to
assist in developing the city’s annual event calendar and related budgetary
recommendations.
   (B)   Responsibilities.
      (1)   The Community Engagement Team shall convene during the summer each
year to:
         (a)   Develop a proposed calendar of city-sponsored community events;
         (b)   Recommend event-related funding requests to the Budget and
Finance Committee as part of the annual budget process; and
         (c)   Coordinate and support the planning and execution of community
events throughout the fiscal year.
      (2)   Budget recommendations shall be reviewed by the Budget and Finance
Committee and considered by the Mayor and City Council during the adoption of
the annual budget.
   (C)   Membership.
      (1)   Members of the Community Engagement Team shall be volunteers
appointed by the Communications and Events Coordinator, under supervision of
the City Administrator.
      (2)   Appointments may be made at any time and are not subject to term
limits. A member shall serve until they voluntarily choose to step down or are
no longer able to participate.
      (3)   The team shall be composed of the following representatives:
         (a)   At least one member of the Planning and Environmental Committee;
         (b)   At least one member of the Arts Commission;
         (c)   Three city staff members, including the Communications and
Events Coordinator, a Public Works Department Representative, and a Police
Department Representative.
   (D)   Structure and operations.
      (1)   The team shall meet as needed, with a required meeting during the
summer for budget and calendar planning.
      (2)   Meetings are informal and are not subject to quorum requirements,
the Texas Open Meetings Act, or formal agenda and minute-keeping procedures.
      (3)   The team shall not include a City Council liaison and shall not
have advisory or legislative authority.
      (4)   City staff will coordinate meetings, facilitate communication among
members, and ensure that the team’s recommendations are reviewed and processed
in accordance with city procedures.
(Ord. 250603-D, passed 6-3-2025)
OFFICERS
§ 31.55 CITY SECRETARY.
   (A)   The Office of City Secretary shall be appointive. The City Council
shall by majority vote, appoint a City Secretary to serve for a term of two
years and until his or her successor shall have been duly appointed except if
the City Secretary is an employee of the city, the term of office will expire
upon the termination of employment with the city, whether voluntary or
involuntary. In the event that City Secretary's term of office expires as a
result of termination of employment, a successor appointee shall serve for a
term comprised of the remainder of term of the terminated City Secretary. The
Secretary, at the beginning of each term of office, shall take and subscribe to
the official oath of office and shall post bond in a sum as the City Council
shall direct, the premium on the bond to be paid by the city. The Secretary
shall perform all of the statutory duties prescribed by law in Tex. Loc. Gov't
Code § 22.073, and as hereafter amended, and other duties as may be prescribed
from time to time by the City Council.
   (B)   Any bond posted by the City Secretary as required by division (A)
above shall extend to all the duties and responsibilities imposed by this
section, the City Council, and applicable statutes.
(Ord. 870217B, passed 2-17-1987; Ord. 170124, passed 1-24-2017; Ord. 200204,
passed 2-4- 2020; Ord. 240206-A, passed 2-6-2024)
§ 31.56 ASSESSOR; TAX COLLECTOR.
   Upon election, the Mayor assumes the office and duty of Assessor and Tax
Collector, to run concurrently with the term of office of Mayor. The Assessor
and Tax Collector shall monitor tax revenues of the city, cause the preparation
of projections for future revenues, and include all tax revenue in an annual
proposed budget for adoption by the Council each year.
(Ord. 830412B, passed 4-12-1983; Ord. 170124, passed 1-24-2017)
§ 31.57 MUNICIPAL ATTORNEY.
   (A)   The City Attorney shall be appointive after a request for
qualifications and appropriate selection by the City Council. The City Attorney
shall be a competent attorney who shall have practiced law in the State of
Texas for at least five years immediately preceding his or her appointment. The
City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the city, and he or she shall
represent the city in all litigation and legal proceedings. He or she shall
draft, approve, or file his or her written legal objections to every ordinance
before it is acted upon by the Council, and he or she shall pass upon all
documents, contracts, and legal instruments in which the city may have an
interest.
   (B)   The City Attorney shall file a written request to perform work with
the Mayor, and when not available, the City Administrator. The City
Administrator shall inform the Mayor and the Council of work requested to be
completed by the Attorney. The work must be approved prior to commencement and
final billing.
(Ord. 200204, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 31.58 TREASURER.
   (A)   The office of Treasurer shall be appointive. The City Council shall,
by majority vote, appoint a Treasurer, who may be an employee, or may be a solo
practitioner, or firm engaged to serve on a contractual basis. The term of
office of the Treasurer shall be a full fiscal year and until a successor shall
have been duly appointed, except as follows: (i) if the Treasurer is an
employee of the city, the term of office will expire on the termination of
employment with the city, whether voluntary or involuntary; and (ii) if the
Treasurer is engaged pursuant to an agreement for services, the term of office
shall expire at the time that such agreement is terminated in accordance with
the terms of such agreement. In the event that an appointee's term of office
expires as a result of a termination of employment or termination of a contract
for services, a successor appointee shall serve for a term comprised of the
remainder of the fiscal year (subject to earlier termination as a result of a
termination of employment or contract).
   (B)   The Treasurer shall have the powers and duties as required by City
Council and as prescribed in Tex. Loc. Gov't. Code § 22.075, as amended from
time to time.
   (C)   The Treasurer shall post bond in a sum as the City Council shall
require or as prescribed by statute, the premium on the bond shall be paid by
the city.
(Ord. 240206-A, passed 2-6-2024)
§ 31.59 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Creation of office.
      (1)   The office of City Administrator is hereby created.
      (2)   The City Administrator shall be appointed by majority vote of the
City Council.
      (3)   The City Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of
the city and shall be responsible to the Mayor and City Council for the proper
administration of all affairs of the city. To that end, the City Administrator
shall have the following powers and duties:
         (a)   The City Administrator shall devote all working time and
attention to the affairs of the city and be responsible to the Mayor and City
Council for the planning, organizing and administration of the city.
         (b)   Legal. The City Administrator shall:
            1.   Execute knowledge of local government operations, public
finance, utilities and related law.
            2.   Comply with federal, state, and local laws and regulations by
studying existing and new legislation, anticipating future legislation,
enforcing compliance with applicable law and advising the Council on needed
actions.
            3.   Maintain and enforce guidelines and rules set out in city
ordinances and policies, including the following: Land Development Code, HR
Manual, Financial Policies.
            4.   Monitor all service contracts and franchise agreements for
compliance with obligations and enforcement of rights, oversee floodplain
administration, community rating status and utility requirements.
         (c)   Financial management. The City Administrator shall:
            1.   Oversee the preparation of monthly financial statements for
presentation to the Mayor and Council.
            2.   Assist the Mayor in preparation and submission of the Mayor's
annual budget and ensure that it is filed as required by state law, and assist
the Council in consideration and adoption of final budgets and periodic
amendments.
            3.   Oversee purchasing matters for the city as defined by
personnel policies, applicable law, ordinance or action of the City Council.
            4.   Manage and oversee the investment of city funds in accordance
with Investment Policy adopted by the Council from time to time and pursuant to
any specific instructions of the Council.
         (d)   Organization and leadership. The City Administrator shall:
            1.   Oversee multiple projects simultaneously, and deal effectively
with elected officials, department heads, employees, residents, and the general
public.
            2.   Demonstrate continuous effort to improve operations, decrease
turnaround times, streamline work processes, and work cooperatively and jointly
to provide quality customer service.
            3.   Recommend 5-10-20 year strategy with timeline mapped goals. In
doing this, attention shall be paid to existing programs and services; the
changing needs of the city; and identifying and anticipating community service
trends.
            4.   Prepare and present all variance and zoning requests to City
Council and appropriate boards or commissions.
         (e)   Personnel. The City Administrator shall:
            1.   Supervise department heads and other management personnel and
perform personnel evaluations of department heads and assist with the
evaluation processes of all employees.
            2.   Exercise supervision of administrative programs and tasks and
assist all departments created by the City Council or that may hereafter be
created by the City Council, except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance,
and to develop actions and procedures that encourage interdepartmental
cooperation and reduce barriers between departments.
            3.   Assist the City Council, finance committee or other committee
or governing body designated by the City Council in determining market wages
and salaries and determining the salaries and benefits for employees.
            4.   The City Administrator shall administer and interpret
personnel policies and procedures as they apply to all departments and
employees. This authority may be delegated as necessary and proper. The Mayor
and City Council have the authority for final review and approval of all
actions on matters not specifically delegated to the City Administrator. The
City Council has the final authority to hire and dismiss the City Administrator
and to hire and dismiss department heads. Except for:
               a.   Any officer appointed by the City Council who is also an
employee of the city; and
               b.   As otherwise provided in Personnel Policies adopted or
approved by the City Council, the City Administrator shall have the authority
to hire and dismiss employees of the city upon recommendation from the
applicable department head not less than 24 hours after notifying the Mayor of
such proposed action. The City Administrator may not terminate the employment
of an employee if instructed not to do so by the Mayor. The City
Administrator's authority to hire employees shall be subject to the creation
and funding of the affected position by the City Council.
         (f)   Communication. The City Administrator shall:
            1.   Maintain open and transparent rapport with the community by
meeting with citizens and advisory groups, reaching out to resolve concerns and
proactively settling disputes.
            2.   Routinely provide the Mayor and Council reports that detail:
               a.   Progress on stated objectives;
               b.   Performance against budget;
               c.   Staff development;
               d.   Potential opportunities;
               e.   Obstacles and suggested means to address; and
               f.   Provide the City Council, monthly at a regularly held
meeting, the number of resident requests, concerns, problems, or issues raised
as well as the required resolution and metrics for resolution.
            3.   Conduct regular meetings with interested retail operators,
developers and owners to understand their needs, concerns and suggestions for
improvement in delivery of municipal services and operation of programs
affecting commercial areas of the city. Provide the Mayor and Council with
reports covering these activities.
            4.   Attend all City Council, Board of Adjustment and Zoning
Commission meetings, and attend committee and other commission meetings as
needed or directed by the Mayor or Council.
         (g)   Public relations. The City Administrator shall:
            1.   Serve as the designated officer for public information, and,
as such, oversee the management of municipal data, including coordinating
compliance with state law with the City Attorney;
            2.   Disseminate information to the public and media organizations
regarding municipal activities; and
            3.   Address inquiries from the public on subjects regarding
municipal operations.
   (B)   The City Administrator may be removed from office in all event(s) and
in the manner(s) provided in Tex. Loc. Gov't Code Ch. 22, or any successor
statutes thereto.
(Ord. 100706-A, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 190521, passed 5-21-2019; Am. Ord.
200901, passed 9-1-2020; Am. Ord. 221101-B, passed 11-1-2022)
§ 31.60 MUNICIPAL ENGINEER.
   (A)   The office of Municipal Engineer shall be appointive. The City Council
shall, by majority vote, appoint a Municipal Engineer, who may be an employee,
or may be a solo engineer or firm engaged to serve on a contractual basis. The
term of office of the Municipal Engineer shall be a full fiscal year and until
a successor shall have been duly appointed, except as follows: (i) If the
Municipal Engineer is an employee of the city, the term of office will expire
on the termination of employment with the city, whether voluntary or
involuntary; and (ii) if the Municipal Engineer is engaged pursuant to an
agreement for services, the term of office shall expire at the time that such
agreement is terminated in accordance with the terms of such agreement. In the
event that an appointee's term of office expires as a result of a termination
of employment or termination of a contract for services, a successor appointee
shall serve for a term comprised of the remainder of the fiscal year (subject
to earlier termination as a result of a termination of employment or contract).
   (B)   The Municipal Engineer shall be licensed to practice civil engineering
in the State of Texas. The Municipal Engineer shall generally advise the
Council as requested or directed by the City Council, and as further directed
by the Mayor or City Administrator outside a Council meeting, consistent with
Council directives.
(Ord. 200204, passed 2-4-2020)
CODE OF ETHICS
§ 31.70 PURPOSE.
   (A)   A Code of Ethics for city officials is established to reinforce
existing state law and to supplement state law as necessary to ensure ethical
behavior in the conduct of city business.
   (B)   The proper operation of democratic government requires city officials
to be independent, impartial, and responsible; and that no city official permit
any interest, financial or otherwise, direct or indirect, or engagement in any
business, transaction, or professional activity to conflict with the proper
discharge of duties in the public interest; that governmental decisions and
policies be made in the proper channels of the governmental structure; that
public office not be used for illegal or improper personal gain; and that city
officials shall at all times strive to avoid even the appearance of impropriety
or partisanship. The City Council shall be maintained as a nonpartisan body.
(Ord. 120508, passed 5-8-2012)
§ 31.71 SCOPE.
   This Code of Ethics shall apply to elected and appointed officials of the
City of Sunset Valley.
(Ord. 120508, passed 5-8-2012)
§ 31.72 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS ENTITY. A sole proprietorship, partnership, firm, corporation,
holding company, joint-stock company, receivership, trust, or any other entity
recognized by law.
   CITY OFFICIAL. The Mayor, every member of the City Council, City
Administrator, Assistant City Administrator, City Secretary, department heads,
and members of the Board of Adjustment, Zoning Commission, and other committees
appointed by the City Council. Neither the applicability of any provision of
this subchapter to any CITY OFFICIAL who is also an employee of the city, nor
any reprimand or other remedy imposed on any such employee pursuant to this
subchapter shall operate to limit any other discipline or action that may be
taken by the city with respect to such person's employment with the city.
   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. Any information that a city official would be
privy to because of the official's position but otherwise is not available to
the public under the provisions of the Texas Public Information Act (Tex. Gov't
Code Ch. 552).
   GIFT. A favor, hospitality, or economic benefit other than compensation but
which does not include campaign contributions reported as required by state
law, gifts received from a relative if given on account of kinship.
   SUBSTANTIAL INTEREST. An interest in a business entity if a city official
(a) owns 10% or more of voting stock or shares of the business entity; (b) owns
10% or more or $15,000 or more of the fair market value of the business entity;
or (c) if funds received from the business entity exceed 10% or more of the
person's gross income for the previous year. A city official has a SUBSTANTIAL
INTEREST in real property if he or she has a legal or equitable interest in the
property and the interest has a market value of $2,500 or more. A city official
also has a SUBSTANTIAL INTEREST as defined herein if a person related to the
city official in the first degree of consanguinity or affinity, as determined
under Tex. Gov't Code Ch. 573, has a SUBSTANTIAL INTEREST.
   VENDOR. A person, business, or corporation who sells goods or services.
(Ord. 120508, passed 5-8-2012)
§ 31.73 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.
   (A)   General provisions.
      (1)   No city official shall intentionally or knowingly disclose to any
person not acting as an agent or contractor for the city with respect to such
information any confidential information gained by reason of official position
concerning the property, operations, policies or affairs of the city, or use
such confidential information for advantage in connection with the city
official's substantial interest. Participation in a candidate forum to which
all candidates are invited made available through the consent of the City
Council shall be not be considered improper use of city facility.
      (2)   No city official shall intentionally or knowingly use one's
official position or city owned facilities, equipment, or supplies, or exercise
any authority on behalf of the city, or use city owned equipment or facilities
for advantage in connection with the city official's substantial interest, or
in connection with any political campaign.
      (3)   Except as otherwise specifically authorized by ordinance, no city
official shall intentionally or knowingly appear before the body of which the
official is a member while representing any other person, group, association,
interest, or business entity.
      (4)   No city official shall, for financial consideration, intentionally
or knowingly represent directly or indirectly any private person, group, or
interest other than himself or herself or a family member before any
department, commission or board of the city.
      (5)   No city official shall vote on or participate in any decision
making process if the official has a substantial interest affected by the
outcome of the matter under consideration.
      (6)   None of the foregoing shall be construed to prohibit any city
official from representing his or her interest in his or her owner-occupied
homestead before the Council, board, commission or any department.
   (B)   Gifts. No city official shall intentionally or knowingly solicit or
accept any contribution, gift, or economic benefit from a third party other
than the city with actual or constructive knowledge that it is:
      (1)   Offered or given with intent to influence the judgment or
discretion of such official; or
      (2)   Given in consideration of the favorable exercise of such official's
judgment or discretion in the past.
(Ord. 120508, passed 5-8-2012)
§ 31.74 DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST.
   (A)   If any city official has a substantial interest involved in any
decision pending before the body of which the city official is a member, the
city official shall not vote or otherwise participate in the consideration of
the matter.
   (B)   (1)   A city official shall publicly disclose, verbally or in writing,
the nature and extent of a substantial interest to the body on which the city
official serves prior to any discussion or determination of a matter affecting
such substantial interest or immediately upon discovery that such substantial
interest is affected. The statement of disclosure shall be included in the
official minutes of the body. The city official shall also promptly file an
affidavit with the City Secretary disclosing the nature and extent of the
substantial interest, and the affidavit shall be included in the official
minutes of the body. The city official shall recuse himself or herself from any
vote on such matter.
      (2)   To avoid the appearance and risk of impropriety, a city official
may not take any official action that the official knows is likely to affect a
substantial interest of a business entity for which the city official serves as
an officer or director or serves in any policy-making position.
   (C)   A city official having a substantial interest in the outcome of a
matter under consideration shall disclose that the official has a substantial
interest and recuse himself or herself immediately from voting and from the
discussion of the matter.
(Ord. 120508, passed 5-8-2012)
§ 31.75 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The City Council may enforce the provisions in this subchapter via:
      (1)   Private reprimand; and/or
      (2)   Public reprimand;
      (3)   An agreement regarding steps to atone for past ethical conduct and
prevent future ethical conduct; and/or
      (4)   Otherwise as provided by applicable law, including a request for
prosecution of any offense provided by state or federal law.
   (B)   The City Secretary shall be the person responsible for receiving
complaints, unless the complaints regarding violation of this subchapter
concern the City Secretary, in which case the City Administrator shall receive
the complaints.
   (C)   Complaints will be investigated by the City Attorney in consultation
with the City Administrator, who will receive regular oral or written reports
regarding progress. The City Attorney shall fully investigate complaints within
two weeks, or, if further investigation is required, the City Attorney shall
report to the City Council at the next Council meeting following the expiration
of two weeks.
   (D)   The City Council shall make all final decisions regarding violations
of this subchapter, except those that may be prosecuted pursuant to applicable
state or federal law. The person accused of violating this subchapter shall
have an opportunity to speak on his or her behalf at the meeting where the City
Council considers the violation of this subchapter.
   (E)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be interpreted to circumvent, alter,
restrict the mandates of state or federal law, or preclude action for removal
of a member of a governing body of a general-law municipality under Tex. Loc.
Gov't Code Ch. 21, Subch. B.
   (F)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be interpreted to replace or
supersede any criminal sanctions prescribed by state or federal law.
(Ord. 120508, passed 5-8-2012)
CHAPTER 32: FISCAL YEAR; FINANCE AND TAXATION; FEES
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Assessed ration for taxes
   
32.02   Municipal Court Building Security Fund
   
32.03   Municipal Court Technology Fund
Fiscal Year
   
32.15   Fiscal year set
   
32.16   Levy, assessment and collection of taxes
   
32.17   Budget Officer
   
32.18   Creating budget
   
32.19   Public hearing on budget
   
32.20   Vote on proposal
   
32.21   Taxable property; values
   
32.22   Vote on adoption
   
32.23   Exemptions
   
32.24   Recovery of costs
   
32.25   Payment by credit card
Cross-reference:
   Budget, see
TSO VII
   Municipal Court, see §
31.36
   Taxation and levies, see
TSO IX
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 ASSESSED RATION FOR TAXES.
   All property in the city shall be appraised and assessed by the Tax Assessor
of the city at 100% of fair cash market value.
(Ord. 800624, passed 6-24-1980)
§ 32.02 MUNICIPAL COURT BUILDING SECURITY FUND.
   (A)   Establishment of Municipal Court Building Security Fund.
      (1)   There is hereby created and established a Municipal Court Building
Security Fund (the "Fund") pursuant to Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure Article
102.017.
      (2)   The Municipal Court of the city (the "Municipal Court") is hereby
authorized and required to assess a Municipal Court building security fee (the
"fee") in the amount of $3 against all defendants convicted of a misdemeanor
offense by the Municipal Court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to
a separate assessment of the fee.
      (3)   A person is considered to have been convicted in a case if:
         (a)   Judgment, sentence, or both are imposed on the person;
         (b)   The person is placed on deferred disposition; or
         (c)   The Court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment
and sentence.
      (4)   The fee shall be collected on convictions for offenses committed on
or after this section is adopted.
      (5)   The Municipal Court Clerk is hereby authorized and required to
collect the fee and to pay same to the Treasury of the city. All fees so
collected and paid over to the Treasury of the city shall be segregated in the
Fund.
   (B)   Designated use of the Fund and administration.
      (1)   The Fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the
purchase of security devices and/or services for the building or buildings
housing the Municipal Court. Security devices and/or services shall include any
and all items described in Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure Article 102.017(d-
l).
      (2)   The Fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the
City Council.
(Ord. 190416-B, passed 4-16-2019)
§ 32.03 MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY FUND.
   (A)   Establishment of Municipal Court Technology Fund.
      (1)   There is hereby created and established a Municipal Court
Technology Fund (the "Fund") pursuant to Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure
Article 102.0172.
      (2)   The Fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may
be maintained in the general revenue account.
   (B)   Establishment of amount of the fee and assessment and collection.
      (1)   The fee shall be in the amount of $4.
      (2)   The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon
conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the Municipal Court as a cost of court.
A defendant is considered convicted if:
         (a)   Judgment, sentence, or both are imposed on the person;
         (b)   The person is placed on deferred disposition; or
         (c)   The Court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment
and sentence.
      (3)   The fee shall be collected on convictions for offenses committed on
or after this section is adopted.
      (4)   The Municipal Court Clerk is hereby authorized and required to
collect the fee and to pay same to the Treasury of the city. All fees so
collected and paid over to the Treasury of the city shall be segregated in the
Fund.
   (C)   Designated use of the Fund and administration.
      (1)   The Fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the
purchase of or to maintain technological enhancements for the Municipal Court.
Technological enhancements shall include any and all items described in Tex.
Code of Criminal Procedure Article 102.0172(d).
      (2)   The Fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the
City Council.
(Ord. 190416-C, passed 4-16-2019)
FISCAL YEAR
§ 32.15 FISCAL YEAR SET.
   The fiscal year for accounting and budgeting purposes of the city shall
begin on October 1 of each calendar year and shall terminate on September 30 of
the next succeeding calendar year.
(Ord. 820209, passed 2-9-1982)
§ 32.16 LEVY, ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF TAXES.
   The Council may levy, assess and collect the taxes as the Council may
determine, not to exceed for any one year 1-1/2% of the value of the taxable
property of the city.
(Ord. 820209, passed 2-9-1982)
§ 32.17 BUDGET OFFICER.
   The Mayor shall serve as the Budget Officer for the Council and shall timely
prepare each year a budget to cover all proposed expenditures of the city for
the succeeding fiscal year, in accordance with Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code Ch. 102.
(Ord. 820209, passed 2-9-1982)
§ 32.18 CREATING BUDGET.
   The budget prepared by the Mayor shall be filed with the City Secretary by
August 1, or as soon thereafter as practicable, but in any event not less than
30 days prior to the time the Council levies taxes for the upcoming fiscal
year.
(Ord. 820209, passed 2-9-1982)
§ 32.19 PUBLIC HEARING ON BUDGET.
   The Council shall, each year, provide for a public hearing on the budget to
take place not less than 15 days after the budget was filed with the City
Secretary by the Mayor and prior to the making of the tax levy. As soon as
practicable after the conclusion of the hearing, but in any event prior to the
levying of taxes for the budget, the budget prepared by the Mayor shall be
acted upon by the Council.
(Ord. 820209, passed 2-9-1982)
§ 32.20 VOTE ON PROPOSAL.
   As soon after the budget hearing as practicable, the Council shall vote on a
proposal to consider imposition of a tax rate.
(Ord. 820209, passed 2-9-1982)
§ 32.21 TAXABLE PROPERTY; VALUES.
   (A)   Upon receipt of the appraised roll from the County Appraisal District/
the City Tax Assessor-Collector shall determine the total value of property
taxable by the city and the values of property added to the appraisal roll
since the preceding year by annexation and improvements (“new property”), in
accordance with Tex. Tax Code § 26.04(a) (1981).
   (B)   The Assessor-Collector shall submit the appraisal roll, showing the
values of all property and taxable value of new property to the Council, in
accordance with Tex. Tax Code Ch. 25.
   (C)   The Mayor of the city shall subtract from the total amount of property
taxes imposed by the city in the preceding year the amounts of taxes imposed in
the preceding year in the following situations:
      (1)   To pay principal and interest of lawfully authorized evidences of
indebtedness of the city;
      (2)   On property in territory no longer in the city limits;
      (3)   On taxable value that is exempt in the current year; and
      (4)   On taxable value that is not taxable in the current year because
property appraised at market value in the preceding year is, required by law,
to be appraised at less than market value in the current year.
   (D)   The Mayor shall calculate the tax rate that, if applied to the total
taxable value submitted by the Assessor-Collector, less the taxable value of
new property, would impose the amount of taxes determined by division (C) above
(“calculated tax rate”). He or she shall add to that rate the amount that, if
added to the taxable value, would impose the amount of taxes needed to pay
principal and interest on lawfully authorized evidences of indebtedness and on
lawfully incurred contracted obligations providing security for payment of
principal and interest on evidences of indebtedness issued on behalf of the
city by other political subdivisions.
   (E)   By August 7, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the Mayor shall
publicize:
      (1)   The calculated tax rate, and the calculations used, and shall
submit the rate to the Council; and
      (2)   The estimated amount remaining at the end of the current fiscal
year that is not encumbered by debt obligations of:
         (a)   Interest and sinking funds balance; and
         (b)   Maintenance and operation or general fund balances.
(Ord. 820209, passed 2-9-1982)
§ 32.22 VOTE ON ADOPTION.
   (A)   By September 1, or as soon thereafter as practicable and after
adoption of a budget for the succeeding fiscal year, the Council shall vote on
the adoption of an ordinance setting a tax rate and shall notify the Assessor-
Collector of the rate adopted. If the tax rate proposed to be adopted by the
ordinance is not in excess of 3% of the calculated tax rate, then same may be
adopted without another hearing.
   (B)   No property taxes may be imposed until a tax rate for the year has
been adopted.
   (C)   The Council may not adopt an ordinance setting a tax rate in excess of
the calculated tax rate by more than 3% until it has held a public bearing on
the proposed income in accordance with Tex. Tax Code §§ 26.05 and 26.06 (1981).
(Ord. 820209, passed 2-9-1982)
§ 32.23 EXEMPTIONS.
   The city hereby exempts $3,000 of the appraised value of the residence
homestead of any individual who is disabled or is 65 years of age or older, as
provided in Tex. Tax Code § 11.13(d) and (e) (1981). Application for exemptions
hereunder shall be filed in accordance with Tex. Tax Code § 11.43.
(Ord. 820209, passed 2-9-1982)
§ 32.24 RECOVERY OF COSTS.
   In addition to other costs authorized by law, the city is entitled to
recover the following costs and expenses in a suit to collect a delinquent tax:
   (A)   All usual court costs, including the cost of serving process;
   (B)   Expense of foreclosure sale;
   (C)   Reasonable expenses, subject to Court approval, incurred by the city
in determining the name, identity and location of necessary parties and in
procuring necessary legal descriptions of the property on which a delinquent
tax is due; and
   (D)   Reasonable attorney fees approved by the Court, not to exceed 15% of
the total amount of taxes, interest and penalty adjudged due.
(Ord. 820209, passed 2-9-1982)
§ 32.25 PAYMENT BY CREDIT CARD.
   (A)   Payment of any amount owing to the city for utility service or
charges, fines for any offense, application fees and any other amounts owing to
the city may be made by credit card, subject to such routine procedures for
verifying such transaction as may be determined by the city council or the city
administrator from time to time.
   (B)   As permitted by Tex. Business and Commerce Code § 604A.0021, a
surcharge in an amount equal to 3% of the amount of a payment by credit card
shall be due and owing at the time of payment. Amounts paid by credit card
shall be applied first to such surcharge and then to the principal or other
balance due and owing to the city at the time of such payment. The amount of
the surcharge shall be rounded down to the nearest one cent.
   (C)   The City Administrator shall adopt reasonable procedures to ensure
that each payor is apprised of the surcharge in advance of a payment by credit
card. A notice of surcharge to a payor in connection with a payment shall be
sufficient for all subsequent payments by such payor. No person shall be
required to use a credit card for any payment made to the city.
(Ord. 180206-A, passed 2-6-2018)
CHAPTER 33: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
33.01   Organization
   
33.02   Emergency Management Director; powers and duties
   
33.03   Emergency Management Plan
   
33.04   Interjurisdictional Program
   
33.05   Override
   
33.06   Liability
   
33.07   Commitment of funds
   
33.08   Limitations
   
33.09   Prohibited activity
 
   
33.99   Penalty
§ 33.01 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   There exists the Office of Emergency Management Director of the city,
which shall be held by the Mayor in accordance with state law.
   (B)   An Emergency Management Coordinator may be appointed by and serve at
the pleasure of the Director.
   (C)   The Director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive
emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and
responsibilities set forth in this chapter. He or she may delegate authority
for execution of these duties to the Coordinator, but ultimate responsibility
for the execution shall remain with the Director.
   (D)   (1)   The operational Emergency Management Organization of the city
shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the
Director in the Emergency Management Plan, as well as organized volunteer
groups.
      (2)   The functions and duties of the Organization shall be distributed
among the officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the Emergency
Management Plan.
(Ord. 950307, passed 3-7-1995)
§ 33.02 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Emergency Management Director shall
include the following:
   (A)   Conduct an on-going survey of actual or potential hazards which
threaten life and property within the city and an on-going program of
identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which
would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of the hazards if a
disaster did occur;
   (B)   Supervision of the development and approval of an Emergency Management
Plan for the city and shall recommend for adoption by the City Council all
mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of the plan;
   (C)   Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may
not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days, except by or
with the consent of the City Council. Any order or proclamation declaring,
continuing or terminating, a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and
general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the City Secretary;
   (D)   Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which
are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter. The proclamations,
regulations or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to
bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless
circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with
the City Secretary;
   (E)   Direction and control of the operations of the City Emergency
Management Organization as well as the training of emergency management
personnel;
   (F)   Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that
may arise within the Emergency Management Organization of the city;
   (G)   Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state,
regional or federal emergency management organizations;
   (H)   Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any
department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the
Emergency Management Plan;
   (I)   Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in
cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political
subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable,
of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with other
municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency
management efforts;
   (J)   Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all
necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions
which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within
the city;
   (K)   Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the City Attorney, for
use of private property for public shelter and other purposes;
   (L)   Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies
and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein; and
   (M)   Other requirements as specified in the State Disaster Act of 1975,
Tex. Gov’t Code Ch. 418.
(Ord. 950307, passed 3-7-1995)
§ 33.03 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   A comprehensive Emergency Management Plan shall be developed and
maintained in a current state.
   (B)   The Plan shall set forth the form of the Organization; establish and
designate divisions and functions; assign responsibilities, tasks, duties and
powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of
this chapter. As provided by state law, the Plan shall follow the standards and
criteria established by the State Division of Emergency Management.
   (C)   Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology
shall conform to the recommendations of the State Division of Emergency
Management.
   (D)   When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to
perform the functions assigned by the Plan and to maintain their portion of the
Plan in a current state of readiness at all times.
   (E)   The Emergency Management Plan shall be considered supplementary to
this chapter and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster.
(Ord. 950307, passed 3-7-1995)
§ 33.04 INTERJURISDICTIONAL PROGRAM.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized to join with the County Judge and the mayors
of the other cities in the county in the formation of an interjurisdictional
emergency management program for the county and shall have the authority to
cooperate in the preparation of an interjurisdictional Emergency Management
Plan and in the appointment of a joint Emergency Management Coordinator, as
well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of
emergency management insofar as the program may affect the city.
(Ord. 950307, passed 3-7-1995)
§ 33.05 OVERRIDE.
   At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated
pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override
all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter
may be inconsistent therewith.
(Ord. 950307, passed 3-7-1995)
§ 33.06 LIABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions
for the protection of the public peace, health and safety and neither the city,
the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm,
partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of the agents
thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply
with, any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result
of the activity.
   (B)   Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who
voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license of privilege,
or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any
part or parts of the real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering
persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attach or natural or
human-made disaster shall, together with his or her successors in interest, if
any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or
about the real estate or premises under the license, privilege or other
permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of the person.
(Ord. 950307, passed 3-7-1995)
§ 33.07 COMMITMENT OF FUNDS.
   (A)   No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city
in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter
without prior approval by the City Council, nor shall any person have any right
to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific
approval of the City Council unless during a declared disaster.
   (B)   During a declared disaster, the Mayor may expend and/or commit public
funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of
health, life or property.
(Ord. 950307, passed 3-7-1995)
§ 33.08 LIMITATIONS.
   This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or
federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule or regulation.
(Ord. 950307, passed 3-7-1995)
§ 33.09 PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or
delay any member of the Emergency Management Organization in the enforcement of
any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display
any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the
Emergency Management Organization of the city, unless authority to do so has
been granted to the person by the proper officials.
   (C)   Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so
as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the
penalties imposed by this chapter.
(Ord. 950307, passed 3-7-1995) Penalty, see §
33.99
§ 33.99 PENALTY.
   Violations of the provisions of this chapter effect the general welfare and
safety of the residents of the city and, upon conviction, shall be punishable
by fine not to exceed $2,000.
(Ord. 950307, passed 3-7-1995)
CHAPTER 34: PERSONNEL
Section
   
34.01   Human Resources Policy Manual
   
34.02   Updated service credits
§ 34.01 HUMAN RESOURCES POLICY MANUAL POLICY.
    The City of Sunset Valley Human Resources Policy Manual attached to
Ordinance 100706-A as Appendix “A” is hereby adopted and shall supersede the
existing Human Resources Policy Manual.
(Ord. 870901A, passed 9-1-1987; Ord. 100706-A, passed - -)
§ 34.02 UPDATED SERVICE CREDITS.
   (A)   Pursuant to Tex. Gov’t Code § 853.502, Subchapter F of Chapter 853,
Title 8, as amended, the city hereby elects to allow eligible members in its
employment to establish credit in the State Municipal Retirement System for
active military service performed as a member of the armed forces or armed
forces reserves of the United States or an auxiliary of the armed forces or
armed forces reserves. ELIGIBLE MEMBERS, as used herein, shall be those
employees meeting the criteria set forth in Tex. Gov’t Code §§ 853.502(b) and
853.503 of Subchapter F, and the amount and use of creditable military service
shall be as further set forth in Tex. Gov’t Code § 853.505.
   (B)   In order to establish credit for military service hereunder, a member
must deposit with the State Municipal Retirement System (in that member’s
individual account in the Employees Saving Fund), an amount equal to the number
of months for which credit is sought, multiplied by $15. The city agrees that
its account in the Municipality Accumulation Fund is to be charged at the time
of the member’s retirement with an amount equal to the accumulated amount paid
by the member for military service credit, multiplied by the city’s current
service matching ratio in effect at the date the member applies for the
military service credit.
   (C)   This section shall become effective on 6-19-2001.
(Ord. 970930, passed 9-30-1997; Ord. 010619, passed 6-19-2001)
CHAPTER 35: LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Section
   
35.01   Adoption of program
   
35.02   Funding authorized
   
35.03   Specific authorization
   
35.04   Effective date
§ 35.01 ADOPTION OF PROGRAM.
   A program for economic development is hereby adopted, as set forth in this
chapter, for the purposes included in the recitals of the ordinance codified
herein, all of which form a substantive part of this chapter.
(Ord. 080318-A, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 35.02 FUNDING AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   Funds in any fiscal year may be expended, as authorized by specific
action of the City Council, for the purpose of business attraction, retention,
growth and expansion in the city.
   (B)   The city’s municipal building(s), facilities and resources may be used
for the meetings or gatherings, as available.
(Ord. 080318-A, passed 3-18-2008; Ord. 170620-B, passed 6-20-2017)
§ 35.03 SPECIFIC AUTHORIZATION.
   Funds may be budgeted for the economic development activities that enhance
the local economy and that establish the local economic development program. A
program must further one or more of the following objectives.
   (A)   To improve the efficiency, competitiveness and the sustainability of
businesses.
   (B)   To improve the community's ability to retain local dollars.
   (C)   To attract new employers and employees.
   (D)   To encourage or incentivize business formation and local business
ownership.
   (E)   To encourage inter-business cooperation.
   (F)   To develop the city as a destination, capturing resident and non-
resident dollars.
   (G)   To improve or create infrastructure that will retain or create
business enterprises.
(Ord. 080318-A, passed 3-18-2008; Ord. 170620-B, passed 6-20-2017)
§ 35.04 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be effective immediately upon adoption.
(Ord. 080318-A, passed 3-18-2008)
CHAPTER 36: RESERVED
CHAPTER 37: SURPLUS AND SALVAGE PROPERTY
Section
General Provisions
   
37.01   Definitions
   
37.02   Disposition of surplus, salvage or data processing property
   
37.03   Notice requirement
   
37.04   Destruction or donation of surplus, salvage or data processing property
   
37.05   Rejection of offer
   
37.06   Record
   
37.07   Proceeds
   
37.08   Title
Seized and Abandoned Property
   
37.15   Receiver of seized and abandoned property
   
37.16   Standard operating procedure for destruction of controlled substance
property, plants, and other miscellaneous items
 
   
37.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 37.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCOUNTANT. The person designated by the Council to serve as accountant,
financial officer or similar such function.
   DATA PROCESSING. Information technology equipment and related services
designed for the automated storage, manipulation, and retrieval of data by
electronic or mechanical means. (Tex. Gov't Code § 2054.003)
   SALVAGE PROPERTY. City property, other than items routinely discarded as
waste that because of use, time, accident, or any other cause is so worn,
damaged, or obsolete that it has little value for the purposes for which it was
originally intended.
   SURPLUS PROPERTY. City property that is not salvage property or items
routinely discarded as waste; is not currently needed by the city; is not
required for the city's foreseeable needs; and possesses some usefulness for
the purpose for which it was intended.
(Ord. 990706, passed 7-6-1999; Ord. 160802, passed 8-2-2016)
§ 37.02 DISPOSITION OF SURPLUS, SALVAGE OR DATA PROCESSING PROPERTY.
   (A)   A department that determines it has surplus or salvage property shall
create a list for the accountant of the property's description, number,
locations, condition, original cost or value (if known), date of acquisition
(if known), whether the property is surplus, salvage property or data
processing property, and the resale value of the property.
   (B)   The accountant shall present the list to the City Administrator or his
or her designee to submit the list for Council approval at a future Council
meeting.
   (C)   Once the Council has approved the list, the City Administrator or his
or her designee may dispose of the property by way of competitive sealed bids,
public auction, or internet auction, including a sale using a private internet
auction site, or as otherwise provided in this division or division (D) below.
The city may contract with a private vendor to assist with the sale of the
property.
      (1)   Every sale of an item of property with a value equal to or
exceeding $1,000 must be made by way of competitive sealed bids, public
auction, or internet auction and in accordance with the notice requirements of
§
37.03; and
      (2)   Every sale of an item of property with a value of less than $1,000
must be made by way of competitive sealed bids or internet auction available
exclusively to the residents and employees of the city;
      (3)   Sale of the city's surplus, salvage, or data processing property
may be directly to other governmental entities (local, state, or federal)
without having to follow the notice requirement provisions of §
37.03;
      (4)   Surplus, salvage, or data processing property maybe offered as a
trade-in for new property of the same general type if the City Administrator
considers that action to be in the best interests of the city; This section
does not apply to the disposal of abandoned or impounded property for which
state law sets forth specific procedures.
   (D)   Disposal of surplus, salvage, or data processing property may be made
pursuant to §
37.04 if:
      (1)   A bidding method of disposal is used and no bids are received at
auction or by the deadline for receipt of bids, for property with a value equal
to or exceeding $1,000; or
      (2)   A bidding method of disposal is used and no bids are received at
auction or by the deadline for receipt of bids for property with a value of
less than $1,000.
(Ord. 990706, passed 7-6-1999; Ord. 160802, passed 8-2-2016)
§ 37.03 NOTICE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Provided that the City Council has approved the list of items to be
sold pursuant to §
37.02, the City Administrator or his or her designee shall:
      (1)   Post on the city's website information detailing the sale of any
surplus, salvage, or data processing property with a value exceeding $1,000;
      (2)   Publicly post and mail to each resident and employee of the city a
notice of the sale of any surplus, salvage, or data processing property with a
value under $1,000.
   (B)   The notice shall provide a reasonable description of the property,
state whether the sale will be made through a public auction or competitive
sealed bids, and must provide the date, time, place, and manner in which bids
will be received; and
   (C)   The notice shall be posted at least ten days prior to the auction.
(Ord. 990706, passed 7-6-1999; Ord. 160802, passed 8-2-2016)
§ 37.04 DESTRUCTION OR DONATION OF SURPLUS, SALVAGE OR DATA PROCESSING
PROPERTY.
   If the city cannot otherwise sell or dispose of the property in accordance
with §
37.02, or the Council has determined that the property has no resale value, it
may be:
   (A)   Destroyed as worthless; or
   (B)   Donated to an organization that would benefit from the property.
(Ord. 160802, passed 8-2-2016)
§ 37.05 REJECTION OF OFFER.
   The City Administrator or his or her designee conducting the sale may reject
any offer to purchase surplus, salvage, or data processing property if he or
she finds the rejection to be in the best interests of the city.
(Ord. 990706, passed 7-6-1999; Ord. 160802, passed 8-2-2016)
§ 37.06 RECORD.
   The City Administrator or his or her designee shall keep a record of each
item of surplus, salvage, or data processing property sold, the sale price of
each or each item sold or destroyed, and adjustments shall be made accordingly
to the city's inventory.
(Ord. 990706, passed 7-6-1999; Ord. 160802, passed 8-2-2016)
§ 37.07 PROCEEDS.
   The proceeds from the sale of surplus, salvage, or data processing property
shall be deposited into the General Fund of the city.
(Ord. 990706, passed 7-6-1999; Ord. 160802, passed 8-2-2016)
§ 37.08 TITLE.
   If a purchaser of surplus, salvage, or data processing property at a sale
held in accordance with this chapter complies in good faith with the conditions
of the sale and the applicable rules, the purchaser obtains good title to the
property.
(Ord. 990706, passed 7-6-1999; Ord. 160802, passed 8-2-2016)
SEIZED AND ABANDONED PROPERTY
§ 37.15 RECEIVER OF SEIZED AND ABANDONED PROPERTY.
   The Police Chief is hereby designated as the person to receive and dispose
of abandoned property or property seized by peace officers of the city, in
compliance with Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure § 18.17.
(Ord. 940315C, passed 3-15-1994)
§ 37.16 STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE FOR DESTRUCTION OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE
PROPERTY, PLANTS, AND OTHER MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS.
   (A)   Definitions.
      (1)   EXCESS QUANTITY. For any item shall be defined by Tex.
Administrative Code, Title 37, § 13.161.
      (2)   ITEM. When used in this section, refers to controlled substance
property, controlled substance plant, simulated controlled substance, volatile
chemical or related inhalant paraphernalia, or abusable glue, aerosol paint, or
related inhalant paraphernalia, as those terms are used in the Tex. Health and
Safety Code, Chapters 481-485.
   (B)   Maximum storage period. The maximum storage period for any item is 90
days.
   (C)   Mandatory destruction authorization. Destruction authorization must be
sought for any excess quantity of an item or for any item that has been stored
for the maximum storage period.
   (D)   Report and investigation required. All non-supervisory peace officers
must immediately report to a supervisor any unusual or suspicious incident or
probable breach of security that could be related to loss, alteration, or
substitution of an item. A supervisor receiving a report of an unusual or
suspicious incident or probable breach of security pursuant to this division,
or having personal knowledge of an unusual or suspicious incident or probable
breach of security that could be related to loss, alteration, or substitution
of an item must make a thorough investigation of such incident, including
laboratory reanalysis if necessary.
   (E)   Destruction of evidentiary exhibits. The Police Chief must contact the
submitting officer, the submitting agency, or the office of the prosecutor
responsible for the case to seek:
      (1)   Specific written authorization to destroy all or part of a
particular exhibit; or
      (2)   Blanket written authorization to destroy all or part of any exhibit
that meets certain criteria.
   (F)   Two-witness rule. No item may be destroyed without at least two
persons present to witness the actual destruction. One witness must be a
supervisor or, if not, a person expressly designated by a supervisor to witness
that specific destruction incident. Where a law enforcement agency or peace
officer destroys an item, no two persons may serve as the sole witnesses to
consecutive destruction incidents, at least two of the witnesses must be peace
officers, and at least one of the witnesses must be a city agent not employed
by the Police Department.
   (G)   Compliance with statutes and regulations. Any party seeking to destroy
an item pursuant to this subchapter must also comply with all applicable
statutes and regulations.
(Ord. 940315C, passed 3-15-1994)
§ 37.99 PENALTY.
   Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than $25, nor more than $300.
(Ord. 990706, passed 7-6-1999)
CHAPTER 38: SMOKING POLICIES
Section
   
38.01   Definitions
   
38.02   Not to excuse noncompliance with other measures
   
38.03   General prohibition of smoking in public places
   
38.04   Commission of offenses; exceptions
   
38.05   Designation of smoking rooms within hotels and motels restricted
   
38.06   Placement of signs
   
38.07   Exceptions for private social functions
   
38.08   Effective date
 
   
38.99   Penalty
§ 38.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Sunset Valley, Texas.
   CITY FACILITY. Any building or facility, or portions thereof, owned,
occupied and under the management and control of the city, and outdoor areas
owned or leased by the city and used by the general public, including but not
limited to parks, greenspaces, conservation areas, and playgrounds. The part of
an open-air parking lot that is more than 15 feet from the nearest door of an
enclosed space will not be included in this definition.
   E-CIGARETTE. Any electronic oral device, such as one composed of a heating
element, battery, and/or electronic circuit, which provides a vapor of nicotine
or any other substances, and the use or inhalation of which simulates smoking.
The term shall include any such device, whether manufactured, distributed,
marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, or under any other
product name or descriptor.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who is employed by an employer in consideration for
monetary compensation or profit.
   EMPLOYER. Any person, organization or other entity that employs one or more
persons.
   MOTEL/HOTEL.  A building or group of buildings developed as an integral unit
in which there are guest rooms, each of which has its own bath and toilet
facilities, in which living and sleeping areas are combined into one room, and
which may be rented on a daily basis and a desk or lobby service and telephone,
maid, linen, room and similar services. Guest rooms may have individual
entrances.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any enclosed indoor area under the control of an
employer to which employees have access during the course of employment,
including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, employee
restrooms, conference rooms and employee cafeterias; provided, however, that a
private residence is not a place of employment for purposes of this chapter.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any enclosed indoor area that is used by the general public or
that is a place of employment, and includes, but is not limited to, stores,
offices and other commercial establishments, restaurants, public and private
primary and secondary schools and institutions of higher education, hospitals
and health care facilities, nursing and convalescent homes, government
subsidized senior citizen residential facilities, elevators, theaters or movie
houses, libraries, museums, city facilities, service lines and public
conveyances such as transit system buses, intrastate buses, planes or trains,
and any outdoor areas used by the general public, including but not limited to
parks, greenspaces, conservation areas, and playgrounds. Notwithstanding the
foregoing that part of the following areas that are not less than 15 feet from
the nearest door of an enclosed space and from any city facility are excepted
from the definition of PUBLIC PLACE: open-air parking lot and an area of a
patio or outdoor area for eating and drinking that is under the control of an
adjacent commercial use and which is clearly indicated by signage to be a
smoking area.
   RESTAURANT. A commercial establishment primarily engaged in the sale of
prepared foods for on-premises consumption.
   SERVICE LINE. Any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for
or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the
exchange of money.
   SMOKE or SMOKING. Includes the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar
or cigarette of any kind or any other lighted smoking equipment or device, and
the lighting of, burning, emitting or exhaling the smoke of any tobacco
product, weed, filler or plant of any kind in a cigarette, cigar, pipe or any
other device. Smoking also includes the use of an e-cigarette which creates a
vapor, in any manner or in any form, or the use of any electronic smoking
device.
   USER. Includes, but is not limited to, user, patron, customer, employee and
licensee.
(Ord. 910108A, passed 1-22-1991; Ord. 980407, passed 4-7-1998; Ord. 140617-B,
passed 6-17-2014)
§ 38.02 NOT TO EXCUSE NONCOMPLIANCE WITH OTHER MEASURES.
   Nothing in this chapter excuses noncompliance with any state or federal law
or any other applicable ordinance of the city, or any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, which prohibits smoking.
(Ord. 980407, passed 4-7-1998; Ord. 140617-B, passed 6-17-2014)
§ 38.03 GENERAL PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   Smoking is prohibited in all public places within the city, except for
within areas designated as smoking areas in accordance with §
38.05.
   (B)   Smoking is prohibited in any city facility.
   (C)   Smoking is prohibited within 15 feet from an entrance or operable
window of an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited.
(Ord. 910108A, passed 1-22-1991; Ord. 980407, passed 4-7-1998; Ord. 140617-B,
passed 6-17-2014) Penalty, see §
38.99
§ 38.04 COMMISSION OF OFFENSES; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if he or she:
      (1)    Knowingly or intentionally smokes in any public place other than
exclusively in an area that has been designated as a smoking area in accordance
with the provisions of §
38.05;
      (2)   Is the owner, lessee or other person in charge of any public place
and knowingly or intentionally permits or fails to make a reasonable effort to
prevent commission by another of the offense described in division (1) above
within the public place;
      (3)   Is the owner, lessee or other person in charge of any public place
and knowingly or intentionally fails to have prominently displayed reasonably
sized signs required by this chapter; or
      (4)   Commits any other violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Exceptions. This chapter does not apply to:
      (1)   A dwelling, as defined in Chapter 1 of the city's Land Development
Code that is used for a residential use;
      (2)   A hotel or motel room designated as a smoking room and rented to a
person, provided that the hotel or motel complies with §
38.05;
      (3)   A retail tobacco store solely for the sale and purchase of tobacco;
      (4)   A facility operated by a fraternal organization for a charitable or
educational function if the premises is controlled by the organization; and
      (5)   The interior of a motor vehicle.
(Ord. 910108A, passed 1-22-1991; Ord. 980407, passed 4-7-1998; Ord. 140617-B,
passed 6-17-2014) Penalty, see §
38.99
§ 38.05 DESIGNATION OF SMOKING ROOMS WITHIN HOTELS AND MOTELS RESTRICTED.
   A hotel and motel may not designate more than 25% of its rooms that are
rented for temporary overnight occupation by the public as smoking rooms.
(Ord. 910108A, passed 1-22-1991; Ord. 980407, passed 4-7-1998; Ord. 140617-B,
passed 6-17-2014)
§ 38.06 PLACEMENT OF SIGNS.
   The owner, lessee or other person in charge of a public place shall place a
reasonably-sized sign or signs, visible at each entrance to the premises,
notifying persons entering the premises that smoking is prohibited and that
violation of the prohibition is an offense punishable by a fine not to exceed
$200. This requirement shall not apply to public streets and sidewalks, but the
city is authorized to post signs in any right-of-way providing notice that
smoking is prohibited on any street or sidewalk.
(Ord. 910108A, passed 1-22-1991; Ord. 980407, passed 4-7-1998; Ord. 140617-B,
passed 6-17-2014)
§ 38.07 EXCEPTIONS FOR PRIVATE SOCIAL FUNCTIONS.
   (A)   It is an exception to the application of §
38.03 that the person smoking tobacco or in possession of the burning tobacco
product is present at an event described in division (A). A private social or
business event must be confined to an entire room or enclosed area for a
special meeting or function and the event and the premises used must be subject
to the control of the sponsor of the function. Premises used for such a private
social or business event include, but are not limited to, areas of public
places, such as hotels, which are normally rented out to private groups, and to
areas of bowling centers used by bowling leagues during league play, but shall
not apply to any city facility.
   (B)   It is an exception to the enforcement of §
38.04 (A)(2) and (3) against a sponsor of a private social event described in
division (A) if the smoking occurs in the enclosed space occupied for the
private social event and signs providing notice that smoking is permitted at
such private social event are displayed.
   (C)   No exceptions from the prohibition of smoking apply to events
described in division (A) shall apply to any city facility.
   (D)   Signs must be posted by the sponsor of an excepted private social of
business event described in division (A), stating that smoking will be allowed
at the event, before smoking at such event may be permitted.
(Ord. 910108A, passed 1-22-1991; Ord. 980407, passed 4-7-1998; Ord. 140617-B,
passed 6-17-2014)
§ 38.08 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be effective immediately upon adoption.
(Ord. 910108A, passed 1-22-1991; Ord. 980407, passed 4-7-1998; Ord. 140617-B,
passed 6-17-2014)
§ 38.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $200 per offense. Each and every day on which any violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such.
(Ord. 910108A, passed 1-22-1991; Ord. 980407, passed 4-7-1998; Ord. 140617-B,
passed 6-17-2014)
CHAPTER 39: POLICY FOR RECORDS MANAGEMENT
Section
   
39.01   Definition of local municipal government records
   
39.02   Definitions
   
39.03   City records declared public property
   
39.04   Policy
   
39.05   Designation of Records Management Officer
   
39.06   Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of
plan
   
39.07   Duties of Records Management Officer
   
39.08   Duties and responsibilities of department heads
   
39.09   Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state
   
39.10   Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records
under schedule
   
39.11   Destruction of unscheduled records
   
39.12   Records center
   
39.13   Micrographics
   
39.14   Schedule
§ 39.01 DEFINITION OF LOCAL MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT RECORDS.
   All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video
recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information
recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless
of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the
state, created or received by the city or any of its officers of employees
pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business, are hereby declared
to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or procedures authorized by
it and in no other manner.
(Ord. 901211, passed 12-11-1990)
§ 39.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Sunset Valley, Texas.
   DEPARTMENT HEAD. The officer who, by ordinance, order, or administrative
policy, is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records.
   DIRECTOR AND LIBRARIAN. The executive and administrative officer of the
Texas State Library and Archives Commission.
   ESSENTIAL RECORD. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or
continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, to the re-
creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection
and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
   PERMANENT RECORD. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a
records control schedule is given as permanent.
   RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULE. A document prepared by or under the authority of
the Records Management Officer listing the records maintained by the city,
their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the
records management program may require.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT. The application of management techniques to the
creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records
for the purposes of reducing costs and improving the efficiency of record
keeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the
management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of
essential permanent records, the economical and space effective storage of
inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports,
and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and
other records storage systems.
(Ord. 901211, passed 12-11-1990)
§ 39.03 CITY RECORDS DECLARED PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   All city records as defined in §
39.01 are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No city official or
employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right
to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The
unauthorized destruction, removal from files or use of such records is
prohibited.
(Ord. 901211, passed 12-11-1990)
§ 39.04 POLICY.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient,
economical and effective controls over the creation, distribution,
organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records
from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the
requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records
management practice.
(Ord. 901211, passed 12-11-1990)
§ 39.05 DESIGNATION OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER.
   The City Secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve
as the Records Management Officer for the city. As provided by state law, each
successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the Director
and Librarian of the Texas State Library within 30 days of the initial
designation or of taking up the office, as applicable.
(Ord. 901211, passed 12-11-1990)
§ 39.06 RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN TO BE DEVELOPED; APPROVAL OF PLAN; AUTHORITY OF
PLAN.
   (A)   The Records Management Officer shall develop a records management plan
for the city for submission to the City Council. The plan must contain policies
and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of
record keeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the city, and to
properly preserve those records of the city that are of historical value. The
plan must be designed to enable the Records Management Officer to carry out his
or her duties prescribed by state law and this chapter effectively.
   (B)   Once approved by the City Council, the records management plan shall
be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions,
bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and records shall
be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with
the plan.
   (C)   State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or record
keeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or
the records in the department head's care from the application of this chapter
and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the
department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management
program of the city.
(Ord. 901211, passed 12-11-1990)
§ 39.07 DUTIES OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER.
   In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, the Records Management
Officer shall:
   (A)   Administer the records management program and provide assistance to
department heads in its implementation;
   (B)   Plan, formulate, and prescribe records, disposition policies, systems,
standards, and procedures;
   (C)   In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and
establish a disaster plan for each city office and department to ensure maximum
availability of the records in order to re-establish operations quickly and
with minimum disruption and expense;
   (D)   Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the
historically valuable records of the city;
   (E)   Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for record
keeping supplies;
   (F)   Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform
filing system and a forms design and control system for the city;
   (G)   Provide records management advice and assistance to all city
departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and
by on-site consultation;
   (H)   Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by
the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the records
management program and the city's records control schedules are in compliance
with state regulations;
   (I)   Disseminate to the City Council and department heads information
concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government
records;
   (J)   Instruct city personnel in policies and procedures of the records
management plan and their duties in the records management program;
   (K)   Direct city personnel in the conduct of records inventories in
preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by
state law and this chapter;
   (L)   Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction,
or other disposition of the city is carried out in accordance with the policies
and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state
law;
   (M)   Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved
records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored
electronically, and the estimated cost and space saving as the result of such
disposal or disposition;
   (N)   Report annually to the City Council on the implementation of the
records management plan, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data
compiled under division (M) of this section; and
   (O)   Bring to the attention of the City Council non-compliance by
department heads or other city personnel with the policies and procedures of
the records management program or the Local Government Records Act.
(Ord. 901211, passed 12-11-1990)
§ 39.08 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEPARTMENT HEADS.
   In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, department heads
shall:
   (A)   Cooperate with the Records Management Officer in carrying out the
policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and
economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this
chapter;
   (B)   Adequately document the transaction of government business and the
services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his or her
staff are responsible; and
   (C)   Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their
preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in
accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program
of the city and the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 901211, passed 12-11-1990)
§ 39.09 RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULES TO BE DEVELOPED; APPROVAL; FILING WITH STATE.
   (A)   The Records Management Officer, in cooperation with department heads,
shall prepare records control schedules on a department-by-department basis,
listing all records created or received by the department and the retention
period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other
information regarding the disposition of city records as the records management
plan may require.
   (B)   Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed
by the Records Management Officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in
compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it
continues to reflect the record keeping procedures and needs of the department
and records management program of the city.
   (C)   Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule
for a department must be approved by the department head and the Mayor. If,
however, the department head and Mayor fail to approve said schedule or amended
schedule within 14 days of submission to them, the schedule or amended schedule
shall be deemed to have been adopted at the expiration of said 14 day period.
   (D)   Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to
and accepted for filing by the Director and Librarian as provided by state law.
If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make
it acceptable for filing. The Records Management Officer shall submit the
records control schedules to the Director and Librarian.
(Ord. 901211, passed 12-11-1990)
§ 39.10 IMPLEMENTATION OF RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULES; DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS
UNDER SCHEDULE.
   (A)   A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and
adopted under § 39.06 shall be implemented by the Records Management Officer
and department heads according to the policies and procedures of the records
management plan.
   (B)   A record whose retention period has expired on a records control
schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the
record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit, or
the department head requests in writing to the Records Management Officer that
the record be retained for an additional period.
   (C)   Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control
schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the Records
Management Officer from the Mayor.
(Ord. 901211, passed 12-11-1990)
§ 39.11 DESTRUCTION OF UNSCHEDULED RECORDS.
   A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control
schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same
manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the Records
Management Officer has submitted to and received from the Director and
Librarian an approved destruction authorization request.
(Ord. 901211, passed 12-11-1990)
§ 39.12 RECORDS CENTER.
   A record center, should one be established by the city, shall be developed
pursuant to the plan required by §
39.06 and shall be under the direct control and supervision of the Records
Management Officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use
of the records shall be contained in the records management plan developed
under §
39.06.
(Ord. 901211, passed 12-11-1990)
§ 39.13 MICROGRAPHICS.
   Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by
order of the city, all microfilming of records will be centralized and under
the direct supervision of the Records Management Officer. The city may direct
that its records be microfilmed or reproduced using an alternate method meeting
minimum requirements of state law. The records management plan will establish
policies and procedures for the microfilming of city records, including
policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards
and procedures for the microfilming of local government records established in
rules of the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. The plan will also
establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming,
and protocols for ensuring that a microfilming program that is exempted from
the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the
Records Management Officer as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency,
and compliance with Commission rules.
(Ord. 901211, passed 12-11-1990)
§ 39.14 SCHEDULE.
   On April 3, 1990, the City Council duly appointed the City Secretary to
serve as the Records Management Officer of the city. The development and
implementation schedule of this Records Management Program shall be consistent
with those prescribed in House Bill 1285, the Texas Local Government Records
Act, as follows:
   (A)   Adoption of program and copy thereof to be filed with Director and
Librarian of the Texas State Library and Archives Commissions no later than
January 1, 1991; and
   (B)   Records control schedules to be implemented and filed with the above
agency no later than January 2, 1995.
(Ord. 901211, passed 12-11-1990)
CHAPTER 40: CITY POLICIES
Section
Notice Procedures
   
40.01   Notice procedure for claims against the city for damages for death or
personal injury and damage to property
Revocation of Permits
   
40.10   Purpose
   
40.11   Definitions
   
40.12   Revocation of permit
   
40.13   Hearing before the City Council
   
40.14   Inspections
   
40.15   Extensions by the city
   
40.16   Application of subchapter
   
40.17   Recovery of costs
NOTICE PROCEDURES
§ 40.01 NOTICE PROCEDURE FOR CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY FOR DAMAGES FOR DEATH OR
PERSONAL INJURY AND DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
   (A)   Notice. Before the city shall be liable for damages to any person or
entity for death or personal injury, or for damage or injury to real or
personal property, written notice of such injury or damage must be given to the
city in accordance with the requirements of this section.
   (B)   The person injured or whose property is damaged, or such person's
authorized agent shall give written notice of such injury, death or damage to
the City Secretary at the city's main office, 2 Lone Oak Trail, Austin, Texas.
The City Secretary shall be the only agent of the city authorized to receive
the notice required by this section. A conveyance of the notice required by
this section to any official or agent other than the City Secretary or a
conveyance of information other than in writing shall not be effective to
comply with the requirements of this section.
   (C)   Deadline for notice. Written notice required by this section shall be
given not more than six months after the earliest date that the injury, death,
or damage to property occurs. Written notice shall be effective only when
actually received in the office listed in division (B) of of this section.
   (D)   Contents of notice. The written notice required by this section must
include the following information:
      (1)   All facts indicating when, where, and how the death, injury to
person(s) or damage to property occurred;
      (2)   The apparent extent of any injury or damage;
      (3)   The residence of the claimant, if still living, or address of the
representative making a claim on behalf of a decedent;
      (4)   The names and addresses of all witnesses to the occurrence forming
the basis of the claim or upon who claimant or claimant's representative rely
to establish the claim;
      (5)   The name and address of the claimant's representative, if any;
      (6)   Whether the injury or damage is continuing; and
      (7)   The amount claimed for such injury, death, or damage.
   (E)   The city shall not be deemed to have notice of any fact proven at any
subsequent trial on a claim which varies materially or is omitted from the
facts set out in a written notice submitted to the city in compliance with this
section.
   (F)   Before the city shall be liable for any continuing injury or damage,
including but not limited to injury or damage resulting from a condition
constituting a nuisance, written notice that such injury or damage is
continuing, in accordance with this section, must be given.
   (G)   Written notice as required by this section may be waived only by
formal resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 960123A, passed 1-23-1996)
REVOCATION OF PERMITS
§ 40.10 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish uniform procedures to govern
the revocation of permits and the city's recovery of its reasonable costs
incurred in connection therewith.
(Ord. 900220, passed 2-20-1990)
§ 40.11 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Sunset Valley, including any official, agent or employee
of the city acting on behalf of the city.
   NONCOMPLIANCE. Any one or more of the following:
      (1)   The failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions of the
city ordinance pursuant to which the permit was issued;
      (2)   The failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions of any
relevant city ordinance other than and in addition to the ordinance pursuant to
which the permit was issued;
      (3)   The failure to the permittee to comply with any term or condition
imposed by the city in connection with the issuance of the permit;
      (4)   The making of any material misrepresentation or false or misleading
statement by the permit applicant or one acting on his or her behalf in
connection with or on the permit application;
      (5)   The failure of the permittee to timely commence the work required
or authorized by the permit as approved by the city; or
      (6)   The failure of the permittee to timely complete the work required
or authorized by the permit as approved by the city.
   PERMIT. A permit or license issued by the city authorizing the holder
thereof, his or her agents or his or her employees to perform certain work or
engage in certain activities.
   PERMITTEE. The person to whom any permit or license has been issued by the
city, and any agent or employee of said person.
(Ord. 900220, passed 2-20-1990)
§ 40.12 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permit may be revoked for:
      (1)   The failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions of the
city ordinance pursuant to which said permit was issued;
      (2)   The failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions of any
relevant city ordinance other than and in addition to the ordinance pursuant to
which the permit was issued;
      (3)   The failure of the permittee to comply with any term or requirement
imposed by the city as a condition of the issuance of the permit;
      (4)   The making of any material misrepresentation or false or misleading
statement by the permit applicant or one acting on his or her behalf in
connection with or on the permit application;
      (5)   The failure of the permittee to timely commence the work as
required or authorized by the permit as approved by the city;
      (6)   The failure of the permittee to timely complete the work as
required or authorized by the permit as approved by the city; or
      (7)   Any other reason allowed by law.
   (B)   If the city determines that a permittee is in noncompliance, as that
term is defined in §
40.11, or that a permit should be revoked for any other reason allowed by law,
the city shall give written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the permittee and, if not the same person, the property owner, which notice
shall:
      (1)   State the nature of the noncompliance or other condition warranting
revocation;
      (2)   Direct the specific action be taken to correct the noncompliance or
other condition warranting revocation within 30 days of the receipt of the
notice, which action may include the requirement that the permittee provide
such additional information as the city deems necessary;
      (3)   Advise that a hearing may be requested before the City Council to
determine whether or not the permittee is in noncompliance, and whether or not
the permit should be revoked;
      (4)   Advise that to request a hearing, a written application therefor
must be filed with the City Secretary within ten days of receipt of the notice
provided for herein; and
      (5)   Advise that if no hearing is requested within said ten days, and if
the required corrective work is not completed within the 30 day period
specified in the notice, the permit shall be revoked.
   (C)   If no hearing is requested and if the required corrective action is
not completed within the time specified by the city, the permit shall be
revoked, and shall be void and of no effect as if it had never been issued. No
work shall be done in connection with the project for which the permit was
issued except as thereafter expressly directed or authorized by the city.
(Ord. 900220, passed 2-20-1990)
§ 40.13 HEARING BEFORE THE CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   If a hearing has been requested within ten days of receipt of the
notice by the filing of a written application therefor with the City Secretary,
the City Council shall, no later than 30 days after receipt of said request,
hold a hearing to determine whether the permittee is in noncompliance or if
some other reason recognized by law exists which would warrant the revocation
of the permit and whether the permit should be revoked. Written notice of the
date, time and place of the hearing shall be given to the permittee and, if not
the same person, the owner of the property.
   (B)   If, after hearing, the City Council determines that the permittee is
in noncompliance or that such other condition exists that would warrant
revocation of the permit, and that the permit should be revoked, it shall order
that the necessary corrective action be completed within such time as the
Council directs. If the work is not so completed, the permit shall be revoked,
and shall be void and of no effect as if it had never been issued. No further
work shall be done in connection with the project for which the permit was
issued except as thereafter expressly directed or authorized by the city.
(Ord. 900220, passed 2-20-1990)
§ 40.14 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   In addition to any inspection authorized or required pursuant to any
city ordinance in connection with the issuance of a permit, the city is
authorized to enter upon any property to which a permit relates at any
reasonable hour to inspect the work for which the permit was issued. If the
property is occupied, the city's representative shall first present credentials
and request entry. If the property is vacant, the city's representative shall
first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons who have
charge or control of the property and request that entry be granted.
   (B)   If the owner, occupant or person in control refuses to grant the
city's representative entry, and the city has reasonable cause to believe that
the permittee is in noncompliance as that term is defined in this subchapter,
the city's representative shall seek and obtain a search warrant from the
Municipal Court Judge, the purpose of which is to determine whether or not the
permittee is in noncompliance, before entering upon the property.
(Ord. 900220, passed 2-20-1990)
§ 40.15 EXTENSIONS BY THE CITY.
   The city may grant such extensions of time as it deems appropriate to those
permittees who have made a reasonable effort to comply with the city's
directives.
(Ord. 900220, passed 2-20-1990)
§ 40.16 APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to the revocation of permits
issued by the city pursuant to ordinances which do not include therein any
specific procedure for permit revocation.
(Ord. 900220, passed 2-20-1990)
§ 40.17 RECOVERY OF COSTS.
   (A)   The city may, upon notice to the permittee, retain such experts,
including but not limited to engineers, sanitarians, hydrologists and
attorneys, to advise and represent the city in connection with its
determination that a permittee is in noncompliance, as that term is defined in
§
40.11 and/or, that a permit should be revoked. In the event that the city does
determine that a permittee is in noncompliance and the permit is finally
revoked, the permittee shall reimburse the city for the reasonable costs
incurred in connection with the retention of such experts.
   (B)   In addition to any other method allowed by law pursuant to which the
city can recover the costs it incurs in connection with the permit revocation
proceedings, including those authorized by division (A) of this section, the
city may, at its discretion, collect on any bond or letter of credit required
of the permittee.
   (C)   Nothing in this section is intended to limit the remedies available to
the city.
(Ord. 900220, passed 2-20-1990)
CHAPTER 41: IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM
Section
   
41.01   Purpose
   
41.02   Definitions
   
41.03   Identification of red flags
   
41.04   Detecting red flags
   
41.05   Preventing and mitigating identity theft
   
41.06   Program updates
   
41.07   Program administration
§ 41.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Identity Theft Prevention Program (“Program”) is to
detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft in connection with the opening of a
covered account or an existing covered account, and to provide for continued
administration of the Program in compliance with Part 681 of Title 16 of the
Code of Federal Regulations, implementing Sections 114 and 315 of the Fair and
Accurate Credit Transactions Act (FACTA) of 2003.
(Ord. 130122-B, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 41.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY.  The City of Sunset Valley, Texas.
   COVERED ACCOUNT.
      (1)   Any account the city offers or maintains primarily for personal,
family or household purposes, that involves multiple payments or transactions;
and
      (2)   Any other account the city offers or maintains for which there is a
reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the
city from identity theft.
   CREDITORS. Finance companies, automobile dealers, mortgage brokers, utility
companies, and telecommunications companies. Where non-profit and government
entities defer payment for goods or services, they, too, are to be considered
CREDITORS.
   IDENTIFYING INFORMATION. Any name or number that may be used, alone or in
conjunction with any other information, to identify a specific person,
including: name, address, telephone number, Social Security number, date of
birth, government-issued driver's license or identification number, alien
registration number, government passport number, employer or taxpayer
identification number, unique electronic identification number, computer's
Internet Protocol address, or routing code.
   IDENTITY THEFT. Fraud committed using the identifying information of another
person.
   PROGRAM. The Identity Theft Prevention Program for the city.
   PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR. The City Secretary is the Program Administrator for
the Program.
   RED FLAG.  A pattern, practice or specific activity that indicates the
possible existence of identity theft.
(Ord. 130122-B, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 41.03 IDENTIFICATION OF RED FLAGS.
   The city identifies the following red flags, in each of the listed
categories:
   (A)    Suspicious documents.
      (1)   Identification document or card that appears to be forged, altered
or inauthentic;
      (2)   Identification document or card on which a person's photograph or
physical description is not consistent with the person presenting the document;
      (3)   Other document with information that is not consistent with
existing customer information (such as if a person's signature on a check
appears forged); and
      (4)   Application for service that appears to have been altered or
forged.
   (B)    Suspicious personal identifying information.
      (1)   Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other
information the customer provides (example: inconsistent birth dates, lack of
correlation between Social Security number range and date of birth);
      (2)   Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other
sources of information (for instance, Social Security number or an address not
matching an address on a credit report);
      (3)   Identifying information presented that is the same as information
shown on other applications that were found to be fraudulent;
      (4)   Identifying information presented that is consistent with
fraudulent activity (such as an invalid phone number or fictitious billing
address);
      (5)   Social Security number presented that is the same as one given by
another customer;
      (6)   An address or phone number presented that is the same as that of
another person;
      (7)   A person fails to provide complete personal identifying information
on an application when reminded to do so, or an applicant cannot provide
information requested beyond what could commonly be found in a purse or wallet;
and
      (8)   A person's identifying information is not consistent with the
information that is on file for the customer.
   (C)   Suspicious account activity or unusual use of account.
      (1)   Change of address for an account followed by a request to change
the account holder's name that is inconsistent with a typical residential move
out;
      (2)   Payments stop on an otherwise consistently up-to-date account;
      (3)   Account used in a way that is not consistent with prior use
(example: very high activity);
      (4)   Mail sent to the account holder is repeatedly returned as
undeliverable;
      (5)   Notice to the city that a customer is not receiving mail sent by
the city;
      (6)   Breach in the city's computer system security; and
      (7)   Unauthorized access to or use of customer account information.
   (D)   Alerts from others. Notice to the city from a customer, identity theft
victim, fraud detection service, law enforcement or other person that it has
opened or is maintaining a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity
theft.
(Ord. 130122-B, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 41.04 DETECTING RED FLAGS.
   (A)    New accounts. In order to detect any of the red flags identified
above associated with the opening of a new account, the city will take one or
more of the following steps to obtain and verify the identity of the person
opening the account:
      (1)   Require certain identifying information such as name, date of
birth, residential or business address, principal place of business for an
entity, driver's license or other identification;
      (2)   Verify the customer's identity (for instance, review a driver's
license or other identification card);
      (3)   Review documentation showing the existence of a business entity;
      (4)   Request additional documentation to establish identity; and
      (5)   Independently contact the customer or business.
   (B)   Existing accounts. In order to detect any of the red flags identified
above for an existing account, city personnel will take one or more of the
following steps to monitor transactions with an account:
      (1)   Verify the identification of customers if they request information
(in person, via telephone, via facsimile, via email);
      (2)   Verify the validity of requests to close accounts or change billing
addresses; and
      (3)   Verify changes in banking information given for billing and payment
purposes.
(Ord. 130122-B, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 41.05 PREVENTING AND MITIGATING IDENTITY THEFT.
   (A)   In the event they detect any identified red flags, city personnel
shall take one or more of the following steps, depending on the degree of risk
posed by the red flag:
      (1)   Continue to monitor an account for evidence of identity theft;
      (2)   Contact the customer, sometimes through multiple methods;
      (3)   Change any passwords or other security devices that permit access
to accounts;
      (4)   Not open a new account;
      (5)   Close an existing account;
      (6)   Do not close the account, but monitor or contact authorities;
      (7)   Reopen an account with a new number;
      (8)   Notify the Program Administrator for determination of the
appropriate step(s) to take;
      (9)   Notify law enforcement; or
      (10)   Determine that no response is warranted under the particular
circumstances.
   (B)   In order to further prevent the likelihood of identity theft occurring
with respect to utility accounts, the city will take the following steps with
respect to its internal operating procedures to protect customer identifying
information:
      (1)   Ensure that its website is secure or provide clear notice that the
website is not secure;
      (2)   Where and when allowed, ensure complete and secure destruction of
paper documents and computer files containing customer information;
      (3)   Ensure that office computers are password-protected and that
computer screens lock after a set period of time;
      (4)   Change passwords on office computers on a regular basis;
      (5)   Ensure all computers are backed up properly and any backup
information is secured;
      (6)   Keep offices clear of papers containing customer information;
      (7)   Request only the last four digits of Social Security numbers (if
any);
      (8)   Ensure computer virus protection is up-to-date; and
      (9)   Require and keep only the kinds of customer information that are
necessary for utility account purposes.
(Ord. 130122-B, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 41.06 PROGRAM UPDATES.
   This Program will be periodically reviewed and updated to reflect changes in
risks to customers and the soundness of the city from identity theft. At least
annually, the Program Administrator will consider the city's experiences with
identity theft situation, changes in identity theft methods, changes in
identity theft detection and prevention methods, changes in types of accounts
the city maintains and changes in the city's business arrangements with other
entities, consult with law enforcement authorities and other city personnel.
After considering these factors, the Program Administrator will determine
whether changes to the Program, including the listing of red flags, are
warranted. If warranted, the Program Administrator will update the Program or
present the City Council with his or her recommended changes, and the City
Council will make a determination of whether to accept, modify or reject those
changes to the Program.
(Ord. 130122-B, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 41.07 PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Oversight. Responsibility for developing, implementing and updating
this Program lies with the Program Administrator, who may be the head of the
city or his or her appointee. The Program Administrator will be responsible for
the Program administration, for ensuring appropriate training of city staff on
the Program, for reviewing any staff reports regarding the detection of red
flags and the steps for preventing and mitigating identity theft, determining
which steps of prevention and mitigation should be taken in particular
circumstances, and considering periodic changes to the Program.
   (B)   Staff training and reports.
      (1)   Initially, all city staff shall be trained either by or under the
direction of the Program Administrator in the detection of red flags, and the
responsive steps to be taken when a red flag is detected. Thereafter, all City
Accounting Department staff shall undergo update training not less than
annually. Additionally, all new City Accounting Department employees shall
undergo training.
      (2)   All City Accounting Department staff shall submit reports annually
concerning the City's compliance with the Program, the training that has been
given and the effectiveness of the policies and procedures in addressing the
risk of identity theft, including recommendations for changes to the Program.
While incidents of identity theft are to be reported immediately to the Program
Administrator, the annual reports shall contain a recap of the incident and
include the steps taken to assist with resolution of the incident.
   (C)   Service provider arrangements. In the event the city engages a service
provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more accounts,
including but not limited to franchise utility providers, the city will take
the following steps to ensure the service provider performs its activity in
accordance with reasonable policies and procedures designed to detect, prevent
and mitigate the risk of identity theft.
      (1)   Require, by contract or contract amendment, that service providers
have such policies and procedures in place; and
      (2)   Require, by contract or contract amendment, that service providers
review the city's Program and report any red flags to the Program
Administrator.
   (D)   Specific program elements and confidentiality. For the effectiveness
of identity theft prevention programs, the red flag rule envisions a degree of
confidentiality regarding the city's specific practices relating to identity
theft detection, prevention and mitigation. Therefore, under this Program,
knowledge of such specific practices are to be limited to the Program
Administrator and those employees who need to know them for purposes of
preventing identity theft. Because this Program is to be adopted by a public
body and thus publicly available, it would be counterproductive to list these
specific practices here. Therefore, only the Program's general red flag
detection, implementation and prevention practices are listed in this document.
(Ord. 130122-B, passed 1-22-2013)
CHAPTER 42: COMPREHENSIVE CONSERVATION STRATEGIES AND REBATES
Section
   
42.01   Findings and objectives
   
42.02   Comprehensive conservation and environmental stewardship program
§ 42.01 FINDINGS AND OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   The City Council is the trustee of the city's domestic water supply as
well as the watershed areas within its city limits.
   (B)   Population increases and economic growth in the city and its environs
continue to impact water, water utility and other environmental aspects in the
city.
   (C)   The general welfare of the citizens of the city and its environs
requires that the water and other environmental resources available to the city
be used with maximum efficiency, and that quality of treatment and disposal of
wastewaters achieve optimal standards.
   (D)   Further population and economic growth in the city and its environs,
without water conservation and environmental sustainability efforts, may
adversely affect both the city's domestic water supply as well as the other
environmental resources that the community uses and/or is surrounded by.
   (E)   The City Council is desirous of adopting appropriate water
conservation and environmental stewardship rebates for the purpose of ensuring
maximum reductions of potable water use and wastewater flows through the
implementation of water conservation technologies, as well as the promotion of
such environmental sustainability programs.
(Ord. 210406, passed 4-6-2021; Ord. 221018-A, passed 10-18-2022; Ord. 231017-A,
passed 10-17-2023; Ord. 240521-A, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 42.02 COMPREHENSIVE CONSERVATION AND ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP PROGRAM.
   (A)   The City of Sunset Valley desires to promote awareness and
participation in various water conservation and other environmental resource
programs for its residents who are eligible to participate.
   (B)   The City of Sunset Valley residents may be able to receive rebates on
toilets, washing machines, tankless water heaters and several other items as
more fully set out below. To be eligible for such rebates, City of Sunset
Valley customers must, at a minimum:
      (1)   Applicant must be a resident of Sunset Valley;
      (2)   Complete the application from the city;
      (3)   Attach photos of receipts;
      (4)   Only one rebate per household per year;
      (5)    Follow the individual rebate program hyperlinks for individual
additional requirements; and
      (6)   Submit the rebate application within 30 days of purchase.
Residential Rebates
Pollution Reduction
Rebate Amount Conditions
Residential Rebates
Pollution Reduction
Rebate         Amount               Conditions
Electric/
propane           Up to $200        50% cost
lawnmowers
Electric/
propane lawn      Up to $100        50% Cost
equipment
Home              Up to $100        75% of cost
composting
Light             Up to $200 x 4       50% of cost including installation
pollution
   Solar Rebates
Solar             Up to $3,000      $1 per watt
   Weatherization Rebates (Annual cap of $2,000 per resident)
Home energy
audit and         Up to $500        $0.50 per square foot
weatherization
Additional        Up to $825        $0.50 per square foot
insulation
Solar
screening/     $2 per square foot      $2 per square foot
solar shading/ up to $200
film
Duct
replacement/      Up to $200        $2 per linear foot
wrapping
Low E windows/    up to $200 per    Up to 10 windows
doors          window
Wi-Fi enabled     Up to $200        40% the cost
thermostat
   Waterwise Landscaping Rebates
Lawn to
native/adapted    Up to $15,000  75% of cost up to $15,000.
bed
Lawn to
native/           Up to $15,000  75% of cost up to $15,000.
adapted/
prairie grass
   Rainwater Harvesting
                                    Sunset Valley Villas: Non- pressurized systems 500 gallons or less (no pump)
                                    - 75% of cost of materials and labor. First $1,000 covered at 100%. All other
Rainwater                           residential areas:
harvesting        Up to $10,000     -Non-pressurized system 500 gallons or more (no pumps) - 75% of cost of
                                    materials and labor. First $2,000 covered at 100%
                                       -Pressurized systems (has a pump) - 75% of cost of materials and labor.
                                    First $2,000 covered at 100%
                                  Annual backflow inspection rebate for all pressurized systems.
   Irrigation Update
Irrigation        Up to $50       
rain sensor
Pressure
regulating        Up to $100      
valve
Pressure
regulating        Up to $100      
components
Conversion
from spray to
multi-stream/     Up to $150        $5 per nozzle
trajectory
nozzles
Conversion
from spray to     $50 per stationMust include filter and pressure regulating components
drip
Capping a         $100 per statioValve must be removed.
station
                                    -Connect to local weather station via Wi-Fi or have an on-site weather
                                    station.
                                    -Program each zone according to correct plant type, soil type, sprinkler
Smart                               nozzle type, sun/shade conditions and slope conditions.
irrigation     Up to $75            -Program on only allowed watering days per neighborhood schedule. (No
controller                          exceptions from watering restrictions are given for smart controllers.)
                                    -Give suggested run times for each zone that is adjustable.
                                    -Turn off the system in the event of a rain or freeze condition.
                                    -Water using the cycle-soak method.
   Water Conservation Rebates
Rainscape         Up to $5,000   $10 for every square foot up to $5,000
Pool cover        $200        Additional $200
Landscape                           -$50 for at least two cubic yards of compost
survival tools    $50-$150       -$150 for core aeration service of entire front and/or back lawn
                                    -Rebate amount may not exceed total amount of eligible project costs
Water timer       $40            $40
 
Commercial Rebates
Rebate Amount Conditions
Commercial Rebates
Rebate                 Amount        Conditions
                                     $200 per 100 square foot up to $10,000.
Waterwise landscaping  Up to $10,000 Larger rebate for native ($200) over
                                     adapted ($150) plants.
                                     50% of cost up to $50,000, $10 for every
Bucks for business     Up to $50,000 1,000 gallons saved per year, up to 10
                                     years.
Commercial kitchen     Up to $5,000  $40 to $5,000 depending on upgrade or new
                                     installation.
Rainwater harvesting   Up to $10,000  
                                     100% of cost up to $5,000 promote to
Water efficiency audit Up to $5,000  businesses. The city receives a copy of
                                     the report. This would be the first step
                                     to receiving any other commercial rebate.
Waterwise rainscape    Up to $3,000  $1 for every foot up to $3,000.
(Ord. 210406, passed 4-6-2021; Ord. 221018-A, passed 10-18-2022; Ord. 231017-A,
passed 10-17-2023; Ord. 240521-A, passed 5-21-2024; Ord. 250107-B, passed 1-7-
2025)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   WATER
      
51.   SEWERS
      
52.   [RESERVED]
      
53.   DRAINAGE UTILITY
      
54.   NETWORK NODES AND NODE SUPPORT POLES
CHAPTER 50: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   User Conservation Plan; Drought Contingency Plan
   
50.02   Rates and charges adopted by reference
Water Source Transfer Petition
   
50.15   Maintaining regular source of water to residential water supply areas
   
50.16   Definitions
   
50.17   Water agreement
   
50.18   Temporary use of alternate source of water in case of emergency
   
50.19   Expiration
   
50.20   Supermajority required
   
50.21   Effective date
   
50.22   Evaluation and consideration of changes to the source of water for any
water supply area
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 USER CONSERVATION PLAN; DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN.
   (A)   Adoption of water conservation and drought contingency plan. The city
water conservation and drought contingency plan and attachments thereto (plan)
which are attached to the ordinance codified herein are incorporated herein by
reference and is hereby adopted.
   (B)   Violation.
      (1)   A person commits an offense if, after an agent of the city has
notified citizens of any of Level II through Level IV water restrictions in the
manner and under the conditions set forth in the plan, the person performs an
act prohibited by the plan or fails to perform an act required by the plan
after issuance of:
         (a)   A documented verbal warning or written notice of warning
following a first occurrence of non-compliance with the requirements of the
plan; and
         (b)   A written notification of violation following a second
occurrence of non-compliance with the requirements of the plan.
      (2)   Each instance of a violation of the plan following the warning and
notification described in divisions (B)(1)(a) and (b) above.
   (C)   Presumption of violation.
      (1)   A person in whose name a water service account is held is presumed
to be responsible for a violation of this chapter that occurs at the water
service account location.
      (2)   In a prosecution of an offense, the issuance of a documented verbal
warning, written notice of warning, and written notification of violation shall
each be presumed to establish a non-compliance for the purpose of determining
whether an offense constitutes a third or greater occurrence of non-compliance.
   (D)   Conflict. In the event of a conflict in the provisions of the plan and
of Ordinance 100622, the provisions of Ordinance 100622 shall supersede the
conflicting provision(s) of the plan and shall be enforceable.
   (E)   Effective date. This subchapter shall become effective on the later of
when the publication requirements of Section 3 of the ordinance codified herein
have been satisfied or on 7-22-2010.
(Ord. passed - -2005; Ord. 100622, passed 6-22-2010; Ord. 110621, passed 6-21-
2011; Ord. 111101-A, passed 11-1-2011; Ord. 121023, passed 10-23-2012; Ord.
140204, passed 2-4-2014; Ord. 140617, passed 6-17-2014) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.02 RATES AND CHARGES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The rates and charges for water usage are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full.
Cross-reference:
   Land Development Code, see
Chapter 150
WATER SOURCE TRANSFER PETITION
§ 50.15 MAINTAINING REGULAR SOURCE OF WATER TO RESIDENTIAL WATER SUPPLY AREAS.
   Neither the city, nor the Mayor or the City Council, shall change the
regular source of water supplied to any property used for residential purposes
located in the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction without first
receiving a water source transfer petition, containing signatures from the
owners of a majority of legal lots in the property’s water supply area.
(Ord. 070712, passed 7-12-2007)
§ 50.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   REGULAR SOURCE OF WATER. The source of water for a lot regularly supplied to
that lot during the time period prior to on the date of filing a water source
transfer petition, excluding any source of water supplied as a result of a
period of temporary emergency under §
50.18.
   SOURCE OF WATER.
      (1)   City of Austin water, provided through the City of Austin and
billed through the City of Sunset Valley;
      (2)   The city ground water well system maintained by the city and
originating in the Edwards Aquifer; or
      (3)   Water obtained from a private well located on the residential
property.
   WATER SOURCE TRANSFER PETITION. A petition requesting a transfer from the
regular source of water for that water supply area to another available source
of water. A valid WATER SOURCE TRANSFER PETITION must contain notarized
signatures from at least a majority of the owners representing of over 66% of
the legal lots located in that water supply area. A WATER SOURCE TRANSFER
PETITION shall, at the top of each page of the petition, state the water supply
area to which the petition pertains, the regular source of water of that water
supply area and state that the signatories of the petition request transfer to
another source of water and specifying the new available source of water.
   WATER SUPPLY AREA. Any one of the following areas of the city:
      (1)   Country White, consisting of lots with residential addresses on
Country White Lane or within the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction bordered
on the east by Brodie Lane;
      (2)   Oakdale, consisting of lots with addresses on Oakdale Drive and
Brodie Lane within the city;
      (3)   Sunset Valley Well Area, consisting of lots with addresses on Jones
Road, Reese Drive, Pillow Road, Lone Oak Trail and Sunset Trail;
      (4)   Stearns Lane, consisting of residential lots with addresses on
Stearns Lane, including those addresses within the city’s extraterritorial
jurisdiction and on Highway 290;
      (5)   Sunset Valley Meadows, consisting of lots with addresses on
Yellowtail Cove, Lovegrass Lane and Curley Mesquite Cove; and
      (6)   The Sunset Valley Villas, consisting of lots with addresses on
Sunflower Trail.
(Ord. 070712, passed 7-12-2007)
§ 50.17 WATER AGREEMENT.
   This subchapter shall not require or permit a transfer of water source or
any other act that violates the 2007 Agreement for Wholesale Water Service
Between the City of Austin and the City of Sunset Valley, as amended from time
to time; provided, however, that, it is recognized and understood that none of
the provisions in the agreement require, or shall be interpreted to require, a
change to any source of water in any water supply area without a water source
transfer petition.
(Ord. 070712, passed 7-12-2007)
§ 50.18 TEMPORARY USE OF ALTERNATE SOURCE OF WATER IN CASE OF EMERGENCY.
   This subchapter does not affect the power of the City Public Works Director
or City Emergency Management Officer to provide water from a source of water
other than the regular source of water for temporary periods of time to any
property in the city or its extra-territorial jurisdiction during times of
emergencies, severe drought or when the health and safety of city residents
will be affected by the quality of water supplied or interruptions in the
supply of water; provided, however, that, unless no water can be supplied by
the regular source of water, the temporary period of time shall not continue
for more than seven days, unless a longer specified time period is approved by
supermajority vote of the City Council.
(Ord. 070712, passed 7-12-2007)
§ 50.19 EXPIRATION.
   If the City Council does not take action to effect a change to the source of
water in response to a water source transfer petition within one year, then the
water source transfer petition expires.
(Ord. 070712, passed 7-12-2007)
§ 50.20 SUPERMAJORITY REQUIRED.
   This subchapter shall not be amended, repealed, superseded or modified in
any manner, except by a supermajority vote of the City Council.
(Ord. 070712, passed 7-12-2007)
§ 50.21 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall take effect on the day it is passed and approved by
the City Council.
(Ord. 070712, passed 7-12-2007)
§ 50.22 EVALUATION AND CONSIDERATION OF CHANGES TO THE SOURCE OF WATER FOR ANY
WATER SUPPLY AREA.
   No provision of this chapter shall limit the City Council, any committee of
the Council, or the City Public Works Director or other city employees from
discussing and evaluating the planning, cost, benefits, and other factors
related to a change in the source of water to any water supply area.
(Ord. 110419-B, passed 4-19-2011)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Section 50.01 offenses.
      (1)   Generally. 
         (a)   An offense prescribed by §
50.01 is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
         (b)   Each instance of a violation of the requirements of the plan
constituting an offense is a separate offense.
      (2)   Civil penalty. Upon the occurrence of a second offense, the city
may cause the cessation of water utility service and require payment of
applicable fees for any reconnection of service.
(Ord. passed - -2005; Ord. 100622, passed 6-22-2010)
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Policy
   
51.002   Purposes
   
51.003   Interpretation
   
51.004   Applicability
   
51.005   Rule making
   
51.006   Definitions
   
51.007   Confidential information
   
51.008   Effective date
Prohibited Discharges and Limitations
   
51.020   General prohibitions
   
51.021   Application
   
51.022   Specific prohibitions
   
51.023   Affirmative defenses
   
51.024   Dilution
   
51.025   Improper processing or storage
   
51.026   Protection; assignments
Pretreatment Requirements and Procedures
   
51.040   Pretreatment required
   
51.041   Pretreatment facilities required
   
51.042   General pretreatment requirements
   
51.043   Industry specific pretreatment requirements; exemptions
   
51.044   National pretreatment standards
Special Procedures Relating to Prohibited Waste
   
51.060   General
   
51.061   Wastewater discharge permits
   
51.062   Exemptions to permit requirement
   
51.063   Required structures
   
51.064   Measurement of flow
   
51.065   Determination by city of the character and concentration of pollutants
   
51.066   Hazardous waste notification required
   
51.067   Retention of records
Permits; Procedures and Conditions
   
51.080   General
   
51.081   Approval standards
   
51.082   Denial of application
   
51.083   Required permit conditions for significant industrial users
   
51.084   Additional permit conditions authorized for significant industrial
users
   
51.085   Required permit conditions for other industrial users
   
51.086   Authorization to establish additional permit conditions
   
51.087   Modification of permit
   
51.088   Voiding pervious permits
   
51.089   Revocation of permit
   
51.090   Revocation proceedings
Self-monitoring and Reporting Requirements
   
51.105   Persons subject to categorical pretreatment standards
   
51.106   Baseline monitoring reports required from existing categorical users
   
51.107   Baseline monitoring reports required from new source categorical users
   
51.108   Required information
   
51.109   Periodic reports required from significant industrial users and other
users
   
51.110   Representative samples required
   
51.111   Reports of additional samples taken
   
51.112   Report of changed conditions
   
51.113   Immediate report of problem discharge
   
51.114   Further reports required
   
51.115   Self-reporting of violations
   
51.116   Repeat sampling required
   
51.117   Sampling and analytical requirements
   
51.118   Nonstandard analyses
   
51.119   Required sample collection techniques
   
51.120   Grab sample requirements
   
51.121   Determination of noncompliance
   
51.122   Postmark date for mailed reports
   
51.123   Unmailed submittals
Monitoring for Surcharge and Removal Credit Determinations
   
51.135   Payment of surcharge for extra strength wastewater
   
51.136   Cost factors
   
51.137   Computation of surcharge
   
51.138   Adjustment of rates
   
51.139   Removal credits
Administration and Enforcement
   
51.150   Enforcement authority
   
51.151   Inspection and enforcement a governmental function
   
51.152   Right of entry
   
51.153   Arrangement for access
   
51.154   Obstruction of access; unreasonable delays prohibited
   
51.155   Administrative search warrants
Appeals Procedures
   
51.170   Right of appeal
   
51.171   Perfection of appeal
   
51.172   Required copies
   
51.173   Informal hearing by the Director
   
51.174   Ruling by Director
   
51.175   Decision of Director final
   
51.176   Procedures for hearing
   
51.177   No stay of enforcement actions
   
51.178   No waivers or variance
 
   
51.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 POLICY.
   It is hereby declared the policy of the city to promote the public health,
safety and welfare by:
   (A)   Implementing the general pretreatment regulations for new and existing
sources of pollution promulgated by EPA and set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 403, as
amended;
   (B)   Establishing uniform regulations governing the disposal of wastewater
containing industrial waste or other prohibited waste within the corporate
limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction; and
   (C)   Establishing requirements to control pollutants that pass through or
cause interference with treatment processes in the publicly owned treatment
works (“POTW”) or which may contaminate sewage sludge, thereby resulting in a
violation of the permit issued by the City of Austin for the discharge of
industrial waste into the POTW.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.002 PURPOSES.
   This chapter shall be construed at all times so as to achieve the following
objectives:
   (A)   To implement safe and environmentally sound methods for disposal of
wastewater containing industrial waste or other prohibited waste to the POTW;
   (B)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW in
concentrations or amounts that will damage or otherwise interfere with the
operation of the POTW;
   (C)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants that will pass through the
POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or otherwise be incompatible
with the POTW;
   (D)   To ensure that the quality of wastewater treatment plant sludge is
maintained at a level that allows its use and disposal in compliance with
applicable laws and regulations and maximize opportunities to reclaim
wastewater and sludge from the POTW;
   (E)   To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by pollutants in
wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the
general public;
   (F)   To implement appropriate fees for equitable distribution of the cost
of operation, maintenance and improvement of the POTW; and
   (G)   To enable the city to comply with the conditions of the permit or
permits granted it by the City of Austin and with the sludge use and disposal
requirements of federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.003 INTERPRETATION.
   This chapter shall be liberally interpreted to achieve the policy and
purposes stated above.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.004 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to the disposal of wastewater containing industrial
waste or other prohibited waste by, through and into the sanitary sewer system
within the corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.005 RULE MAKING.
   The Director is hereby authorized to promulgate regulations and procedures
to implement and interpret the provisions of this chapter that are not in
conflict with this chapter, the laws of the state and the federal pretreatment
regulations for new and existing sources of pollution set forth in 40 C.F.R.
part 403, as amended. The rules must be approved by the City Attorney and filed
of record in the office of the City Secretary. The rules and procedures shall
consider the quantity, quality and means of disposal of wastewater containing
industrial waste or other prohibited waste, geographic, topographic and
construction factors and treatment methods available, the beneficial uses of
the water and any other matter the Director shall deem relevant to the
implementation of this chapter. Failure to comply with the rules and procedures
following the promulgation and filing thereof in the office of the City
Secretary shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.006 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
      APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Regional Administrator of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
      APPROVED METHODS. The approved methods for pollutant sampling and
analysis described in the latest revision of 40 C.F.R. part 136. If 40 C.F.R.
part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for a particular
pollutant, sampling and analysis for the pollutant must be performed in
accordance with procedures approved by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE. When used in this chapter, means the person
authorized to act on behalf of a person discharging wastewater to the POTW or
its authorized designee; more particularly, the term shall mean:
         (a)   In the case of a corporation, the president, vice president,
secretary, manager or other
corporate officer authorized to act on behalf of the corporation;
         (b)   In the case of a partnership, a general partner;
         (c)   In the case of a sole proprietorship, the proprietor thereof;
         (d)   In the case of a federal, state or local government facility,
the director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the
operations of the facility; or
         (e)   The authorized designee of a person described above.
      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter as determined by standard laboratory
procedures for five days at 20°C expressed as a concentration in milligrams per
liter (mg/l).
      CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act
which apply to a specific category of persons discharging industrial waste to
the POTW or sanitary sewer and which appear in 40 C.F.R. chapter I, subchapter
N, parts 405 through 471.
      CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD. The measure of the oxygen equivalent of
the organic matter content of a sample that is susceptible to oxidation by a
strong chemical oxidant as determined by standard laboratory procedures as
specified in Standard Methods expressed as milligrams per liter (mg/l).
      CITY. The City of Sunset Valley, Texas.
      COD. See CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND.
      COMMINUTED GARBAGE. Garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in sanitary sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in
any dimension.
      COMPOSITE SAMPLE. The sample resulting from the combination of individual
wastewater
samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or
time.
      COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any system of condensation, such
as air conditioning, cooling and refrigeration systems.
      DAILY AVERAGE LIMIT. A discharge limit based on the average of the
analysis results of all samples taken from an industrial waste source over the
course of the operating day.
      DAY. One 24-hour calendar day unless otherwise specified.
      DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Works or his or her authorized designee.
      DISCHARGE. To deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep or
otherwise release  or dispose of, or to allow, permit or suffer any of these
acts or omissions.
      DRAINAGE WATER. Storm water; surface water; roof run-off water; drainage
from downspouts; water from yard drains; water from foundations and ponds;
water from lawn sprays, rainwater leaders and areaways; overflows from cisterns
and water tanks; swimming pool water; and swimming pool filter backwash water.
      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
      EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation
of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical
pretreatment standards which will be applicable to the source if the standard
is thereafter promulgated in accordance with § 307 of the Act.
      EXTRA STRENGTH WASTEWATER. Wastewater having a suspended solids (SS),
chemical oxygen demand (COD) or biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) content in
excess of that found in normal waste, but which is otherwise acceptable for
discharge to the POTW in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
      GARBAGE. Solid waste from domestic or commercial preparation, cooking,
dispensing or manufacturing of food or from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
      GENERATOR. A person who causes, creates, generates, stores or otherwise
produces liquid waste, excluding a person storing liquid waste in a mobile tank
or fixed storage tank for temporary storage.
      GRAB SAMPLE. A single sample taken from a wastestream without regard to
the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.
      GREASE TRAP. A receptacle, structure or mechanical device used by a
generator to intercept, collect, separate and restrict the passage of free and
emulsified fat, oil, grease, organic, inorganic, greasy or fatty liquid, semi-
liquid, semi-solid or solid waste from wastewater prior to discharge to the
POTW.
      GREASE TRAP WASTE. Free and emulsified fat, oil, grease organic,
inorganic, greasy or fatty liquid, semi-liquid, semi-solid or solid waste
collected by and removed from a grease trap.
      GRIT TRAP. A receptacle, structure or mechanical device used by a
generator to intercept, collect, separate and restrict the passage of
petroleum-based oil and grease waste, and inorganic or other solids or semi-
solids from wastewater prior to discharge to the POTW.
      GRIT TRAP WASTE. Petroleum-based oil and grease waste and inorganic or
other solids and semi-solids collected by and removed from a grit trap.
      GROUND WATER. Subsurface and subsoil water; artesian well water; water
from ground water remediation sites; and subsurface leachates captured from
municipal landfills.
      HOLD-HAUL TANK. A storage tank installed to hold industrial waste that is
prohibited from being discharged to the POTW, the contents of which must be
hauled to a disposal site. A HOLD-HAUL TANK shall not be connected to the
sanitary sewer.
      INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any
nondomestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
      INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any amount of liquid waste and waterborne liquid,
gaseous and solid substances discharged or disposed of from any industrial,
manufacturing, trade or commercial establishment including nonprofit
organizations, governmental agencies or business activities. The term shall not
include sewage discharged from sanitary conveniences on the premises unless the
sewage is commingled with wastewater containing industrial waste or other
prohibited waste.
      INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE LIMIT. The maximum concentration or
loading of an allowable pollutant, determined from the analysis of a discrete
or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the
duration of the sampling event.
      INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge
from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations or the processing, use or disposal of sludge; and therefore is a
cause of a violation of the city’s permit or of the City of Austin’s NPDES
permit, or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with the terms of any of the following statutory provisions, or regulations or
permits issued thereunder, or more stringent state or local regulations: § 405
of the Act, the federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, including, without
limitation, Title II thereof commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act (“RCRA”), any state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal
Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine
Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
      MEDICAL WASTES. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and
dialysis wastes.
      MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT. A discharge limit based on the average of the
analysis results of all samples taken during a calendar month using approved
methods for both sampling and analysis.
      MUNICIPAL USER. A political subdivision or municipal corporation that
discharges wastewater to the POTW.
      NEW SOURCE. The following for purposes of this chapter:
         (a)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which is
commenced after the publication of the proposed pretreatment standards under §
307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to the source if the standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section; provided that:
            1.   The building, structure, facility or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located;
            2.   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
            3.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should
be considered.
         (b)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria
of divisions (a)2. or 3. above, but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to
existing process or production equipment; and
         (c)   Construction of a NEW SOURCE, as defined herein, has commenced
if the owner or operator has:
            1.   Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site
construction program any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment;
            2.   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities
or equipment; or
            3.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this definition.
      NONCONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling that does not come into
contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished
product.
      NORMAL WASTEWATER. Waste which, when analyzed, indicates that:
         (a)   The concentration of BOD in the waste will not exceed 200
milligrams per liter (mg/l) average over any 24-hour period or will not
contribute BOD at a rate which would exceed 1,668 pounds of BOD per million
gallons of wastewater per day;
         (b)   The concentration of suspended solids (SS) in the water will not
exceed 200 milligrams per liter (mg/l) average over any 24-hour period or will
not contribute suspended solids at a rate which would exceed 1,668 pounds of
suspended solids per million gallons of wastewater per day; or
         (c)   The concentration of COD in the waste will not exceed 450
milligrams per liter (mg/l) average over any 24-hour period or will not
contribute COD at a rate that would exceed 3,735 pounds of COD per million
gallons of wastewater per day.
      OTHER WASTE. Solid or viscous substances such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, concrete, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, asphalt, plastics, rubber, rubber products, wood, whole non-
human blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime
residues, carbide wastes, slops, chemical residues, paint residues, asbestos,
bulk solids, grass clippings or tree trimmings.
      OWNER or OCCUPANT. When used in this chapter, the person who owns real
property or pays or is legally responsible for payment of water and/or
wastewater charges made against a plot, parcel of land, building, office or
other real property or premises, if connected to the water distribution system
and/or the wastewater collection system maintained by the city, or who should
pay or be legally responsible for the payment if so connected.
      PASS THROUGH. A discharge that exits the POTW into waters of the United
States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the city’s permit or of the City of Austin’s NPDES permit,
including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
      PERMIT. Any permit issued to the city by the City of Austin allowing the
discharge of wastewater into the City of Austin’s POTW. If the City of Austin
has issued more than one permit, the term PERMIT shall include all permits. The
term PERMIT shall also include any extension, renewal, revision, amendment or
modification thereof.
      PERSON. Any individual, association, firm, trust, partnership,
corporation, joint-stock company, joint venture, court appointed receiver or
conservator, consortium or any other legal or commercial entity; any group of
the foregoing, organized or united for a business purpose; or any governmental
agency or entity or political subdivision.
      pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution expressed in
standard units.
      POLLUTANT. A substance that alters the physical, thermal, chemical,
radiological or biological quality or properties of water or that contaminates
water to the extent that the water is rendered harmful to humans, animal life,
vegetation or property or to the public health, safety or welfare or that
impairs the usefulness or public enjoyment of the water for any lawful purpose
including, but not limited to, dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
swimming pool filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials,
heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, appliances or manufactured goods, rock,
sand, dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial waste and certain
characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, suspended solids,
turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor).
      POLLUTION. Alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, radiological or
biological quality of, or contamination of any water to the extent that the
water is rendered harmful, detrimental or injurious to humans, animal life,
vegetation or property or to the public health, safety or welfare, or that
impairs the usefulness of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
      POTW. See PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS.
      PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination
of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of the properties of pollutants
in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing the pollutants into the
POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes, by process changes, or by other means except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment imposed on a person discharging wastewater to the POTW
other than a pretreatment standard.
      PRETREATMENT STANDARD(S). Prohibited discharge standards, categorical
pretreatment standards and local limits.
      PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. Those
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances contained in this
chapter.
      PROHIBITED WASTE. Any waste prohibited from discharge to the POTW, except
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW. A “treatment works”, as defined
by § 212 of the Act that is owned by the city or that the city has secured the
right to discharge into by contract, permit or otherwise. This definition
includes, without limitation, any and all pipelines, equipment, devices or
systems used, alone or in combination, for the collection, conveyance, storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of wastewater, sewage or industrial waste.
      RECEIVING STREAM. The waterway into which a wastewater treatment plant
operated by the city discharges treated effluent or, the waterway into which a
wholesale wastewater provider with whom the city has contracted for wholesale
wastewater transportation and treatment services discharges treated effluent.
      SANITARY CONVENIENCE. Any plumbing fixture (except for a food waste
disposal unit) not required to have a sand and/or grease trap (interceptor)
according to provisions of the Plumbing Code.
      SANITARY SEWER. A pipe or conduit owned, controlled or subject to the
jurisdiction of the city, designed to collect and transport wastewater.
      SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
      SEWAGE. Water which contains, or which has been in contact with, organic
and inorganic contaminants such as human or animal wastes, vegetable matter,
cooking fats and greases, laundry and dishwashing detergents and other chemical
compounds and waste products.
      SEWER SYSTEM. All of the property involved in the operation of a sanitary
sewer utility. It includes land, wastewater lines and appurtenances, pumping
stations, treatment works, wastewater treatment plants and general property.
      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER or SIU.
         (a)   A person subject to categorical pretreatment standards;
         (b)   A person that either:
            1.   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of
process water to the POTW (excluding sewage from sanitary conveniences,
noncontact cooling water and boiler blowdown wastewater);
            2.   Contributes a process wastestream that makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment
plant; or
            3.   Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the operation of the POTW or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
         (c)   Provided, however, that, upon a finding that a person meeting
the criteria in division (b) above has no reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the operation of the POTW or for violating any pretreatment standard
or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response
to a petition received from the person, and in accordance with the procedures
in 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6), determine that the user should not be considered a
significant industrial user.
      SIU. See SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.
      SLUG LOAD or SLUG. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which
could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards established in
this chapter.
      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION. A classification pursuant to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Office of Management
and Budget.
      STORM SEWER. Any sewer owned, controlled or subject to the jurisdiction
of the city designed to carry storm and surface water, street wash and drainage
water.
      SURCHARGE. The additional sewerage service charge levied against any
person for discharging extra strength wastewater into a sanitary sewer. This
charge is intended to defray the added cost of sampling, testing, transporting
and treating extra strength wastewater. This charge shall be in addition to the
usual monthly charge for wastewater service.
      SUSPENDED SOLIDS or SS. The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquid which is
removable by laboratory filtering expressed in milligrams per liter.
      TREATMENT PLANT UPSET. An inhibition, impairment or disruption of a
wastewater treatment plant, its treatment processes or operations, or its
sludge processing, use or disposal which is a cause of or significantly
contributes to:
         (a)   A violation of any requirement of the treatment plant’s NPDES
permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation);
         (b)   The prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the treatment
plant in accordance with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations
and this code and any other applicable ordinances of the city;
         (c)   A decrease in the quality of the effluent being discharged from
the treatment plant; or
         (d)   A decrease in the performance of the treatment plant processes
or operations.
      USER or INDUSTRIAL USER. A source of indirect discharge.
      WASTE. One or more pollutants.
      WASTEWATER. All liquids and waterborne waste, drainage water and sewage
from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated.
      WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by the Director authorizing
the discharge of wastewater to the POTW in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the wastewater discharge permit and this chapter.
      WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices or structures used
for treating wastewater.
      WATERCOURSE. Any natural or artificial channel for the passage of water.
   (B)   The meaning of all terms used in this chapter that are not defined
above shall be as defined in Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.007 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   Information and data pertaining to an industrial user or other person
subject to this chapter obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharges,
permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, monitoring programs and from
city inspection, sampling and enforcement activities shall be available to the
public in accordance with the laws of the state subject to the following.
   (A)   The information shall be withheld from disclosure if the industrial
user or the person subject to this chapter makes a specific and timely request
in writing and demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Director that the
release of the information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable law.
   (B)   When timely requested and demonstrated that the information should be
held confidential, the portions of the information that might disclose trade
secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the
public, but shall be made available upon request to governmental agencies for
uses related to the NPDES or pretreatment and monitoring program and in
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the information.
   (C)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other “effluent data”,
as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 2.302, will not be recognized as confidential
information and will be made available to the public without restriction.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.008 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be effective as of ten days following
4-2-1997.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
PROHIBITED DISCHARGES AND LIMITATIONS
§ 51.020 GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall discharge or
cause, suffer or permit to be discharged to the POTW any pollutants that:
   (A)   Cause a treatment plant upset, whether that treatment plant is owned
or operated by the city or by any other entity, including, but not limited to,
the City of Austin, that treats wastewater under a contract or similar
arrangement with the city;
   (B)   Cause pass through or otherwise cause or contribute to pollution of
the receiving waters of the POTW;
   (C)   Cause interference with the operation of the POTW;
   (D)   Cause the POTW to be in violation of the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (“NPDES”) permit held by the City of Austin, Texas;
   (E)   Cause damage to the POTW or any portion of the sanitary sewer;
   (F)   Cause a hazard to life or property;
   (G)   Cause ambient air quality of the POTW to exceed standards established
by federal, state or local law;
   (H)   Violate any term or condition of a wastewater discharge permit issued
under this chapter;
   (I)   Cause or constitute a public nuisance or imminent endangerment to the
public health, safety or welfare;
   (J)   Cause the presence of pollutants in the POTW or in treatment plant
sludge in excess of the limits established for same in applicable federal,
state and local rules and guidelines; and
   (K)   Cause the POTW to be in violation of the city’s permit.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.021 APPLICATION.
   The foregoing general prohibitions shall apply to all persons discharging to
the POTW or sanitary sewer whether or not the person is subject to categorical
treatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment
standards or requirements.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.022 SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS.
   In addition to the general prohibitions set out above, no person shall
discharge, or cause, suffer or permit to be discharged, to the POTW any of the
following pollutants:
   (A)   Other waste, as defined in this chapter;
   (B)   Flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases, and similar
substances that may create a fire or explosive hazard in the collection system
or the POTW including, without limitation, pollutants with a closed cup
flashpoint of less than 40°F (60°C) utilizing the test methods specified in 40
C.F.R. § 261.21, as amended;
   (C)   Pollutants regulated pursuant to any categorical pretreatment standard
promulgated by EPA in a concentration or amount in excess of the limit
specified in the standard;
   (D)   Any wastewater having a temperature of 120°F (48.9°C) or higher, or at
a temperature that will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in
interference or increase the temperature of the influent to the treatment plant
to 104°F (40°C) or higher;
   (E)   Garbage other than comminuted garbage;
   (F)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other substances in
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other materials, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or prevent entry into
sewers for maintenance or repair;
   (G)   Pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes
within the POTW in a quantity or concentration capable of causing danger to
life, health or safety;
   (H)   Fat, oil, grease or similar material in excess of an instantaneous
maximum allowable limit of 200 milligrams per liter;
   (I)   Substances having a pH value lower than 6.0 or higher than 11.5, or
any acid, alkali or other substance that damages, by corrosion or otherwise,
any part of the POTW or sanitary sewer;
   (J)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil
origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
   (K)   Any waste trucked or hauled from its point of origin that contains a
pollutant prohibited by this chapter unless otherwise specifically approved by
the Director based upon criteria and procedures set out in this chapter;
   (L)   Any material removed from a pretreatment facility or private sewage
facility, except at discharge points designated by the Director;
   (M)   Any of the following pollutants in solution or suspension in
concentrations exceeding the following prescribed limits:
Pollutant Monthly Average Limits in mg/l
Pollutant             Monthly Average Limits in mg/l
Arsenic, Total (T)    0.2
Cadmium (T)           0.5
Chromium (T)          2.5
Copper (T)            1.9
Cyanide (T)           1.0
Fluoride (T)          65
Lead (T)              0.4
Manganese (T)         6.1
Mercury (T)           0.002
Nickel (T)            1.6
Silver (T)            1.0
Total Toxic Organics* 2.0
Zinc (T)              2.3
*The Total Toxic Organics (TTO) limit applies to the sum of the concentrations
of toxic organics listed in Table II of Appendix D, 40 C.F.R. part 122.
 
   (N)   Phenols or other substances in concentrations as to produce odor or
taste in the waters receiving wastewater treatment plant effluent where the
receiving waters are used as drinking water;
   (O)   Wastewater containing radioactive materials in concentrations greater
than allowable under current regulations of the State Department of Health or
other agency of competent jurisdiction;
   (P)   Solids or viscous pollutants in quantities or concentrations capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in the POTW or any portion of the collection
system thereby resulting in interference;
   (Q)   Any pollutant including, without limitation, oxygen demanding
pollutants (BOD and the like) discharged to the POTW at a flow rate and/or
pollutant concentration capable of causing interference or which are otherwise
not amenable to treatment;
   (R)   Any pollutant that imparts color that cannot be removed by the
treatment process including, without limitation, dye water, vegetable tanning
solutions or whole blood, which consequently imparts color to the treatment
plant effluent;
   (S)   Medical wastes except in accordance with the terms and conditions of a
wastewater discharge permit issued under this chapter;
   (T)   Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial waste or other prohibited waste unless otherwise specifically
authorized by the Director in accordance with the criteria and the procedures
set forth in this chapter;
   (U)   Any pollutants in wastewater that, alone or in conjunction with other
sources of waste water, cause the treatment plant effluent to fail a toxicity
test;
   (V)   Wastes containing detergents, surface active agents or other
substances that may cause foaming in the POTW or treatment plant effluent that
results in a violation of the permit or of the City of Austin’s NPDES permit;
   (W)   Wastewater causing a single reading over 10% of the lower explosive
limit (LEL) of an explosion hazard meter;
   (X)   Antifreeze or coolant solutions used in vehicles or motorized
equipment;
   (Y)   A discharge at a flow rate or quantity that exceeds the carrying
capacity of that part of the collection system through which it flows; and
   (Z)   Drainage water or ground water that has become contaminated by one or
more pollutants prohibited by this chapter unless all of the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   An assessment has been made by the Director of the characteristics,
volume and concentrations of the pollutants involved;
      (2)   A determination has been made by the Director that discharge to the
city sewer system is an appropriate disposal method;
      (3)   A determination has been made by the Director that discharge of the
pollutant(s) in question will not cause harm to the city sewer system or to
employees or to other persons or property;
      (4)   Pretreatment of the polluted water by the discharger to the
discharge standards of this chapter for the pollutants in question;
      (5)   Presentation to the Director of an application for a wastewater
discharge permit conforming in all respects to the requirements of this
chapter; and
      (6)   Issuance of a wastewater discharge permit by the Director pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter setting forth the conditions to which the
proposed discharge is subject.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.023 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES.
   Pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(a)(2), a person discharging wastewater
containing prohibited waste to the POTW shall have the following affirmative
defenses to the general prohibitions and specific prohibitions set forth above.
   (A)   Upset. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
following requirements are met.
      (1)   “Upset” defined. For purposes of this section, the term UPSET shall
mean an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond
the reasonable control of the person discharging wastewater to the POTW;
provided, however, that, the term shall not include noncompliance with the
general and specific prohibitions set forth above to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance or careless or improper operation.
      (2)   Demonstration of upset. A person desiring to establish the
affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate through properly signed,
contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence that:
         (a)   An upset occurred and the person can identity the cause(s) of
the upset;
         (b)   The facility was at the time of the upset being operated in a
prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable and generally
accepted operation and maintenance procedures; and
         (c)   The person verbally reported the following information to the
Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset and followed the verbal
report with a complete written report of same within five days:
            1.   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
            2.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
            3.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
      (3)   Burden of proof regarding defense. In any enforcement proceeding,
the person seeking to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall have the
burden of proof.
      (4)   Applicability of defense. The affirmative defense of upset shall be
available only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards and shall not apply in any other context.
      (5)   Control of discharge pending resolution of upset. A person whose
pretreatment system is affected by upset shall control production of all
discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical
pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment
facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment
is provided. (By way of example and not of limitation, this requirement shall
apply in situations where the primary source of power of the treatment facility
is reduced, lost or fails.)
   (B)   Compliance with prohibited discharge standards. A person discharging
wastewater containing prohibited waste to the POTW shall have an affirmative
defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the
general prohibitions or specific prohibitions set forth above if it can prove
that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in
conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or
interference and that either:
      (1)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the person
was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass
through or interference; or
      (2)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the person’s prior discharge when
the city was in compliance with the permit and the City of Austin was regularly
in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, both were
in compliance with applicable sludge disposal requirements.
   (C)   Bypass. A person discharging wastewater containing prohibited waste to
the POTW may cause, suffer or permit to occur a bypass meeting the conditions
set forth in this division (C) and the bypass shall not constitute a violation
of the general or specific prohibitions set forth above.
      (1)   “Bypass” defined. The term BYPASS shall mean the intentional
diversion of wastestreams from any portion of the wastewater treatment system
of a person discharging wastewater containing prohibited waste to the POTW.
      (2)   Conditions for allowable maintenance related bypass. A person
discharging wastewater containing prohibited waste to the POTW may allow bypass
to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be
violated, but only if the bypass is for essential maintenance to assure
efficient operation; such a bypass is not subject to the further conditions and
limitations of this division (C).
      (3)   Prior notice of anticipated bypass. If the person knows in advance
of the need for a bypass, the person shall submit notice of same to the
Director at least ten days prior to the date of the anticipated bypass, if
possible.
      (4)   Notice regarding unanticipated bypass. The person shall submit
verbal notice to the Director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds
applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes
aware of the bypass. A written report of the bypass shall contain a description
of the bypass and its cause, the duration of the bypass, including exact dates
and times and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue, and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Director may waive the requirement of a
written report on a case-by-case basis if a complete verbal report has been
received within 24 hours.
      (5)   General prohibition of bypass; exceptions. Bypass is prohibited and
the Director may take enforcement action against a person causing or allowing a
bypass unless:
         (a)   The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury or severe property damage; as used herein, the term SEVERE PROPERTY
DAMAGE shall mean substantial physical damage to property, damage to the
treatment facilities that causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and
permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur
in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not mean and shall not
include economic loss caused by production delays;
         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         (c)   The person submits the notices required under divisions (C)(3)
and (4) above.
      (6)   Director approval of anticipated bypass. The Director is authorized
to approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the
Director determines that the anticipated bypass meets three conditions listed
in division (C)(5) above.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.024 DILUTION.
   No person shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way,
dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment
to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized
by an applicable pretreatment requirement or standard.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.025 IMPROPER PROCESSING OR STORAGE.
   No person shall process or store prohibited waste in a manner as to cause,
suffer, permit or result in a discharge of the prohibited waste to the POTW.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.026 PROTECTION; ASSIGNMENTS.
   If necessary to protect the POTW or sanitary sewer, the Director may issue a
permit, order or rule that assigns the limit on discharge of fat, oil, grease
or a similar substance as an:
   (A)   Instantaneous maximum allowable limit;
   (B)   Daily average limit;
   (C)   Daily maximum limit;
   (D)   Monthly average limit; or
   (E)   Limit of other sampling duration or averaging period.
(Ord. 030121, passed 1-21-2003)
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
§ 51.040 PRETREATMENT REQUIRED.
   Any person generating wastewater containing waste prohibited from discharge
to the POTW by this chapter and who desires to discharge the same to the POTW
shall pretreat or otherwise dispose of the prohibited waste so as to make the
wastewater actually discharged to the POTW conform to the discharge standards,
limits, requirements and conditions established in this chapter.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.041 PRETREATMENT FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   Any person discharging wastewater containing prohibited waste to the POTW,
whether directly or indirectly, shall install, operate and maintain, at its
sole expense, all necessary wastewater treatment facilities specified by this
chapter to treat the prohibited wastes so that the effluent discharged to the
POTW by the person will comply at all times with applicable categorical
pretreatment standards, local limits and all other rules, standards and
limitations set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.042 GENERAL PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   All pretreatment facilities shall comply with the following general
requirements.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall commence a discharge of wastewater
containing prohibited waste from a pretreatment facility to the POTW without
first having secured a wastewater discharge permit from the Director in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Discharge to comply with permit. The discharge from a pretreatment
facility shall comply at all times with the terms, conditions and limitations
set forth in the wastewater discharge permit issued by the Director in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Approval of plans; pretreatment processes. Any person desiring to
discharge wastewater containing prohibited waste to the POTW, and who is
required by this chapter to pretreat the waste prior to such discharge thereof,
shall submit to the Director for review and approval, prior to the discharge or
the commencement of construction of pretreatment facilities or the utilization
or modification of any pretreatment facility, method, process or technology,
complete plans and specifications for the pretreatment system and a description
of the proposed pretreatment method, process or technology to be utilized,
including, without limitation, any products, chemicals, agents or devices to be
utilized for pretreatment; provided, however, that, the approval of the plans
and specifications by the Director shall not relieve a person of the continuing
obligation to install, operate, maintain and, if necessary, modify the
pretreatment system so that the discharge is in compliance at all times with
the requirements of this chapter and other applicable law.
   (D)   Inspection and approval of pretreatment facilities. No person shall
commence any discharge of wastewater to the POTW or sanitary sewer from or
through a pretreatment facility unless and until the pretreatment facility has
been inspected and approved by the Director.
   (E)   Testing of pretreatment facilities and products. The Director is
authorized to require testing of pretreatment facilities, agents, products or
devices prior to the utilization of same in the treatment process or prior to
the commencement of any discharge to the POTW from or through the pretreatment
facility.
   (F)   Installation requirements. Pretreatment facilities shall be of a
design, size and construction approved by the Director and shall be installed
and connected to the POTW in a manner approved by the Director.
   (G)   Additional pretreatment conditions authorized. In order to protect the
POTW, the Director is hereby authorized to require any person discharging to
the POTW or sanitary sewer to comply with any or all of the following
conditions by inclusion of same in the wastewater discharge permit issued under
this chapter.
      (1)   Wastestream controls. The Director may require any person
discharging to the POTW to:
         (a)   Restrict or equalize the rate of flow of the discharge;
         (b)   Designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into
specific sewers;
         (c)   Relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge;
         (d)   Separate domestic sewage wastestreams from industrial
wastestreams; and
         (e)   Implement other and further wastestream control, flow control or
other conditions and limitations on the wastestream as the Director shall deem
reasonable and necessary to protect the POTW, determine the compliance of the
person discharging with this chapter or other applicable law or otherwise
implement the purposes and intent of this chapter.
      (2)   Flammable gas detection. The Director is authorized to require any
person discharging wastewater with the potential to discharge flammable
substances to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
matter.
      (3)   Accidental discharge/slug control plans. Every person discharging
wastewater containing industrial waste or other prohibited waste to the POTW
shall provide protection from the accidental discharge of prohibited waste.
Prior to the connection of water and/or wastewater service, the Director may
require a person proposing to discharge wastewater to the POTW to develop and
implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan. At least every two years,
the Director shall evaluate whether each of the significant industrial users
discharging wastewater from the POTW needs to prepare a plan. Each plan will
include, at a minimum, the following:
         (a)   A description of discharge practices including non-routine batch
discharges;
         (b)   A description of stored chemicals;
         (c)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental
or slug discharge in violation of any prohibition contained in this chapter,
any wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder or any other pretreatment
requirement or standard; and
         (d)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge which may include, without limitation:
            1.   Inspection and maintenance of storage areas;
            2.   Handling and transfer of materials;
            3.   Loading and unloading operations;
            4.   Control of plant site run-off;
            5.   Worker training;
            6.   Construction of containment structures or equipment;
            7.   Measures for containing toxic organic pollutants;
            8.   Measures and equipment for emergency response;
            9.   Measures for detecting a spill; and
            10.   Other and further procedures or requirements as the Director
shall deem necessary to protect the POTW from accidental discharges and/or slug
loads.
   (H)   Mass limitations. The Director may impose mass limitations on
pollutant discharges where, in the judgment of the Director, limitation of the
mass of pollutants discharged is necessary for protection of the POTW or any
portion of the sanitary sewer affected by the discharge and/or to prevent the
dilution of pollutants to meet the pollutant concentration limits specified in
this chapter.
   (I)   Dilution prohibited. Unless expressly authorized by an applicable
pretreatment standard or requirement, no person shall increase the use of
process water or in any other manner attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial
or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a
discharge limitation or pretreatment standard specified in this chapter.
   (J)   Permit standards generally. The Director is hereby authorized to
establish in wastewater discharge permits issued under this chapter more
stringent pretreatment standards, requirements and conditions than those set
forth in this chapter or in 40 C.F.R. part 403, where the Director determines
that the standards, requirements or conditions are necessary to protect the
POTW, any portion of the sanitary sewer, or to implement the general purposes
and intent of this chapter.
   (K)   Use of enzymes, agents or devices. Use of enzymes, chemicals or other
agents or devices for the purpose of causing oil, grease and/or solids to pass
through the pretreatment facility is prohibited.
   (L)   Wastes and residues removed from pretreatment facilities. Storage,
handling and transportation of wastes and residues removed from pretreatment
facilities shall be performed in accordance with all federal, state and local
laws, ordinances and regulations applicable to the type or class of waste
removed from the pretreatment facility.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.043 INDUSTRY SPECIFIC PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS; EXEMPTIONS.
   The following additional pretreatment requirements and exemptions shall
apply to the specific activities and industries described below.
   (A)   Commercial food preparation. Any person engaged in commercial food
preparation including, without limitation, food processors, bakeries,
restaurants, schools, hospitals, retirement homes, grocery stores or other
commercial food preparation operations shall construct, operate and maintain a
pretreatment system in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Vehicle wash facilities. Any person engaging in the commercial washing
of motorized vehicles, whether utilizing automated equipment or handwashing,
discharging or proposing to discharge to the POTW shall discharge through a
pretreatment facility of a design, size and construction approved by the
Director. The vehicle wash area shall be protected so that rain water does not
enter the sanitary sewer.
   (C)   Minor vehicle maintenance areas. Areas where minor vehicle repairs
such as engine tune-up, air conditioning repair, electrical repair, front end
alignments, exhaust system replacement and repair, suspension system
replacement and repair and brake system repair are performed may discharge
floor wash water to the POTW through a pretreatment facility of a design, size
and construction approved by the Director.
   (D)   Major vehicle maintenance areas and fluid change areas. Areas where
major vehicle repairs such as engine dismantling, transmission repairs,
hydraulic system repairs, differential repair and/or rebuilding of any of the
above parts or fluid changing are performed shall not have a floor drain or
other device where wastewater may discharge to the POTW unless a pretreatment
system or process is provided that consistently produces an effluent that is in
compliance with the standards established in this chapter. If a pretreatment
system or process meeting the requirements of this chapter is not provided, all
drainage from the areas shall discharge into a hold-haul tank of a design, size
and construction approved by the Director and the contents thereof shall be
disposed of according to applicable law. If a pretreatment system or process
meeting the foregoing requirements is not provided, the major vehicle
maintenance and fluid change areas shall be physically separated from any area
that drains to the POTW.
   (E)   Steam cleaning and chemical cleaning facilities. Drainage from steam
cleaning and/or chemical cleaning facilities shall not be discharged to the
sanitary sewer unless a pretreatment facility or process is provided that
consistently produces an effluent in compliance with this chapter.
   (F)   Pretreatment system maintenance documentation. Any person with a
pretreatment system shall make the most recent waste hauler’s manifest
available for inspection upon request by the industrial waste inspector.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.044 NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   The categorical pretreatment standards in 40 C.F.R. chapter I, subchapter N,
parts 405 through 471 are hereby incorporated and shall apply to categorical
users as follows.
   (A)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
Director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with
40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c).
   (B)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Director shall
impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula set out in 40
C.F.R. § 403(e).
   (C)   A person subject to a categorical pretreatment standard may obtain a
variance from the categorical standard if the person can prove, pursuant to the
procedural and substantive provisions in 40 C.F.R. § 403.13, that factors
relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors
considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard.
   (D)   A person subject to a categorical pretreatment standard may obtain a
net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 C.F.R. §
403.15.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
SPECIAL PROCEDURES RELATING TO PROHIBITED WASTE
§ 51.060 GENERAL.
   The following special procedures are hereby established and shall apply to
any person discharging prohibited waste to the POTW.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.061 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS.
   The following requirements and procedures shall apply to any person
discharging or proposing to discharge prohibited waste to the POTW.
   (A)   Wastewater discharge permit required. It shall be unlawful for any
person to deposit or discharge prohibited waste to the POTW without first
having made application and obtained a wastewater discharge permit and complied
with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Form of application. Each application for a wastewater discharge
permit hereunder shall be made in writing and filed with the Director on a form
promulgated for this purpose by the Director.
   (C)   Information requirements. An application for a wastewater discharge
permit under this chapter shall include, at a minimum, the following
information:
      (1)   Name, title, address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   Description of the activities, facilities and processes conducted
on the premises for which a wastewater discharge permit is sought;
      (3)   The nature and characteristics of the proposed discharge;
      (4)   A complete list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored
at the facility sought to be permitted which are or could, either accidentally
or intentionally, be discharged to the POTW or sanitary sewer;
      (5)   Each product produced by type, amount, process and rate of
production;
      (6)   Type and amount of raw materials processed, including the daily
average and daily maximum;
      (7)   A copy of the site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing
plans with sufficient detail to show all sewers, floor drains, pretreatment
facilities and appurtenances by size, location and elevation and all points of
origin;
      (8)   Time and duration of the discharge; and
      (9)   Other and further information deemed necessary by the Director to
evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application, to determine whether the
facilities of the applicant and proposed discharge will be in compliance with
this chapter, or otherwise to fulfill the purposes and intent of this chapter.
   (D)   Certification of signatory. All applications for a wastewater
discharge permit hereunder shall contain the following certification and be
signed by a duly authorized representative of the applicant:
      “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of legal
action, fine and rejection of this application.”
   (E)   Identity of applicant. An application for issuance of a wastewater
discharge permit shall be filed by the owner, occupant or manager of premises
for which a wastewater discharge permit is sought, and in whose name water
service from the city is established. If the owner, occupant or manager is a
business entity other than a natural person (e.g., corporation, partnership,
association and the like), the application shall be made in the name of the
entity.
   (F)   Identity of signatory. If an application for issuance of a wastewater
discharge permit under this chapter is made by a natural person, the person
shall sign the application. If an application for issuance of a wastewater
discharge permit under this chapter is made on behalf of a legal entity other
than a natural person, the application shall be made in the name of the entity
and shall be signed by a principal, authorized corporate officer, ranking
elected official or other duly authorized representative of the applicant
entity.
   (G)   Application fees. An application for a wastewater discharge permit or
an application for transfer of an existing wastewater discharge permit shall be
accompanied by the nonrefundable application and permit fee established from
time to time by the City Council by ordinance or resolution.
   (H)   Transfer of existing permit. At least 90 days prior to a transfer of
ownership, occupancy or management of premises currently permitted hereunder,
the new owner, occupant or manager shall apply for transfer of the wastewater
discharge permit to the new owner, occupant or manager and approval thereof by
the Director shall be subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   The new owner, occupant or manager shall submit a written
application for transfer thereof on a form provided for this purpose by the
Director satisfying all information requirements for new applications for
wastewater discharge permits hereunder;
      (2)   The application for transfer must indicate no material change in
equipment, facilities or processes on the permitted premises;
      (3)   The application for transfer must indicate no material change in
the character, quantity, rate of flow or other characteristics of the
industrial waste discharge; and
      (4)   The discharge from the permitted premises must be in compliance
with the requirements of this chapter at the time of the transfer.
   (I)   Multiple use buildings. For multiple use buildings (such as shopping
centers, medical service buildings, and the like) having one water meter issued
to the same person, one permit shall be issued to the person in whose name the
water bill is issued provided the application conforms to the requirements and
procedures set forth in this chapter. The quality and volume of the discharge
from a multiple use building shall be monitored by the city and the applicant
shall be responsible for the discharge and be billed accordingly.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.062 EXEMPTIONS TO PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   Without prejudice to the application of any other requirement of this
chapter, the following premises shall be exempt from the permit requirement set
forth in §
51.061:
   (A)   Single-family residences;
   (B)   Residential duplexes;
   (C)   Other commercial buildings discharging only sewage; and
   (D)   Funeral parlors.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.063 REQUIRED STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Authority to require installations. The Director is hereby authorized
to require any person discharging or proposing to discharge wastewater
containing prohibited waste to the POTW to install, operate and maintain in
safe and proper operating order, at the sole expense of the person,
pretreatment, sampling, monitoring, flow equalization, flow metering or other
equipment of a size, type, character and specification as the Director shall
determine appropriate for the discharge, operations and facilities of the
person.
   (B)   Sampling port and control manhole. Any person discharging wastewater
containing prohibited waste to the POTW or proposing the discharge shall
install, operate and maintain, at the sole expense of the person discharging or
proposing the discharge, a suitable sampling port or control manhole in
accordance with the following requirements:
      (1)   The sampling port or control manhole shall be located at a place
approved by the Director at or near the property line;
      (2)   The sampling port or control manhole shall intersect the common
building drain line connected to the city’s sanitary sewer;
      (3)   If the property has more than one drain line connected to the
city’s sanitary sewer, a sampling port or control manhole must be constructed
on each drain line;
      (4)   Plans for the sampling port and/or manhole shall be submitted to
the Director for review and approval prior to commencement of construction
thereof;
      (5)   The sampling port and/or manhole shall be maintained at all times
in a safe and proper operating condition in accordance with the manufacturer’s
specifications; and
      (6)   The sampling port and/or manhole shall be accessible at all times
to the Director for inspection, sampling, monitoring of flows and any other
purposes relating to the implementation and enforcement of this chapter.
   (C)   Flow equalization tanks. In order to prevent pass through,
interference, overloading of the collection system, treatment plant upset,
inadequate treatment or damage to the POTW, the Director may require a flow
equalization tank of a design, size and construction approved by the Director
for this purpose.
   (D)   Operation and maintenance. The person discharging wastewater
containing prohibited waste shall operate and maintain all required
pretreatment, sampling, monitoring, flow equalization or flow metering
equipment required under this chapter at his or her sole expense in accordance
with the manufacturer’s specifications and the requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   Monitoring installations by regulatory agencies. As a condition for
connection and discharge to the POTW, the city, the state and the EPA shall
have the right to install and maintain on premises emitting a discharge of
wastewater containing industrial waste or other prohibited waste the equipment,
devices and personnel as are deemed necessary to conduct sampling, metering or
other monitoring of the person’s facilities, operations or discharge.
   (F)   Special monitoring and recording devices for pretreatment facilities.
The Director is hereby authorized to require any person by this chapter to use
pretreatment facilities prior to discharging to the POTW to install the
monitoring and recording devices as the Director shall determine necessary to
monitor the following parameters:
      (1)   pH;
      (2)   Dissolved oxygen (DO);
      (3)   Total carbon (TC);
      (4)   Oxidation reduction potential (ORP);
      (5)   Temperature;
      (6)   Conductivity;
      (7)   Specific ions;
      (8)   Flow;
      (9)   Total organic carbon (TOC);
      (10)   Lower explosive limit (LEL);
      (11)   Sulfides; and
      (12)   Other and further parameters as the Director shall determine
necessary to monitor the discharge of to the POTW.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.064 MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.
   (A)   The volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW shall be determined
using one of the following processes as approved by the Director:
      (1)   The actual metered flow of water measured through the city’s water
meter;
      (2)   The wastewater average which is the average of the actual metered
flow of water through the city’s water meter for the December, January and
February billing periods; or
      (3)   A wastewater flow meter of a design, size and construction approved
by the Director and installed by the customer at the customer’s expense in each
of the customer’s house laterals in a manner and at a location approved by the
Director.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Director shall have authority to
require the measurement of flow at each wastewater tap of the person
discharging wastewater to the POTW.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.065 DETERMINATION BY CITY OF THE CHARACTER AND CONCENTRATION OF
POLLUTANTS.
   The wastewater discharged or deposited to the POTW by persons classified as
significant industrial users shall be subject to inspection and sampling on at
least an annual basis and more frequently if the Director determines that more
frequent inspections and sampling are necessary to protect the POTW. The
wastewater discharged or deposited to the POTW by persons not classified as
significant industrial users shall be subject to periodic inspection and
sampling as often as may be deemed necessary by the Director. Samples shall be
collected in a manner as to be representative of the character and
concentration of the wastewater under operational conditions. The laboratory
methods used in the examination of the samples shall be those set forth in the
Approved Methods. The sampling schedule or program for determining the
character and concentration of wastewater shall be determined by the Director.
Should the person discharging wastewater containing prohibited waste to the
POTW desire that a determination of the quality of the wastewater be made at
some time other than that scheduled by the Director, the special determination
may be made by the Director at the expense of the person.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.066 HAZARDOUS WASTE NOTIFICATION REQUIRED.
   Any person who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the
Director, the Director of the EPA Regional Waste Management Division, and state
hazardous waste authorities having jurisdiction in writing of any discharge
into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a
hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R. part 261 in accordance with the following
standards and procedures.
   (A)   Required information. The notification required hereunder shall
include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 261, the
EPA hazardous waste number and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or
more). If the person discharges more than 100 kilograms of waste per calendar
month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following
information to the extent the information is known and readily available to the
person:
      (1)   An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes;
      (2)   An estimation of the mass and concentration of the constituents in
the wastestream discharge during that calendar month;
      (3)   An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream
expected to be discharged during that calendar month; and
      (4)   An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream
expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.
   (B)   Deadline for notifications. All notifications required under this
section shall be made no later
than 180 days after the discharge commences; provided, however, that, any
notification under this section need be made only once for each hazardous waste
discharged.
   (C)   Pollutants previously reported. The notification requirement in this
section does not apply to
pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements set forth in
this chapter.
   (D)   Quantitative exemption. Dischargers are exempt from the reporting
requirements of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no
more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes unless the wastes are acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).
Discharges of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a
calendar month or any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40
C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e) requires a one-time notification satisfying
the information requirements set forth above. Subsequent months during which
the person discharges more than the quantities of any hazardous wastes do not
require additional notification.
   (E)   New or additional hazardous wastes. In the case of any new regulations
under § 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste
or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the person must
notify the POTW, EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director and
state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of any substance within 90
days of the effective date of the regulations.
   (F)   Volume reduction plan. In the case of any notification made under this
section, the person shall certify that he or she has a program in place to
reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.067 RETENTION OF RECORDS.
   (A)   General. A person discharging wastewater containing prohibited waste
to the POTW shall retain and make available for inspection and copying by the
Director all records and information required to be made, retained or reported
under this chapter.
   (B)   Retention period. Unless required to be retained for a longer period
under federal or state law, records required to be retained hereunder shall be
retained for a period of not less than three years from the date of creation
thereof.
   (C)   Extension of retention period. The records retention period set forth
herein shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation
concerning compliance with this chapter or where the person has been ordered to
retain records for a longer period under the enforcement provisions of this
chapter.
   (D)   Failure to retain a violation. Failure to retain records as required
by this section shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997) Penalty, see §
51.999
PERMITS; PROCEDURES AND CONDITIONS
§ 51.080 GENERAL.
   The Director is hereby authorized to issue wastewater discharge permits in
accordance with the standards, procedures and conditions set forth below.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.081 APPROVAL STANDARDS.
   The Director shall approve the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit or
an application for transfer or renewal thereof only after the Director
determines that:
   (A)   The application is complete and accurate and meets all requirements of
this chapter;
   (B)   Installation, inspection and approval by the Director of all
facilities required under this chapter has been completed; and
   (C)   The proposed discharge will comply in all respects with the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.082 DENIAL OF APPLICATION.
   The Director may disapprove an application for a wastewater discharge permit
or for transfer or renewal thereof that is false, incomplete, inaccurate, filed
by a person or in a manner other than that prescribed in this chapter or which
otherwise fails to comply with the requirements and procedures of this chapter.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.083 REQUIRED PERMIT CONDITIONS FOR SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS.
   For significant industrial users and other industrial users designated as
such by the Director under the standards set forth in 40 C.F.R. § 403.3(4), as
amended, a wastewater discharge permit issued under this chapter shall include,
at a minimum, the following terms, conditions and limitations:
   (A)   A statement identifying the permittee, the premises from which the
permitted discharge will be emitted and the nature, characteristics, conditions
and limitations applicable to the permitted discharge;
   (B)   A statement describing the duration of the wastewater discharge permit
which shall in no event exceed one year;
   (C)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification and approval of the Director and a requirement for
furnishing the new owner, operator or manager of the permitted premises with a
copy of the permit;
   (D)   Effluent limitations applicable to the permittee based on applicable
standards set forth in federal and state law and this chapter;
   (E)   Pretreatment, self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and
record keeping requirements applicable to the applicant which shall include an
identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling locations, sampling
frequency, and sample type based on federal, state and local law; and
   (F)   A statement of applicable civil, criminal, and administrative,
penalties for violation of applicable pretreatment standards other requirements
hereof and any applicable compliance schedule; provided that, the schedule may
not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal
or slate law or this chapter.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.084 ADDITIONAL PERMIT CONDITIONS AUTHORIZED FOR SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL
USERS.
   Where the Director determines the same to be necessary to protect the POTW
or further the purposes of this chapter, wastewater discharge permits issued to
significant industrial users may contain, without limitation, the following
additional conditions:
   (A)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
   (B)   Limits on the instantaneous daily and monthly average and/or maximum
concentration, mass or other measure of identified wastewater pollutants or
properties;
   (C)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment and monitoring
technology, pollution control or construction of appropriate containment
devices designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants
into the POTW;
   (D)   Requirements for development and implementation of spill control plans
including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental,
unanticipated or routine discharges;
   (E)   Requirements for development and implementation of waste minimization
plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
   (F)   A statement of the unit charge or schedule of charges and fees for the
management and treatment of wastewater discharged to the POTW;
   (G)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment;
   (H)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit and/
or this chapter does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance
with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards including those
which become effective during the term of the permit;
   (I)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is subject to
modification for good cause as determined by the Director in accordance with
this chapter; and
   (J)   A statement that the permitted facilities, pretreatment and equipment
and any source of wastewater or prohibited waste and all records pertinent
thereto shall be subject to inspection by the Director or his or her authorized
representative at any time upon presentation of his or her credentials in
accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.085 REQUIRED PERMIT CONDITIONS FOR OTHER INDUSTRIAL USERS.
   For other industrial users not classified as significant industrial users
under this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit issued under this chapter
shall contain, at a minimum, the terms and conditions set forth in §
51.083(A), (B), (C) and (D). A wastewater discharge permit issued under this
section may include those conditions listed in §
51.083(C) and (D) where the Director shall determine the inclusion of same to
be necessary for the protection of the POTW or the proper implementation of
this chapter.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.086 AUTHORIZATION TO ESTABLISH ADDITIONAL PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   Any wastewater discharge permit issued under this chapter may include
additional or more stringent conditions deemed by the Director to be necessary
to:
   (A)   Prevent pass through or interference;
   (B)   Protect the water quality of the waters receiving the treatment plant
effluent;
   (C)   Protect the health and safety of employees and the public;
   (D)   Facilitate proper sludge management and disposal;
   (E)   Protect against damage to the POTW or sanitary sewer;
   (F)   Provide for self-monitoring, reporting and record keeping by persons
discharging wastewater containing industrial waste or other prohibited waste to
the POTW;
   (G)   Provided for city access to permitted facilities to inspect, sample
and conduct enforcement activities under this chapter;
   (H)   Minimize the expense of the wastewater treatment processes;
   (I)   Ensure compliance with the city’s permit and with applicable NPDES
permits held by the City of Austin;
   (J)   Protect ambient air quality; and
   (K)   Otherwise to implement fully the purpose and intent of this chapter
and all federal pretreatment standards and regulations.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.087 MODIFICATION OF PERMIT.
   The Director is hereby authorized to modify, upon application by the holder
or on his or her own motion, a wastewater discharge permit issued under this
chapter for good cause which shall include, without limitation, the following:
   (A)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment
standards or requirements including amendments to this chapter;
   (B)   To address significant alterations or additions to the permittee’s
operation, processes or wastewater volumes or character of discharge since the
time of issuance or last amendment of the permit;
   (C)   Any change in the POTW or sanitary sewer that requires either a
temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the discharge previously
authorized;
   (D)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the POTW, sanitary sewer, receiving waters, treatment plant or field personnel
or the public;
   (E)   Violations of any terms or conditions of the permit that, in the
judgment of the Director, require modification of the permit to correct, abate
or prevent a recurrence thereof;
   (F)   Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required report;
   (G)   Revision of or the grant of a variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.13;
   (H)   To correct typographical, clerical or other ministerial errors in the
permit; and
   (I)   To reflect a transfer of the premises for which the permit was
obtained to a new owner, occupant or manager.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.088 VOIDING PREVIOUS PERMITS.
   The Director is authorized to void and terminate a wastewater discharge
permit previously issued for the following reasons:
   (A)   Abandonment of the permitted premises;
   (B)   Vacancy or other non-use of the permitted facilities for a period of
90 days;
   (C)   Cessation of operations for which a wastewater discharge permit is
required under this chapter;
   (D)   Transfer of the permitted operations to a new owner, occupant or
manager; and
   (E)   Issuance of a new or modified permit hereunder.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.089 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The Director is hereby authorized to revoke a wastewater discharge
permit issued under this chapter for any one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   Misrepresentation or failure to disclose all relevant facts in the
wastewater discharge permit application;
      (2)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter, any pretreatment
standard or requirement or the terms of any wastewater discharge permit issued
hereunder;
      (3)   Failure to notify the Director of significant changes to the
character or volumes of wastewater discharged prior to the changed discharge;
      (4)   Filing false, misleading, incomplete or inaccurate self-monitoring
reports;
      (5)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      (6)   Refusal to allow the Director or his or her authorized
representative(s) access to the permitted premises or facilities or to records
or reports appertaining thereto as required by this chapter;
      (7)   Failure to comply with applicable effluent limitations established
under this chapter;
      (8)   Failure to pay applicable wastewater charges, surcharges for
treatment and handling of abnormal wastes, or fines, penalties or other charges
established under this chapter;
      (9)   Failure to comply with compliance orders or schedules established
by the Director hereunder;
      (10)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey required by the Director
hereunder;
      (11)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of permitted
facilities as required hereunder; and
      (12)   Failure to comply with applicable administrative rules or orders
established by the Director to implement the purposes and intent of this
chapter.
   (B)   The initiation of proceedings for revocation of a permit shall not
prevent the Director from initiating other proceedings for civil and/or
criminal enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.090 REVOCATION PROCEEDINGS.
   The Director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with the
following procedure.
   (A)   The Director shall issue to the permittee an order to show cause
setting forth the time and place for the revocation hearing in accordance with
the procedures in this chapter for issuance of orders to show cause.
   (B)   The Director shall conduct an informal hearing at which time the
Director will inform the permittee of the grounds for the proposed revocation
and allow the permittee the opportunity to respond the same.
   (C)   The informal hearing conducted under this part is not required to be
conducted in accordance with formal rules of evidence and the Director may
establish rules for the conduct of the hearings.
   (D)   The Director shall forward written notice to the permittee of a
decision to revoke a wastewater discharge permit hereunder together with a
statement of the permittee’s right to appeal the decision.
   (E)   The failure of the permittee to appear at the time and place indicated
for the revocation hearing shall not prevent the Director from proceeding to
revoke a permit hereunder.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
SELF-MONITORING AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
§ 51.105 PERSONS SUBJECT TO CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   Persons engaged in industries that have national pretreatment requirements
promulgated by EPA shall follow the self-monitoring and reporting requirements
published in the Federal Register. To the extent permitted by the terms of a
waste water discharge permit issued under this chapter, persons engaged in any
other industry that discharges wastes to the sanitary sewer system of the city
that is regulated by this chapter may, at the Director’s option, take periodic
samples, analyze the samples for the presence and/or quantity of pollutants
listed in this chapter and report the results to the Director. The frequency
and methods of sampling and analysis shall be consistent with the approved
methods described in this chapter. Self-monitoring and reporting shall not
replace nor supersede sampling and testing by the city. In the event of a
conflict, the city’s sampling and analysis shall control for all purposes under
this chapter.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.106 BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS REQUIRED FROM EXISTING CATEGORICAL USERS.
   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard or the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical users currently discharging or scheduled to discharge to the POTW,
shall be required to submit to the Director a report which contains the
information listed in this section.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.107 BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS REQUIRED FROM NEW SOURCE CATEGORICAL
USERS.
   At least 90 days prior to commencement of this discharge, new sources and
sources that become industrial users, subsequent to the promulgation of an
applicable categorical standard, shall be required to submit to the city a
report which contains the information required in this section together with a
report concerning the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet
applicable pretreatment standards.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.108 REQUIRED INFORMATION.
   Existing or new source categorical users described in this section are
required to submit the following information:
   (A)   Identifying information. The name and address of the facility
including the name of the owner, operator or manager of the facility;
   (B)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility;
   (C)   Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average
rate of production and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s)
conducted by the industrial user including, without limitation, a schematic
process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the
regulated processes;
   (D)   Flow data. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum
daily flow in gallons per day to the POTW from regulated process streams and
other wastestreams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream
formula set out in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e);
   (E)   Measurement of pollutants. Each categorical user described in this
section shall also:
      (1)   Identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process; and
      (2)   Submit the results of a sampling and analysis representative of
daily operations performed in accordance with approved techniques set out in 40
C.F.R. part 136 identifying the nature and concentration (and/or mass, where
required by the standard or by the city) of regulated pollutants in the
discharge from each regulated process including without limitation
instantaneous, daily maximum and long term average or mass where required by
the Director.
   (F)   Certification. A statement reviewed by the industrial user’s
authorized representative signed and certified by a qualified professional in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(2) indicating whether pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional
operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet
the pretreatment standards and requirements;
   (G)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or operation and
maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the industrial user will provide additional pretreatment and/
or operations and maintenance. The completion date in this schedule shall not
be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the
requirements set by the Director for the achievement of compliance;
   (H)   Compliance schedule progress report. The compliance schedule described
above shall include progress increments or benchmarks in the form of dates for
commencement and completion of major events leading to construction and
operation of additional pretreatment facilities required for the user to meet
the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary and final plans, executing contracts, commencement and completion
of major component construction, testing commencement of operation and the
like); provided, however, that, no increment mentioned above shall exceed nine
months with such progress reports to be provided no later than 14 days
following each date in the schedule and the date of final compliance and
including a statement as to whether each progress increment was complied with,
the reason for delay, if any, and steps taken to return to the established
schedule; and
   (I)   Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial
user subject to the pretreatment standards or requirements shall submit to the
Director a report signed and certified in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter by the authorized representative of the industrial user containing
the information required under division (C) above. For industrial users subject
to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the
procedures in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c), the report shall contain a reasonable
determination of the industrial user’s long term production rate. For all other
industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in
terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure
of operation), this report shall include the industrial user’s actual
production (or other measure of operation).
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.109 PERIODIC REPORTS REQUIRED FROM SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS AND OTHER
USERS.
   (A)   Any significant industrial user subject to a pretreatment standard
shall submit to the Director, at a frequency determined by the Director, but in
no case less than twice per calendar year, a written report, signed and
certified by the authorized representative of the user indicating the nature
and concentration of pollutants in the discharge that are limited by the
pretreatment standards, the measured or estimated average and maximum daily
flows for the reporting period and other and further information as the
Director shall require.
   (B)   The Director shall have authority to require all other persons
generating waste that is discharged, deposited or otherwise received for
treatment at the POTW to provide to the Director appropriate reports concerning
the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge, the origin of the
waste and other and further information as the Director shall deem necessary to
identify and process such waste, to protect the POTW or otherwise to implement
the purposes and intent of this chapter.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.110 REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLES REQUIRED.
   (A)   All wastewater samples reflected in periodic reports filed with the
Director hereunder shall be representative of a person’s discharge.
   (B)   Toward this end, wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities
shall be properly operated and maintained in good working order at all times.
   (C)   The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in
good working order shall not be grounds for a person to claim that sample
results are not representative of its discharge.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.111 REPORTS OF ADDITIONAL SAMPLES TAKEN.
   If a person subject to the reporting requirements in this section monitors
any pollutant more frequently than required by the Director using the approved
methods described herein, the results of this monitoring shall be included in
the periodic reports to the Director required hereunder.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.112 REPORT OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.
   Any person discharging wastewater to the POTW or any portion of the sanitary
sewer is required to notify the Director of any planned significant charges to
its operations or wastewater treatment system which might alter the nature,
quality or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change is
implemented or in accordance with the terms of its wastewater discharge permit
or the following standards and procedures, whichever are more stringent.
   (A)   Information required. The Director may require that any person
discharging wastewater to the POTW to submit information as the Director deems
reasonably necessary to evaluate a changed condition in the operations or
wastewater treatment system of the person including, without limitation, the
submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under this chapter.
   (B)   Action on changed conditions. Based on the change proposed, the
Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit or modify an existing
wastewater discharge permit under this chapter.
   (C)   Prerequisite to implementation of significant change. No person shall
implement a planned significant change until the Director has responded to the
industrial user’s notice required under this section.
   (D)   “Significant change” defined. For purpose of this section, flow
increases of 10% or greater and/or the discharge of any previously unreported
pollutants shall be deemed a SIGNIFICANT CHANGE.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.113 IMMEDIATE REPORT OF PROBLEM DISCHARGE.
   In the case of any problem discharge including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-
customary batch discharge or a slug load that may cause potential problems for
the POTW, including any violation of the prohibited discharge standards
established under this chapter, the person discharging same shall notify the
Director immediately by telephone in accordance with the following requirements
and procedures.
   (A)   Information required. The notification to the Director required under
this section shall include, at a minimum, the location of the discharge, type
of waste, concentration and volume, if known, treatability of waste, toxic
effects to humans, if any, and corrective actions taken by the person
responsible for the discharge.
   (B)   Follow-up written report required. Within five days following the
occurrence of the discharge, the person responsible for the discharge shall,
unless waived by the Director in writing, submit a detailed written report
describing the nature and causes of the discharge and the measures to be taken
by the person to prevent similar future occurrences; provided, however, that,
the notification shall not relieve the person of any loss, expense, damage or
other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW or
sanitary sewer, natural resources or any other damage to persons or property;
nor shall the notification relieve the person of any fines, civil penalties or
other liability imposed by this chapter or other applicable law.
   (C)   Consequences of failure to notify. Each failure to notify of a
potential problem discharge hereunder shall constitute a separate violation of
this chapter.
   (D)   Instruction of notice procedures. Each person discharging wastewater
containing prohibited waste shall instruct all employees who either may suffer
or cause a problem discharge to occur or be responsible for reporting same of
the obligation and proper procedures for notification of a problem discharge
hereunder and shall permanently post written notice of the procedures on a
bulletin board or other prominent place.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.114 FURTHER REPORTS REQUIRED.
   All persons discharging wastewater containing prohibited waste to the POTW
shall provide further reports and information to the Director as the Director
shall deem necessary to monitor and evaluate the particular discharge of the
person as determined on a case by case basis.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.115 SELF-REPORTING OF VIOLATIONS.
   If sampling performed by a person discharging wastewater containing
prohibited waste to the POTW indicates a violation of this chapter, the person
must notify the Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.116 REPEAT SAMPLING REQUIRED.
   A person discharging wastewater containing prohibited waste in violation of
this chapter shall repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of
the repeat analysis to the Director within 30 calendar days after becoming
aware of the violation; provided, however, the person is not required to
resample if the POTW performs monitoring at the person’s site at least once per
month or if the POTW performs sampling between the person’s initial sampling
and when the person receives the results of this sampling.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.117 SAMPLING AND ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All sampling techniques and pollutant analyses used for compilation of data
required to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application
or report required under this chapter shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. part 136 unless otherwise specified in an
applicable categorical pretreatment standard.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.118 NONSTANDARD ANALYSES.
   If 40 C.F.R. part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for
the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in
accordance with procedures approved by EPA.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.119 REQUIRED SAMPLE COLLECTION TECHNIQUES.
   Except as otherwise set forth herein, a person discharging wastewater
containing industrial waste or other prohibited waste must collect wastewater
samplings using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event
flow proportional sampling is not feasible in the judgment of the Director, the
Director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or through a
minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide
a representative sample of the effluent being discharged.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.120 GRAB SAMPLE REQUIREMENTS.
   Sample for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides and
volatile organic chemicals must be obtained using grab collection techniques.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.121 DETERMINATION OF NONCOMPLIANCE.
   The Director may utilize grab samples to determine noncompliance with
pretreatment standards.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.122 POSTMARK DATE FOR MAILED REPORTS.
   Written reports mailed postage prepaid via U.S. Postal Service will be
deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.123 UNMAILED SUBMITTALS.
   For reports not mailed via the U.S. Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall be deemed the date of submittal.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
MONITORING FOR SURCHARGE AND REMOVAL CREDIT DETERMINATIONS
§ 51.135 PAYMENT OF SURCHARGE FOR EXTRA STRENGTH WASTEWATER.
   In addition to compliance with all other requirements of this chapter, any
person discharging extra strength wastewater to the POTW shall pay a monthly
surcharge for the additional costs of handling and treatment of the extra
strength wastewater in addition to the usual monthly sewer service charges.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.136 COST FACTORS.
   The cost factors for extra strength wastewater are based on the capital and
operating cost of wastewater facilities to provide treatment for the reduction
of excessive BOD, COD and suspended solids.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.137 COMPUTATION OF SURCHARGE.
   (A)   For extra strength wastewater having a COD concentration of 2.25 or
more times that of the BOD concentration, the surcharge will be based on the
COD category in lieu of the BOD category. Computations of surcharges shall be
based on the following formula:
S = V x 8.34 (A [BOD - 200] + B [SS - 200])
or
S = V x 8.34 (C [COD - 450] + B [SS - 200])
      S:   Surcharge in dollars that will appear on the customers monthly
bills.
      V:   Wastewater actually billed in millions of gallons during the billing
period.
      8.34:   Pounds per gallon of water.
   (B)   Unit charge in dollars per pound of BOD:
      (1)   BOD: BOD strength in milligrams per liter (mg/l) by weight; and
      (2)   200: normal BOD strength in milligrams per liter (mg/l) by weight.
   (C)   Unit charge in dollars per pound for SS:
      (1)   SS: suspended solids (SS) concentration in milligrams per liter
(mg/l) by weight; and
      (2)   200: normal SS concentration in milligrams per liter (mg/l) by
weight.
   (D)   Unit charge in dollars per pound for COD:
      (1)   COD: COD strength in milligrams per liter (mg/l) by weight; and
      (2)   450: normal COD strength in milligrams per liter (mg/l) by weight.
   (E)   If the strength or concentration for BOD, SS or COD is less than the
normal strength for that category, then there shall be no surcharge for that
category, nor shall there be credit given for the total surcharge if the
strength or concentration is less than the normal.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.138 ADJUSTMENT OF RATES.
   All flow rates, BOD, COD and SS values used in determination of the
surcharge of wastewater customers shall be re-evaluated on a periodic basis as
determined by the Director and shall be adjusted to reflect any increase or
decrease in wastewater treatment costs. However, if there is a major change in
the operation to cause changes in value, the values may be increased or
decreased based on a study of changes or actual measurements. Every person
discharging wastewater to the POTW shall be responsible for notifying the
Director of major changes in its operation affecting the quantity or quality of
extra strength wastewater discharged. In the absence of the notification, the
surcharge applicable to the person shall be based on the data available to the
Director at the time the surcharge is billed.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.139 REMOVAL CREDITS.
   Any person wishing to apply for removal credit, as described in 40 C.F.R.
part 403, may do so; provided, the person assumes responsibility for all costs
incurred including those costs incurred by the city. The person shall affirm
this responsibility to the Director in a writing signed and dated by an
authorized representative of the person which shall be subject to review and
approval by the City Attorney. Any removal credit granted shall be in
accordance with the procedures for same set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 403.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 51.150 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   The Director and the City Attorney, and each of them, are hereby authorized
to enforce the provisions of this chapter by any one or more of the enforcement
mechanisms set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.151 INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT A GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION.
   The inspectors, agents or representatives of the city charged with
enforcement of this chapter shall be deemed to be performing a governmental
function for the benefit of the general public and neither the city, the
Director nor the individual inspector, agent or representative of the city
engaged in inspection or enforcement activities under this chapter shall ever
be held liable for any loss or damage, whether real or asserted, caused or
alleged to have been caused as a result of the performance of the governmental
function.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.152 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   As a condition of the city providing wastewater service, directly or
indirectly, to property, whether within or outside the corporate limits, and as
a condition for issuance of every wastewater discharge permit under this
chapter, any authorized officer or employee of the city may enter, inspect,
sample, monitor or conduct enforcement activities with respect to any part of
the sewer system servicing the premises, shall have a right to enter without
delay to, upon or through any premises to gain access to a source of industrial
waste or other prohibited waste or discharge, and without limitation, may
inspect any pretreatment, sampling or monitoring equipment or method of
pretreatment or monitoring or records pertinent thereto, required under this
chapter, and/or the industrial waste order, ordinance, rules or regulations of
any governmental entity with whom the city may have an interlocal agreement for
the provision of wholesale wastewater and/or industrial waste services. This
right of entry shall extend to public streets, easements and private property
within which any portion of the sewer system servicing the premises may be
located.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.153 ARRANGEMENT FOR ACCESS.
   The person discharging or proposing to discharge wastewater to the POTW or
sanitary sewer shall make all necessary arrangements, at its sole expense, to
remove without delay security barriers or other obstacles to access by the
Director.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.154 OBSTRUCTION OF ACCESS; UNREASONABLE DELAYS PROHIBITED.
   Obstruction or unreasonable delay in allowing access by the Director to
premises discharging to the POTW shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.155 ADMINISTRATIVE SEARCH WARRANTS.
   If the Director or his or her designee have been refused access to a
building, structure or property or any pretreatment facilities or other portion
of the wastewater system discharging to the POTW and if the Director or his or
her designee have demonstrated probable cause to believe that a violation of
this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or other order issued hereunder
exists or that there is a need to inspect as part of the city’s routine
inspection program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any
permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall health, safety and
welfare of the community, then, upon application by the Director or his or her
designee, the Judge of the Municipal Court shall issue a search and/or seizure
warrant describing therein the specific location subject to search and the
property or items subject to seizure. The warrant shall be served at reasonable
hours in the company of a uniformed police officer. In the event of an
emergency affecting public health and safety, the inspection shall be made
without the necessity of a warrant.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
APPEALS PROCEDURES
§ 51.170 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision, interpretation or ruling under this
chapter shall have the right to appeal the same to the Director in accordance
with the procedure set forth herein.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.171 PERFECTION OF APPEAL.
   The appeal shall be perfected by directing written request for same to the
Director within 30 days of the issuance of the decision, interpretation or
ruling providing therein the following information:
   (A)   The name and address of the person making the appeal;
   (B)   The facts giving rise to the particular ruling or refusal to make a
ruling;
   (C)   The ruling or refusal to make a ruling appealed from; and
   (D)   The reasons why the ruling should be set aside or, if the ruling was
refused, the reasons why the ruling should be made.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.172 REQUIRED COPIES.
   The person making the appeal shall forward copies of the appeal to the City
Attorney concurrent with the filing of same with the Director.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.173 INFORMAL HEARING BY THE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Within 60 days of the filing of the appeal with the Director, the
Director shall conduct an informal hearing of the matter on notice to the party
appealing and allow the person to appear and present the facts and its position
with respect to the decision, ruling or interpretation appealed from.
   (B)   The Director shall also consider the facts and position of the public
works staff in relation to the matter appealed from. The hearing shall be
informal rather than adjudicatory and the rules of evidence shall not apply.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.174 RULING BY DIRECTOR.
   The Director shall consider the facts and statement of position made by the
person appealing and render a written decision thereon within 30 days from the
date of the informal hearing.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.175 DECISION OF DIRECTOR FINAL.
   The decision of the Director with regard to the matter appealed from shall
be final.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.176 PROCEDURES FOR HEARING.
   The Director may establish rules for conduct of the informal hearing;
provided that, the rules shall not include the application of adjudicatory
techniques or formal rules of evidence.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.177 NO STAY OF ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS.
   The filing of an appeal shall not stay an enforcement action pending the
resolution of the appeal.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.178 NO WAIVERS OR VARIANCE.
   In passing upon the appeal, the Director may not waive or grant a variance
to any provision of this chapter, but shall only address the correctness of the
decision, interpretation or ruling appealed from and the application thereof to
the party appealing.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
§ 51.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Criminal penalty. A person who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor for each day or portion thereof during
which the violation is continued. Each offense is punishable by a fine not to
exceed $2,000.
   (B)   Culpable mental state not required. A culpable mental state is not
required to prove a criminal offense under this chapter.
   (C)   Remedies cumulative.
      (1)   All remedies authorized under this chapter are cumulative of all
others unless otherwise expressly provided.
      (2)   Accordingly, the filing of a criminal action shall not preclude the
pursuit of a civil or administrative action for violation of this chapter nor
shall the filing of a civil action preclude the pursuit of any other action or
remedy, administrative or criminal.
   (D)   Persons responsible. A person is responsible for a violation of this
chapter if:
      (1)   The person commits or assists in the commission of a violation; or
      (2)   The person is the owner, occupant or manager of the property or
facilities determined to be the source of a discharge of waste made in
violation of this chapter.
   (E)   Tenant responsibility. Where an owner of property leases or rents the
same to any person as tenant or lessee, the owner or tenant or both may be held
responsible by the Director for noncompliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (F)   Expenses, loss or damage. Any person violating the provisions of this
chapter shall be liable to the city for all expenses, loss or damage incurred
by the city by reason of the violation.
   (G)   Civil actions. The City Attorney is hereby authorized to enforce this
chapter by civil court actions in accordance with the procedures therefor
provided by state or federal law, including, without limitation, actions for
injunction, damages, declaratory relief or other remedies that the City
Attorney shall deem appropriate to pursue.
   (H)   Administrative enforcement. In addition to any other actions or
remedies authorized in this chapter, the Director is hereby authorized to
enforce this chapter through the exercise of any one or more of the following
administrative actions and, unless otherwise expressly set forth herein, the
selection or use of one action or remedy by the Director shall not be construed
to limit the authority of the Director to pursue any other enforcement action
or remedy nor require the pursuit of a particular action or remedy as a
condition precedent to the use of any other action or remedy:
      (1)   Notice of violation (NOV). Whenever the Director determines that
any person has violated or is violating this chapter, the conditions of any
wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this chapter, or any other
pretreatment requirement, the Director may, but shall not be required, to serve
upon the person a written notice of violation describing the violation and the
actions required to correct the same. The notice of violation shall inform the
recipient that, within 14 calendar days of receipt thereof, the person
receiving same shall provide to the Director an explanation of the violation
and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include
specific actions for correction of the violation; provided, however, that:
         (a)   Submission of the proposed corrective plan shall in no form or
manner relieve the user of criminal or civil liability for violations of this
chapter whether before or after receipt of the notice of violation; and
         (b)   Nothing in this division (H)(1) shall be construed to limit the
authority of the Director to pursue any other enforcement action or remedy,
including, without limitation, the emergency actions the Director determines to
be necessary, without first issuing a notice of violation.
      (2)   Assurances of voluntary compliance. The Director is hereby
authorized to enter into assurances of voluntary compliance, consent orders or
similar documents establishing an agreement for voluntary compliance with any
person responsible for a violation of this chapter. The documents shall
describe the violation determined to exist, the specific actions agreed to be
taken by the person to correct the noncompliance and the time period for
completion of the corrective actions specified. The assurance of voluntary
compliance, consent order or similar document evidencing the intent of the
responsible person to ameliorate voluntarily the described violations of this
chapter shall be signed and dated by the person responsible for compliance and
shall be judicially enforceable; provided, however, that, in the event of
noncompliance with an assurance of voluntary compliance, consent order or
similar document, the Director may pursue any procedure available under this
chapter or otherwise to enforce compliance. An assurance of voluntary
compliance, consent order or similar document shall not include terms limiting
or restricting the actions or remedies available for violations of this chapter
or the terms of the instrument.
      (3)   Show cause hearing. The Director may order any person responsible
for a violation of this chapter, the conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the
Director and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
Notice shall be served on the person responsible for a violation specifying the
time and place for the meeting, the nature of the violation and enforcement
action proposed, the reasons for the action and a request that the person show
cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice of the
show cause hearing shall be served in person or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, at least three calendar days prior to the hearing. The
notice may be served upon any employee, agent or other authorized
representative of the person responsible for the violation. Whether or not the
person appears as ordered, immediate enforcement action may be pursued
following the noticed hearing date; provided, however, a show cause hearing
shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the person;
and, provided, further, that, the issuance of a show cause notice shall not
prevent the Director from pursuing emergency actions if the Director determines
the actions are required to prevent pass through or other damage or
interference with the POTW.
      (4)   Compliance orders. When the Director determines that a person has
violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter or the
conditions of a wastewater discharge permit or other order issued hereunder or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Director may issue an order
to the person responsible for the discharge directing that the person cure the
noncompliance within the time period and in the manner specified in the
compliance order. If the person does not comply within the time specified in
the compliance order, the Director may discontinue and disconnect water and/or
wastewater service to the noncomplying premises unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly
operated. The compliance order may also contain other and further requirements
as the Director shall deem necessary to protect the POTW or sanitary sewer
including, without limitation, additional self-monitoring, reporting and waste
management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged
to the POTW. A compliance order issued hereunder may not extend a deadline for
compliance established for a federal pretreatment standard or requirement
established by federal law or by EPA order, regulation or otherwise. A
compliance order issued hereunder likewise shall not release the noncomplying
person of liability for any violation including, without limitation, any
continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order hereunder shall not be a
prerequisite to taking any other action against the person.
      (5)   Cease and desist orders. When the Director determines that a person
is violating this chapter, the conditions of the person’s wastewater discharge
permit or other order issued hereunder, or that past violations committed by
the person are likely to recur, the Director may issue an order directing the
person to cease and desist immediately all violations and directing the person
to:
         (a)   Immediately comply with all requirements of this chapter, the
conditions of a wastewater discharge permit or other order issued hereunder;
and
         (b)   Take remedial or preventive action as may be needed to address
properly a present, continuing or threatened violation including, without
limitation, the halting of operations and/or termination of the wastewater
discharge to the POTW through disconnection or otherwise. Issuance of a cease
and desist order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against
the noncomplying person hereunder.
      (6)   Civil penalties. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
chapter, if:
         (a)   A person has received actual notice of the provisions of this
chapter; and
         (b)   After the person received notice of the provisions of this
chapter, the person committed or continued acts in violation of this chapter or
failed to take action necessary for compliance with this chapter, the City
Attorney may initiate a suit against the owner, occupant or manager of premises
that are in violation of this chapter, to recover a civil penalty not to exceed
$5,000 per day for each violation. Each day or fractional part thereof that the
noncompliance continues shall constitute a separate violation for which civil
penalties shall accrue under this chapter. A suit for civil penalties hereunder
shall not prevent nor be a prerequisite for taking any other action against a
person in violation of this chapter. The suit may also include therein a
request for other and further relief as the City Attorney shall deem advisable
including, without limitation, an action for injunction or claim for damages to
recover for expenses, loss or damage to city property occasioned by reason of
the violation.
      (7)   Emergency suspensions. Notwithstanding any other provision hereof,
if the Director determines that an actual or threatened discharge reasonably
appears to present an imminent danger to the health, safety and welfare of
persons or property, or presents an imminent danger of pass-through or other
threat to the environment, or otherwise threatens to interfere with the
operation of the POTW, the Director, upon verbal or written notice to the
person responsible for the discharge, may immediately suspend water and/or
wastewater service to the discharging premises and initiate emergency measures
to halt or prevent the discharge by disconnection from the city’s wastewater
system or otherwise. Any person notified of the suspension of its discharge
shall immediately cease the discharge or eliminate its contribution to the
wastestream. If the person responsible for the discharge fails to comply
immediately with the emergency suspension order, the Director may immediately
undertake all necessary measures to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, to
the environment or to persons or property including, without limitation,
immediate severance of sewer connection(s). Unless further proceedings for
termination of the discharge have been initiated, the Director may allow
recommencement of the discharge when the responsible person has demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the Director that the period of endangerment has passed.
Permission to recommence the discharge shall not constitute a waiver of the
city’s right to pursue criminal or civil penalties or other relief authorized
hereunder. Prior to recommencement of the suspended discharge, the person
responsible for the discharge shall submit for the approval of the Director a
detailed report describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures
implemented to prevent the future recurrence of the conditions causing the
imminent endangerment. Nothing herein shall be construed to require a hearing
prior to an emergency suspension under this part.
      (8)   Termination of discharge.
         (a)   In the event the Director determines that a person has violated
the provisions of this chapter, the conditions of its wastewater discharge
permit or other order(s) issued hereunder, the Director may:
            1.   Order the person to terminate its discharge to the POTW; and
            2.   Enforce termination of the discharge by severance of the sewer
connection(s).
         (b)   Termination of discharge and severance of the wastewater
connection to the POTW under this section shall be made only after satisfaction
of the procedures for a show cause hearing in accordance with the procedures
set out above.
      (9)   Termination of water supply. In the event the Director determines
that a person has violated this chapter, the conditions of its wastewater
discharge permit, or other order(s) issued hereunder, the Director may, in
addition to any other remedies available under this chapter, issued an order
terminating water service to this noncomplying person’s premises. Except in the
case of emergency, termination of water supply hereunder shall be made only
after satisfaction of the procedures for a show cause hearing set forth above.
      (10)   Publication of noncompliant users list. The Director shall publish
annually in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a list of the
industrial users that, during the previous 12 months, the Director determined
to be in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements of this chapter. For purposes of this division (H)(10),
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE shall mean:
         (a)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here
as those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-
month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same
pollutant parameter by any amount;
         (b)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily
maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4
for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants, except
pH);
         (c)   A discharge violation that the Director believes has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through;
         (d)   A discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment
to the public or to the environment, or that otherwise has resulted in the
city’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent a discharge;
         (e)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or
otherwise attaining final compliance;
         (f)   Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
         (g)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and
         (h)   Any other violation which the city determines has or will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
(Ord. 970318A, passed 3-18-1997)
CHAPTER 52: [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 53: DRAINAGE UTILITY
Section
Established
   
53.01   Findings
   
53.02   Established; service area; dedication of assets
   
53.03   No effect on land owner obligations under city ordinances; no waiver of
immunity
   
53.04   Effective date
General Provisions
   
53.15   Findings
   
53.16   Definitions
   
53.17   Drainage Utility Fund
   
53.18   Administration of drainage utility
   
53.19   Drainage utility charge
   
53.20   Billing, payments, and failure to pay
   
53.21   Appeals
   
53.22   Exemptions
   
53.23   Effective date
   
Appendix A:   Service Area
ESTABLISHED
§ 53.01 FINDINGS.
   The City Council of the City of Sunset Valley (hereinafter sometimes
referred to as the city) finds that:
   (A)   It will establish a schedule of drainage charges against all real
property in the service area subject to charges as permitted by Tex. Loc. Gov’t
Code Ch. 552, Subch. C subject to any exemptions as required or permitted by
Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code Ch. 552, Subch. C;
   (B)   It will provide drainage for all real property in the service area on
payment of drainage charges, except real property exempted in accordance with
Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code Ch. 552, Subch. C;
   (C)   It will offer drainage service on nondiscriminatory, reasonable, and
equitable terms; and
   (D)   Notice as required by Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code Ch. 552, Subch. C shall be
provided.
(Ord. 100907, passed 9-21-2010)
§ 53.02 ESTABLISHED; SERVICE AREA; DEDICATION OF ASSETS.
   (A)   The city adopts the provisions of Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code Ch. 552, Subch.
C to implement a drainage utility for the city. Accordingly, the drainage of
the city is hereby declared to be a public utility as provided in Tex. Loc.
Gov’t Code Ch. 552, Subch. C.
   (B)   The service area for the drainage utility shall include all real
property within the city limits and the portions of the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city which contribute overland flow into the watersheds
served by the drainage system of the city as now existing or which may be
annexed hereafter from time to time. The service area is more particularly
identified in the attached Appendix A which is incorporated herein for all
purposes.
   (C)   All property exempt from the provisions of this subchapter pursuant to
applicable law on the effective date of this subchapter, including Tex. Loc.
Gov’t Code § 552.053 of Subchapter C, shall be exempt from the provisions of
this subchapter.
   (D)   The city incorporates into the drainage utility system all existing
property, facilities, materials, and supplies constituting the city's drainage
system on the effective date of this chapter. All future acquisitions by the
city of real or personal property used in the city's drainage system shall be
maintained as a part of the drainage utility.
(Ord. 100907, passed 9-21-2010)
§ 53.03 NO EFFECT ON LAND OWNER OBLIGATIONS UNDER CITY ORDINANCES; NO WAIVER OF
IMMUNITY.
   (A)   The establishment of the drainage utility by the city does not relieve
private land owners, developers, or other individuals or entities from
responsibility for providing drainage improvements in connection with land
development pursuant to the City of Sunset Valley's Land Development Code and
other ordinances of the city or laws of the State of Texas that relate to
stormwater runoff drainage management or drainage improvements.
   (B)   The establishment of the drainage utility does not imply or warrant
that a benefitted property will be free from flooding, stormwater pollution, or
stream erosion; the city makes no representation that all drainage problems
will be remedied. This chapter does not create additional duties on the part of
the city or create liability for any flooding, stream erosion, deterioration of
water quality, or other damages. Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to
waive the city's immunity under state law or reduce the need or necessity for
flood insurance.
(Ord. 100907, passed 9-21-2010)
§ 53.04 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall become effective from and after the day it is passed
and approved.
(Ord. 100907, passed 9-21-2010)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.15 FINDINGS.
   The City Council hereby finds that notice of the charges and the
establishment of the charges of the City of Sunset Valley Drainage Utility
complies with the requirements of Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code Ch. 552, Subch. C.
(Ord. 100921-A, passed 9-21-2010)
§ 53.16 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code Ch. 552, Subch. C. Terms not otherwise defined
herein shall be given the definitions contained in Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code Ch.
552, Subch. C.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BENEFITTED PROPERTY. An improved lot or tract to which drainage service
is made available under this subchapter.
      CITY. The City of Sunset Valley, Texas.
      COMMERCIAL PROPERTY. All improved properties within the city other than
single-family residential property, including, but not limited to, commercial,
industrial, institutional, government, multi-family, and religious organization
land uses.
      COST OF SERVICE. Costs for drainage system service to any benefitted
property, which shall be the total of:
         (a)   Prorated cost of the acquisition, whether by eminent domain or
otherwise, of land, rights-of-way, options to purchase land, easements, and
interests in land relating to structures, equipment, and facilities used in
draining the benefitted property;
         (b)   Prorated cost of the acquisition, construction, repair, and
maintenance of structures, equipment, and facilities used in draining the
benefitted property;
         (c)   Prorated cost or architectural, engineering, legal and related
services, plant and specifications, studies, surveys, estimates of cost and of
revenue, and all other expenses necessary or incident to planning, providing,
or determining the feasibility and practicability of structures, equipment, and
facilities used in draining the benefitted property;
         (d)   Prorated cost of all machinery, equipment, furniture, and
facilities necessary or incident to the provision and operation of draining the
benefitted property;
         (e)   Prorated cost of funding and financing charges and interest
arising from construction projects and the start-up cost of a drainage facility
used in draining the benefitted property;
         (f)   Prorated cost of debt service and reserve requirements of
structures, equipment, and facilities provided by revenue bonds or other
drainage revenue-pledge securities or obligations issued by the city; and
         (g)   Administrative costs of operating a drainage utility system.
      DRAINAGE. Bridges, catch basins, channels, conduits, creeks, culverts,
detention ponds, water quality treatment ponds, ditches, draws, flumes, pipes,
pumps, sloughs, treatment works, and appurtenances to those items, whether
natural or artificial, or using force or gravity, that are used to draw off
surface water from land, carry the water away, collect, store, or treat the
water, or divert the water into natural or artificial watercourses.
      DRAINAGE UTILITY CHARGE. The levy imposed to recover the cost of the
service of the municipality in furnishing drainage for any benefitted property;
and if specifically provided by the city by ordinance, an amount made in
contribution to funding of future drainage system construction by the city.
      DRAINAGE REVENUE BONDS. Any obligations issued to finance the costs
facilities payable and secured by a lien on and pledge of drainage utility
fees.
      DRAINAGE SYSTEM. The drainage system owned or controlled in whole or in
part by the city and dedicated to the service of benefitted property, including
any future additions, extensions, and improvements thereto and replacement
thereof.
      DRAINAGE UTILITY FEE. The drainage charge plus any interest and penalties
paid on behalf of a benefitted property.
      ERU (EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT). The unit of measure used to calculate
the drainage utility fee for commercial property. The ERU is based upon the
average horizontal impervious area for single-family property within the city
adjusted to account for the higher percentage of impervious area coverage on
commercial property.
      FACILITIES. The real, personal, or mixed property that is used in
providing drainage and included in the system.
      IMPERVIOUS AREA or IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface which has become
compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to
infiltration by water. IMPERVIOUS AREAS include, but are not limited to,
compacted soils, buildings, parking lots, pavement, and private ingress/egress
driveways.
      IMPROVED LOT OR TRACT. A lot or tract that has a structure or other
improvement on it that causes an impervious coverage of the soil under the
structure or improvement.
      PARCEL. One or more lots or portions of lots that are contiguous and
under single ownership.
      PUBLIC UTILITY. Drainage service that is regularly provided by the city
through city property dedicated to that service to the users of benefitted
property within the service area and that is based on:
         (a)   An established schedule of charges;
         (b)   Use of the police power to implement the service; and
         (c)   Nondiscriminatory, reasonable, and equitable terms consistent
with the Act.
      RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any improved lot or tract with single-family,
duplex, or mobile home land use.
      SERVICE AREA. The municipal boundaries of the city and the portion of the
extraterritorial jurisdiction tributary to the Drainage System as more
particularly described in Appendix A.
      SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. All improved single-family, duplex
and mobile home land use properties.
      THE ACT. Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code Ch. 552, Subch. C.
      USER or CUSTOMER. The person or entity that owns or occupies a benefitted
property.
      WHOLLY SUFFICIENT AND PRIVATELY OWNED DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Drainage from an
improved lot or tract which does not discharge into a creek, river, slough,
culvert, or other channel that is part of the drainage system.
(Ord. 100921-A, passed 9-21-2010)
§ 53.17 DRAINAGE UTILITY FUND.
   A separate fund is hereby created, known as the Drainage Utility Fund, for
the purpose of segregating, identifying, and controlling all revenues and
expenses attributable to the drainage utility. All drainage utility fees shall
be deposited as collected and received into this fund and shall be used
exclusively for drainage cost of service. The utility revenues may be used for
the operation, planning, engineering, inspection, construction, repair,
maintenance, improvement, reconstruction, administration, debt issuance cost
and debt service, and other reasonable and customary charges associated with
the operation of a drainage utility system. It shall not be necessary that the
expenditures from the drainage utility fund for any authorized purpose
specifically relate to any particular benefitted property from which the
revenues were collected.
(Ord. 100921-A, passed 9-21-2010)
§ 53.18 ADMINISTRATION OF DRAINAGE UTILITY.
   The City Administrator or his or her designee shall be responsible for the
administration of the drainage utility, including, but not limited to, enacting
any procedures necessary for the administration of the drainage charges and the
consideration of appeals, development, and implementation of maintenance and
facility improvement programs, state and federal regulatory compliance, and
establishing drainage criteria and standards for the drainage system. The City
Administrator shall keep an accurate record of all properties benefitted by the
services and facilities of the drainage utility.
(Ord. 100921-A, passed 9-21-2010)
§ 53.19 DRAINAGE UTILITY CHARGE.
   (A)   Establishment of a drainage utility fee. A drainage utility charge is
hereby imposed upon each developed lot and parcel within the service area. For
purposes of imposing the drainage utility charge, all lots and parcels within
the city are classified into the following customer categories:
      (1)   Residential property; and
      (2)   Commercial Property.
   (B)   ERU value. The ERU value for the city is determined through an
inventory of all developed parcels in the city and determination of impervious
area for each parcel. Statistical and hydrologic evaluation of these data
determined that the equivalent residential unit impervious area value for
assigning fees to commercial properties is 3,350 square feet.
   (C)   Single-family residential rates. Based on statistical evaluation of
land parcel impervious area for the single-family customer category, three
rates are established for assignment of fees as follows:
      (1)   Tier 1 “Small”:      0.55 ERU,      <3,253 square feet impervious
area;
      (2)   Tier 2 “Average”:      1.00 ERU,      3,253-6,980 square feet
impervious area;
      (3)   Tier 3 “Large”:      1.70 ERU,      >6,980 square feet impervious
area.
   (D)   Commercial rates. Based on impervious area determination for each
parcel:
      (1)   Total ERU's = (Impervious Area/3,350 sq. ft.), minimum 1 ERU.
      (2)   The Total ERU shall be rounded to the nearest one-hundredth.
   (E)   Calculation of drainage utility charge. The monthly drainage utility
charge for properties shall be calculated by multiplying the total number of
ERU's for the parcel by the ERU monthly billing rate.
   (F)   ERU monthly billing rate. The following ERU monthly billing rate is
hereby established and shall be used to calculate the total monthly drainage
utility charge for all property located in the city, in accordance with the
applicable formula established in this subsection:
      ERU rate = $4 per ERU per month.
   (G)   Impervious area determination. The City Administrator or his or her
designee shall be responsible for determining impervious area of property based
on reliable data, including geographic information system technology, aerial
photography, and other reliable means for determining impervious area. The City
Administrator may require additional information from the property owner,
tenant, or developer to make the determination. The amount of a charge may be
revised by the City Administrator based on any additions to the impervious area
through the city approved building permit process.
   (H)   Revision of rates. The City Council may review the schedule of charges
on an annual basis and may increase or decrease charges upon a determination
that an increase or decrease is warranted.
   (I)   No credit. No drainage utility charge credit shall be given for the
installation of drainage facilities required by the City Land Development Code
or state law.
(Ord. 100921-A, passed 9-21-2010)
§ 53.20 BILLING, PAYMENTS, AND FAILURE TO PAY.
   (A)   Bills/statements for fee. Bills or statements for the drainage utility
fee shall be rendered by the city for all properties subject to the fee. Bills
shall be payable when rendered and shall be considered as received by the
customer, whether actually received or not, when deposited in the United States
mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the utility customer. Bills shall be
rendered monthly for the previous month's service.
   (B)   Fees; multiple users and users without utility account. For any parcel
for which there is more than one user who receives utility services from an
individual utility account or one or more users for whom a utility account is
not established, each user's fee shall be based upon the relative contribution
to runoff of the parcel controlled by that user.
   (C)   Bills due and payable. Bills are due and payable on the date specified
thereon and if full payment is not made by the date specified, it shall become
delinquent. The city shall have the right to apply interest of 10% per month to
amounts delinquent.
   (D)   Bill with other public utility billings. Drainage utility fees shall
be billed with the city's other public utility billings and shall be identified
separately on the bill as a drainage utility fee. Delinquent drainage utility
fee bills shall be mailed to the user at the address at which the user receives
other city utility services, or if no other city utility services are received,
to any known address for the owner or user.
   (E)   Penalties for failure to pay. Any charge due hereunder which is not
paid when due will subject the user to discontinuance of all utility services
provided by the city. Drainage utility fees that become delinquent pursuant to
this section shall be subject to a penalty in the amount of $5 to cover
administrative costs. Any drainage charge due hereunder which is not paid when
due may be recovered in an action at law by the city including fixture of a
lien against the property.
   (F)   Lien. The city may impose a lien against a user's property, unless it
is a homestead.
   (G)   Access to benefitted property. The city shall have access, at all
reasonable times, with reasonable notice, to any benefitted property served by
the drainage utility for inspection, repair or enforcement of this subchapter
(Ord. 100921-A, passed 9-21-2010)
§ 53.21 APPEALS.
   (A)   Administrative adjustment procedures. Requests for adjustment of a
drainage utility charge shall be submitted to the City Administrator. All
requests shall be evaluated based upon the amount of impervious area only. The
following procedures shall apply to all requests for adjustment of the drainage
utility charge:
      (1)   Any user who has paid drainage utility charges and who believes the
calculation or determination of the drainage utility charge to be incorrect
may, subject to the restrictions set forth in this subchapter, submit an
adjustment request to the City Administrator.
      (2)   Requests for adjustment of drainage utility charges paid by an
owner, user or customer making the request shall be in writing and set forth in
detail the grounds upon which relief is sought.
      (3)   Adjustment requests will be reviewed by the City Administrator
within 30 days from the date of receipt of an adjustment request. Adjustments
resulting from such a request shall be prospective, but may be made retroactive
for no greater time period than three months prior to the receipt of the
request.
      (4)   The user requesting an adjustment may be required, at the
requesting party's own cost, to provide supplemental information to the City
Administrator, including, but not limited to, survey data certified by a Texas
registered professional land surveyor (R.P.L.S.), or a development plan
approved by the city. Failure to provide requested information may result in
the denial of the adjustment request.
      (5)   The City Administrator's determination of the adjustment request
shall be provided in writing. If the City Administrator approves the request,
the adjustment to the drainage utility charge will be made.
      (6)   All findings and determinations made by the City Administrator
arising out of this section, except for the determination of impervious area,
will be final.
   (B)   Appeal of administrative adjustments. Upon receipt of a written denial
of an adjustment request, the user who requested the adjustment may, within 30
days of receipt of the denial, make written application to the City Council
requesting review of the denial. The City Council shall grant a public hearing
within 60 days of receipt of the request for review. The City Council's
decision shall be final.
   (C)   Appeal of lien. Before imposing a lien for delinquent drainage utility
fees, the city shall send notice to the record owner of the benefitted property
of the amount of the charges owed and any penalties or interest accrued, and of
the owner's right to appeal the placement of the lien. Within ten working days
of the postmark of the notice sent to the property owner, the owner may appeal
the decision to impose the lien on the property to the City Administrator. The
City Administrator shall not file the lien if the owner shows that the drainage
utility fee made the basis of the lien is not owed and shall give the owner
written notice of the decision. When a person pays all principal, interest, and
charges of a valid lien filed pursuant to this subchapter, the City
Administrator shall execute a release of that lien and surrender it to the
paying party. The paying party shall be responsible for the filing of the
release.
   (d)   Appeal by users outside the city's boundaries. Users residing within
the Service area, but outside the city's boundaries, may appeal rates
established for drainage charges to the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality as authorized by Tex. Water Code § 13.043(b).
(Ord. 100921-A, passed 9-21-2010)
§ 53.22 EXEMPTIONS.
   As required by the Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code Ch. 580, the following properties
shall be exempt from the provisions of this subchapter:
   (A)   Property with proper construction and maintenance of a wholly
sufficient and privately owned drainage system;
   (B)   Property held and maintained in its natural state, until such time
that the property is developed and all of the public infrastructure constructed
has been accepted by the municipality in which the property is located for
maintenance;
   (C)   A subdivided lot, until a structure has been built on the lot and a
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the municipality in which the
property is located; and
   (D)   Property owned by the state or any public or private institution of
higher education.
(Ord. 100921-A, passed 9-21-2010)
§ 53.23 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall become effective from and after the day it is passed
and approved.
(Ord. 100921-A, passed 9-21-2010)
APPENDIX A: SERVICE AREA
   1.   All property within the city limits of the City of Sunset Valley Texas.
   2.   Property within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Sunset
Valley further described as:
      a.   21.529 acres in the Thomas Anderson survey 17 Abstract 2, known as
the Grand Preserve Apartments at 5500 Brodie Lane, bounded by Brodie Lane on
the east and Home Depot Boulevard on the north.
      b.   18.00 acres (more or less) out of the Thomas Anderson Survey No. 17,
Abstract No. 2 including: Lots 1, 2, and 3 of the Rayford Subdivision; Lots 1,
2, and 3 of the Rayford Subdivision No. 2; Lots 1 and 2 of the Offer
Subdivision; one parcel within this 18.00 acres is described as a 6.61-acre
tract of land out of the Thomas Anderson Survey No. 17, Abstract No. 2; and one
parcel within this 18.0-acres is described as a 2.63 acre tract of land out of
the Thomas Anderson Survey No. 17, Abstract No. 2. This property is along
Country White Lane and west of Brodie Lane consisting of single family
residences.
(Ord. 100907, passed 9-21-2010)
CHAPTER 54: NETWORK NODES AND NODE SUPPORT POLES
Section
   
54.01   Purpose and scope
   
54.02   Definitions
   
54.03   Permitted use; application and fees
   
54.04   Action on permit applications
   
54.05   Network nodes in the public right-of-way; maximum height; other
requirements
   
54.06   Effect of permit
   
54.07   Removal, relocation or modification of network nodes in the right-of-
way
   
54.08   Public right-of-way rate
   
54.09   Attachment to service poles in the public right-of-way
   
54.10   Transport facilities
   
54.11   Design manual
§ 54.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for the placement of node support poles in the right-of -way and
network nodes in the public right-of-way and on service poles within the city's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefits and will be consistent with
the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the city
public right-of-way and the city as a whole.
   (B)   Intent. In enacting this chapter, the city is establishing uniform
standards to address issues presented by network nodes, including without
limitation, ensuring that network nodes or node support poles do not adversely
affect:
      (1)   Use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways
and places;
      (2)   Vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      (3)   The operation of facilities lawfully located in public right-of-way
or public property;
      (4)   The ability of the city to protect the environment, including the
prevention of damage to trees;
      (5)   The character of residential and historic areas, and city parks, in
which network nodes may be installed; and
      (6)   The rapid deployment of network nodes to provide the benefits of
wireless services.
(Ord. 180515, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 54.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All terms not
specifically defined herein have the meaning provided in Tex. Loc. Gov't Code
Ch. 284, as amended from time to time.
   APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application and is a network provider.
   APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant:
      (1)   For a permit to collocate network nodes; or
      (2)   To install a transport facility; or
      (3)   Approve the installation, replacement or modification of a pole.
   DAY. Calendar day.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization, including the city.
   ROUTINE MAINTENANCE.
      (1)   Work in the public right-of-way that does not require excavation or
closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way;
      (2)   Replacing or upgrading a network node or pole with a node or pole
that is substantially similar in size or smaller and that does not require
excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way;
or
      (3)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement
of micro network nodes that are strung on cables between existing poles or node
support poles, in the public right-of-way.
   TECHNICAL GROUNDS. In light of prevailing industry and engineering
standards, reasons of insufficiency of capacity, safety, reliability and/or
generally applicable engineering purposes consistent with applicable law.
(Ord. 1805015, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 54.03 PERMITTED USE; APPLICATION AND FEES.
   (A)   Permitted use. Collocation of network nodes and the placement of node
support poles in the locations and meeting the parameters set forth in §
54.05 and other applicable law, shall be a permitted use.
   (B)   Permit required. No person shall place a network node, transport
facility or node support pole in the public right-of-way, without first filing
a permit application and obtaining a permit therefor, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter.
   (C)   Permit application. All permit applications filed pursuant to this
chapter shall be on a form promulgated by the city. The applicant may designate
portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain
proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by
clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly. The treatment of any
such claim of confidentiality shall be subject to the provisions of the Texas
Public Information Act and processes provided therein for withholding
information in response to a request for public information.
   (D)   Application requirements. The permit application shall be made by the
network provider or its duly authorized representative and shall contain the
following:
      (1)   The applicant's name, address, telephone number, and e-mail
address;
      (2)   The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses of
all consultants, if any, acting on behalf of the applicant with respect to the
filing of the application;
      (3)   Construction and engineering drawings and information confirming
that the construction will be in compliance with all applicable law.
   (E)   Routine maintenance and replacement. A permit application shall not be
required for:
      (1)   Routine maintenance; or for
      (2)   The replacement of a node with another node that is substantially
similar.
   (F)   Information updates. Any amendment to information contained in a
permit application shall be submitted in writing to the city within 30 days
after the change necessitating the amendment.
   (G)   Application fees. All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be accompanied by a fee of $500 for up to five network nodes
addressed in the same application, $250 for each additional node in the same
application; and a fee of $1,000 for each node support pole.
(Ord. 150515, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 54.04 ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Review of applications. The city shall review applications for network
nodes, node support poles and transport facilities in light of their conformity
with applicable law, including but not limited to Chapter 92 of this Code and
Land Development Code Division 6.9, as applicable. Permits for alteration or
excavation of a right-of-way shall be issued on terms applicable to such work.
The city shall issue permits pursuant to this chapter on nondiscriminatory
terms and conditions subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Within 30 days of receiving an application for a network node or
node support pole, or ten days for a transport facility, the city shall
determine and notify the applicant whether the application is complete; or if
incomplete, the city must specifically identify the missing information in such
notification. There shall be no fee charged for completion and resubmittal of
an application.
      (2)   The city shall make its final decision to approve or deny a
complete application no later than:
         (a)   Twenty-one days after receipt of a complete application for a
transport facility;
         (b)   Sixty days after receipt of a complete application for a network
node; and
         (c)   One hundred fifty days after receipt of a completed application
for a new node support pole.
      (3)   The city shall advise the applicant in writing of its final
decision, and, if denied, the basis for that denial, including specific
provisions of City Code or applicable law on which the denial was based, and
send the documentation to the applicant by electronic mail on or before the day
the city denies the application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies
identified by the city and resubmit the application within 30 days of the
denial without paying an additional application fee. The city shall approve or
deny the revised application within 90 days of receipt of the amended
application. The subsequent review by the city shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the original denial.
      (4)   If the city fails to act on an application within the review period
specified in this section, the application shall be deemed approved.
      (5)   An applicant seeking to collocate network nodes may, at the
applicant's discretion, file a consolidated application and receive permits for
up to 30 network nodes. Provided, however, that the city's denial of any node
within a single application shall not affect other nodes submitted in the same
application. The city may grant permits for any and all nodes in a single
application that it does not deny.
   (B)   Review of eligible facilities requests. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this chapter, the city shall comply with the provisions of
subsection (c) of 47 CFR 1.40001 in connection with an eligible facilities
request for modification that does not substantially change the physical
dimension of such structure.
(Ord. 180515, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 54.05 NETWORK NODES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY; MAXIMUM HEIGHT; OTHER
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Maximum size of permitted use. Collocation of permitted use network
nodes in the pubfic right-of-way shalf be subject to the size limitations
specified in of the Tex. Loc. Gov't Code §§ 284.003 and 284.106.
   (B)   Undergrounding provisions. A network provider shall comply with
nondiscriminatory undergrounding requirements, including Chapter 8 and Section
3.302 of the City of Sunset Valley Land Development Code, applicable state law,
private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that
prohibit installing aboveground structures in a public right-of-way without
first obtaining approval. This requirement or restriction shall not be
interpreted to prohibit a network provider from replacing an existing structure
as permitted pursuant to §
54.03(E).
   (C)   Historic areas and design districts. Subject to the permit application
approval time frames in §
54.04, a network provider must obtain advance approval from the city before
collocating new network nodes or installing new node support poles in any areas
zoned or designated as a historic district or as a design district if the
district has decorative poles. Such installations shall be subject to the
design and aesthetic standards of such areas.
   (D)   Installation in municipal parks and residential areas.
      (1)   A network provider may not install a new node support pole in a
public right-of-way without the city's discretionary, nondiscriminatory,
written consent of the Director of Public Works or other person designated by
the City Administrator if the public right-of-way is located in a municipal
park or is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is:
         (a)   Not more than 50 feet wide; and
         (b)   Adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily
residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning
or deed restrictions.
      (2)   A network provider shall comply with private deed restrictions and
other private restrictions when installing network nodes in parks and
residential areas. Consent for a new node support pole pursuant to this
division (D) may be given if it is determined that the purpose and intent as
provided in §
54.01 will be satisfied, that the location and use of the support pole complies
with the requirements of this chapter, and that, in the case of a location in a
municipal park, the new node support pole will not interfere with recreational
and other uses of the park, will not have an unusually adverse visual impact
affecting park users' appreciation of the natural landscape, wildlife, or
geologic or water features. A consent given pursuant to this division (D) with
regard to a municipal park shall also constitute consent for purposes of §
96.05(M) of this City Code.
(Ord. 180515, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 54.06 EFFECT OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Authority granted. A permit from the city authorizes an applicant to
undertake only certain activities irr accordance with this chapter and Tex.
Loc. Gov't Code Ch. 284, and does not create a property right or grant
authority to the applicant to impinge upon the rights of others who may already
have an interest in the public right-of-way.
   (B)   Time of installation. A network provider shall begin the installation
for which a permit is granted not later than six months after final approval
and shall diligently pursue the installation to completion.
   (C)   Right to occupy. Once a network provider has collocated a network node
or placed a node support pole pursuant to a permit, the provider shall be
permitted to continue to maintain such collocation or such pole unless required
to remove or relocate under the terms of this chapter or other applicable law.
   (D)   Interference with network nodes. City may refuse to issue a permit to
any person to install any network node or other wireless facility if the city
knows or has reason to know that such person's use of such network node of
other wireless facility may in any way adversely affect or interfere with:
      (1)   The use and operation of an existing and operational network node
for which the city has previously issued a permit; or
      (2)   With a Federal Communications Commission-authorized mobile
telecommunication operation of the city in operation at the time the network is
initially installed pursuant to a permit.
(Ord. 180515, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 54.07 REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF NETWORK NODES IN THE RIGHT-OF-
WAY.
   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the city, a
network provider shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
network node or node support pole within the public right-of-way whenever the
city has determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is
reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation
of any city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon,
the public right-of-way.
   (B)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The city retains the
right and privilege to disconnect or move any network node located within the
public right-of-way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary,
appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the city shall notify the network provider and allow the
network provider an opportunity to move its own facilities prior to the city
disconnecting or removing a facility and shall notify the network provider
after disconnecting or removing a network node or node support pole.
   (C)   Abandonment of facilities. A network provider shall notify the city
prior to abandonment of a network node or node support pole within the public
right-of-way. Following receipt of such notice, the city may direct the network
provider to remove all or any portion of a network node or node support pole if
the city, or any of its departments, determines, subject to applicable law,
that such removal is necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare.
The removal work shall be scheduled and performed, as necessary, for the
convenience and safety of users of the affected right-of-way within a
reasonable time after a direction for removal is issued.
(Ord. 180515, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 54.08 PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY RATE.
   (A)   Annual rate. Once a network provider has installed and made
operational a network node in the public right-of-way, network provider shall
pay to the city compensation for use of the public right-of-way in the amount
of $250 annually per node in the city public right-of-way. The annual rate may
be adjusted in conformance with Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 284.054.
   (B)   Cease payment. A network provider is authorized to remove its
facilities at any time from the public right-of-way and cease paying the city
compensation for use of the public right-of-way following removal and
notification to the city of such removal.
(Ord. 180515, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 54.09 ATTACHMENT TO SERVICE POLES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   A network provider shall be permitted to attach network nodes to city-owned
service poles, consistent with applicable law and subject to the requirements
specified herein.
   (A)   Permits. A network provider shall obtain a permit, pursuant to the
terms of this chapter, prior to collocating network nodes on service poles.
   (B)   Make ready. Network provider shall be responsible for costs for make
ready work on city service poles to which provider seeks to place a network
node.
   (C)   Technical limitations. In the event the city determines, based upon
technical grounds, that inadequate space exists on a service pole to
accommodate the proposed network node, such pole may be replaced by network
provider, at the network provider's expense, with a service pole with adequate
space to accommodate the proposed network node.
   (D)   Facilities rearrangements. If another provider would have to rearrange
or adjust any of its facilities to accommodate a new network node, the
applicant may work with the affected providers to coordinate such activity. All
make ready work shall comply with NESC, and other applicable codes.
   (E)   Service pole attachment fee. The rate to collocate a network node on a
service pole in the public right-of-way shall be $20 per pole per year.
   (F)   Cease payment. A network provider is authorized to remove its
facilities at any time from a service pole in the public right-of-way and cease
paying the attachment fee to the city upon notification to the city that the
facilities have been removed.
(Ord. 180515, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 54.10 TRANSPORT FACILITIES.
   Installation of transport facilities, including compensation payable to the
City for such facilities, shall be governed by Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 284.055.
(Ord. 180515, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 54.11 DESIGN MANUAL.
   A network provider shall comply with the city's design manual, if any, in
place on the date a permit application is filed in relation to work for which
the city has approved a permit application.
(Ord. 180515, passed 5-15-2018)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
72.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Engine brakes or retarders
   
70.02   Disabled parking
   
70.03   Fire lanes
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 ENGINE BRAKES OR RETARDERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to operate or permit the operation
of the engine of a motor vehicle so as to assist in braking or slowing the
vehicle through the use of gears or through the use of any engine brake or
engine retarding device on any street or roadway within the corporate limits of
the city unless the vehicle is a fire truck engaged in emergency duties.
   (B)   This section shall become effective after all notice requirements have
been satisfied.
(Ord. 070918-B, passed 9-18-2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.02 DISABLED PARKING.
   (A)   Authority for restrictions. The restrictions on parking established in
this section have been made in conjunction with the provisions of Ordinance No.
851119, Zoning Ordinance, providing for the reservation of parking spaces for
vehicles used by disabled persons. This section is designed to ensure disabled
persons convenient access to civic and commercial establishments having parking
facilities or a portion of a parking facility that is not easily accessible to
such establishment.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CITY. The City of Sunset Valley, Texas.
      DISABLED PERSON. A person is disabled who has mobility problems that
substantially impair the person's ability to ambulate, or who is legally blind.
   (C)   Offenses.
      (1)   A person commits an offense if he or she parks a vehicle in a
parking space properly designated by sign to be specifically for the disabled,
which vehicle does not display a special license plate or other specially
designed tab, identification card or other device issued by a governmental
entity indicating that such vehicle is used by or for a disabled person.
      (2)   A person commits an offense if the person is neither temporarily or
permanently disabled nor transporting a temporarily or permanently disabled
person and parks a vehicle in a parking space designated by sign to be
specifically for the disabled, when such vehicle displays a specially designed
tab, identification card, or other device issued by any governmental entity
indicating that such vehicle is used by or for a disabled person.
      (3)   A person commits an offense if the person parks a vehicle so that
the vehicle blocks an access, or curb ramp, or any other architectural
improvement designed to aid the disabled.
   (D)   Enforcement by city. The provisions of division (C) of this section
shall be enforceable by the city and shall apply to all parking spaces
designated as for the disabled by the city and by any private property owner,
provided that such designated parking space is in compliance with all
specifications for such parking spaces provided by applicable law.
   (E)   Penalty. An offense under division (C) of this section is a Class C
misdemeanor.
   (F)   Effective date. This section shall become effective after its passage
or from and after February 22, 1992.
(Ord. 920204A, passed 2-4-1992)
§ 70.03 FIRE LANES.
   (A)   Purpose. The requirement that fire lanes be established in certain
parking areas and the enforcement of restrictions on parking in such fire lanes
established in this section are designed to ensure adequate access to
commercial, office, multi-family, and other high density use facilities by
fire-fighting and other emergency vehicles.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      FIRE LANE. A lane with a minimum width of 24 feet along the curb of a
parking facility or off-loading roadway on private property nearest the
building or structure served by such parking facility or off-loading roadway.
Such lane shall be adequately accessible from the nearest public street for
firefighting vehicles and other emergency vehicles to enter and exit
efficiently while responding to an emergency.
   (C)   Basic regulations.
      (1)   A fire lane shall be provided in any off-street parking facility
constructed or reconstructed subsequent to the effective date of this section,
when such parking facility is required by the provisions of Section 303 J of
the Zoning Ordinance for the City of Sunset Valley, Ordinance No. 851119 as
amended from time to time, to include five or more parking spaces.
      (2)   Whenever a person or entity applies for a building or construction
permit for construction that will necessitate the provision of a fire lane
according to the terms of this section, such person or entity shall include in
all plans and specifications submitted to the City Council the location and
dimensions of all proposed fire lanes required by this section.
      (3)   City Council approval of any proposed fire lane required by this
section shall be based on the adequacy of access to structures on the subject
property provided by the proposed fire lane. A fire lane may be provided in an
off-loading roadway on the subject property in lieu of providing a fire lane in
a parking facility, if the City Council, in its discretion, determines that the
off-loading roadway provides adequate access by emergency vehicles to
structures on the subject property.
      (4)   All required fire lanes shall be delineated by a red stripe on the
pavement marking the outside boundary from the curb of the fire lane. In
addition, signs shall be conspicuously placed along the curb nearest the fire
lane indicating the existence of the fire lane, and indicating that parking
therein is prohibited.
   (D)   Variance. All requests for a variance from the requirements of this
section must be submitted in writing to the City Council. The City Council may
authorize a variance from the requirements imposed by this section when, in its
opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance or when
alternative compliance will satisfy the purpose of this section.
   (E)   Violations.
      (1)   A violation of the requirement of a fire lane is a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of up to $100 per day for each day that a parking facility
is in use in violation of this section.
      (2)   A person commits an offense if he or she parks a vehicle, other
than an authorized emergency vehicle as defined in Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann.
Art. 670ld § 2(d) in any properly designated fire lane, whether such lane is
required by this section, or whether such lane was constructed, planned, or
provided prior to the effective date of this section with the approval of the
City Council. Such offense is a Class C misdemeanor.
(Ord. 920107A, passed 1-7-1992)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating §
70.01, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine
of not more than $500. Each day a violation continues is a separate offense.
(Ord. 070918-B, passed 9-18-2007)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Speed limits
      
II.   Stop intersections; through streets; turn restrictions
      
III.   U-turns
      
IV.   No passing zones
      
V.   School zones
      
VI.   Through-traffic prohibited in alleys
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   The speed limits provided in this Schedule I are hereby determined
upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigations and applicable to
establish the prima facie maximum speed limit on the portions of streets and
roads identified herein, which prima facie maximum speed limits shall be
effective at all times. Signs shall be erected giving notice of the prima facie
maximum speed limits so declared in compliance with applicable law and
regulations.
      (1)   Westbound US 290 Frontage Road (WBFR). On US 290 WBFR from the east
city limit at mile point of 10.686 miles, (which is located at approx. 700 feet
west of the approx. center of West Gate Boulevard), to the west city limit at
mile point 9.600 (which is located approx. 1,410 feet east of the approx.
center of State Loop 1), a distance of 1.086 miles, the prima facie maximum
speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour.
      (2)   Eastbound US 290 Frontage Road (EBFR). On US 290 EBFR from the west
city limit at mile point 9.600, (which is located at approx. 1,410 feet east of
the approx. center of State Loop 1), to the east city limit at mile point
10.655, (which is located approx. 64 feet east of the approximate center of
Sunset Trail), a distance of 1.055 miles, the prima facie maximum speed limit
shall be 45 miles per hour.
      (3)   Brodie Lane. The prima facie speed limit the entire length of
Brodie Lane within the city limits shall be 40 miles per hour.
      (4)   Curly Mesquite Cove, Lone Oak Trail, Lovegrass Lane, Oakdale Drive,
Pillow Road, Reese Drive, Sunset Trail, and Yellowtail Cove. The prima facie
speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour on the following streets and portions of
streets:
         (a)   The entire length of Curly Mesquite Cove from its intersection
with Lovegrass Lane to its dead end adjacent to property located at 5 Curley
Mesquite Cove;
         (b)   The entire length of Lone Oak Trail from its intersection with
Jones Road to its southerly dead end;
         (c)   Lovegrass Lane from its intersection with Brodie Lane to its
intersection with Yellowtail Cove;
         (d)   The entire length of Oakdale Drive from its intersection with
Brodie Lane to its easterly dead end;
         (e)   Pillow Road from its intersection with Jones Road to its
southerly dead end;
         (f)   Reese Drive from its intersection with Jones Road to its
southerly dead end;
         (g)   Sunset Trail from its intersection with Jones Road to its
intersection with Reese Drive; and
         (h)   Yellowtail Cove from its intersection with Lovegrass Lane to its
dead end adjacent to the property located at 29 Yellowtail Cove.
      (5)   Ernest Robles Way. The prima facie speed limit the entire length of
Ernest Robles Way shall be 35 miles per hour.
      (6)   Jones Road. The prima facie speed limit on Jones Road beginning at
a point 3,060 feet west of the westernmost edge of its intersection with
Westgate Boulevard and continuing westward to the easternmost edge of its
intersection with Ernest Robles Way shall be 35 miles per hour.
      (7)   All other streets and highways. Except as otherwise provided in
this Schedule I, the prima facie speed limit on all other streets and highways
in the city limits shall be 30 miles per hour.
   (B)   Advisory speed limit - Jones Road. For the distance on Jones Road from
1,820 feet to 3,060 feet west of the western most edge of its intersection with
Westgate Boulevard, being a curved portion in the location where the road
divides around a center island, the advisory maximum speed limit shall be 15
miles per hour.
   (C)   All of the streets of the City of Sunset Valley, and all portions of
any such streets, are hereby declared to be public streets and that the driving
or operating of any motor vehicle on or along any portion of any street of the
city at a rate of speed that is greater than the maximum rate of speed for said
portion of said street, as fixed by this Chapter 71 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine in any sum not to exceed $200. That the use
of the word SPEEDING shall be sufficient to designate any such offense, and
shall mean that a motor vehicle has been driven upon a public street at a
greater rate of speed than fixed by this chapter for the street or portion
thereof.
(Ord. 790410A, passed 4-10-1979; Ord. 87-0602, passed 6-2-1987; Ord. 880301,
passed 3-1-1988; Ord. 940315A, passed 3-15-1994; 940315B, passed 3-15-1994;
Ord. 940712A, passed 7-12-1994; Ord. 991019A, passed 10-19-1999; Ord. 020820,
passed 8-20-2002; Ord. 020820A, passed 8-20-2002; Ord. 020820B, passed 8-20-
2002; Ord. 040720, passed 7-20-2004; Ord. 080610-A, passed 6-10-2008; Ord.
160405-A, passed 4-5-2016)
SCHEDULE II. STOP INTERSECTIONS; THROUGH STREETS; TURN RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Truck traffic.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division (A), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY TRUCKS. Trucks of a fire department, police
trucks, public and private ambulances for which permits have been issued by the
State Board of Health, emergency trucks of municipal departments or public
service corporations as are designated or authorized by the governing body of
an incorporated city, private trucks operated by volunteer firefighters or
certified emergency medical services volunteers while answering a fire alarm or
responding to a medical emergency, and trucks owned by the City of Austin or
the state or any other political subdivision thereof engaged in bonafide
emergency utility repair of electric, water or wastewater services.
         PROOF OF ROUTE. A verification of pick ups, deliveries or destinations
which shall consist of a log book, delivery slip, shipping order, bill of
lading contract or other document, identifying and specifying the date, address
and name of the company or person requesting or directing the pick up or
delivery, and the company or person receiving the pick up or delivery and the
site of the pick up, delivery or destination within the corporate limits of the
city.
         TANDEM AXLE GROUP. Two or more axles spaced 40 inches or more apart
from center to center having at least one common point of weight suspension.
         THROUGH TRUCK. Trucks having no destination, pick up or delivery point
in the city.
         TRUCK. A motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property and equipped with tandem axle groups, a movable
loading bed or all truck-tractor or semitrailer combinations.
      (2)   Truck traffic prohibited. Due to the congestion of traffic, the
frequency and passage of vehicles, the direction and volume of flow of traffic,
the dimensions and conditions of the streets herein named within the corporate
limits of the city and for the free flow and expeditious handling of traffic
and the safety of persons and property, all public streets, except Highway 290
West and Brodie Lane within the corporate limits of the city, shall be closed
to through truck traffic. The city is authorized to and shall place appropriate
signs indicating “NO THRU TRUCK TRAFFIC”; provided that, no sign shall apply or
be placed on Highway 290 West or Brodie Lane.
      (3)   Exemptions. Authorized emergency trucks responding to an emergency
call where the City Police Department has been notified in advance of the
proposed entry into the city by the authorized emergency vehicle driver or by
someone acting on behalf of the driver. An officer of the City Police
Department may thereupon escort the authorized emergency truck through the
city.
      (4)   Penalty.
         (a)   Presence of a truck at a site or on a street within the
corporate limits of the city which may not be reached without traveling on a
street designated as closed to through truck traffic without immediate
possession of valid proof of route specifying and identifying a person or place
within the corporate limits of the city as the point for pick up or delivery
shall constitute violation of this division (A) punishable by fine of not less
than $1 and not more than $200.
         (b)   Passage of a through truck to any point, beyond the limits of
the city on a street or streets designated as closed to through truck traffic
shall constitute a violation of this division (A) punishable by a fine of not
less than $1 and not more than $200.
         (c)   Passage of a through truck onto Highway 290 West or Brodie Lane
from a street or streets designated as closed to through truck traffic shall
constitute a violation of this division (A) punishable by a fine of not less
than $1 and not more than $200.
      (5)   Effective date. This division (A) shall become effective 30 days
after passage by the Council. During the 30 days following its passage and
before this division (A) becomes effective, the city police may issue warning
citations to drivers of trucks in violation of this division (A) together with
a copy of this division (A) and a copy of a map showing alternate routes
available to the drivers. At the time when the 30 days have elapsed, this
division (A) shall be in full force and effect.
   (B)   General.
      (1)   Through streets. The streets and parts of streets of the city
designated by ordinance as through streets are hereby declared to be through
streets. The driver of a vehicle shall stop at the entrance to a through street
and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the
intersection or which are approaching so close on a through street as to
constitute an immediate hazard, unless directed otherwise by the traffic
officer or a traffic control signal. The following are designated as through
streets:
         (a)   Brodie Lane;
         (b)   Highway 290; and
         (c)   Jones Road.
      (2)   Stop streets. The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a
stop sign at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at one or more
entrances thereto, and shall proceed cautiously yielding to the vehicles not so
obliged to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at the intersection is
controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event the directions of the
police officer shall be complied with. The locations of stop signs erected
pursuant to this section are indicated in the following table:
Street/Road Location Direction State Law Times
Street/Road     Location        Direction State Law                   Times
                Intersection of           Tex. Transportation Code §
Lone Oak Trail  Lone Oak Trail  North     544.003                     All times
                and Jones Road
                Intersection of           Tex. Transportation Code §
Reese Drive     Reese Drive and North     544.003                     All times
                Jones Road
                Intersection of           Tex. Transportation Code §
Sunset Trail    Sunset Trail    North     544.003                     All times
                and Jones Road
                Intersection of           Tex. Transportation Code §
Sunset Trail    Sunset Trail    West      544.003                     All times
                and Reese Dr
                Intersection of           Tex. Transportation Code §
Lovegrass Lane  Lovegrass Lane  West      544.003                     All times
                and Brodie Lane
Lovegrass Lane  Intersection of
and Yellow Tail Lovegrass Lane  North     Tex. Transportation Code § All times
Cove            and Yellow Tail           544.003
                cove
                Intersection of
Curley Mesquite Curley Mesquite West      Tex. Transportation Code § All times
Court           Court and                 544.003
                Lovegrass Lane
                Intersection of
Yellow Tail     Yellow Tail     South     Tex. Transportation Code § All times
Cove            Cove and                  544.003
                Lovegrass Lane
                Intersection of
Sunflower Trail Sunflower Trail West      Tex. Transportation Code § All times
                and Ernest                544.003
                Robles Way
                Intersection of
Sunflower Trail Sunflower Trail East      Tex. Transportation Code § All times
                and Sunflower             544.003
                Trail
 
      (3)   Posting signs. The Chief of Police or any other person designated
by the Mayor and Council shall post or cause to be posted suitable signs for
all through streets, one-way streets or alleys and stop intersections. It shall
be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to turn left where the turns
are prohibited by this division (B).
      (4)   Turn restrictions. It shall be unlawful to make a left hand turn
eastbound from Jones Road into the main driveway of Sunset Valley Elementary
School between the hours of 1:30 p.m. and 3:30 p.m. during the school year.
      (5)   Erection of signs. The Mayor is authorized to have its Marshal
erect stop signs at all entrances to all through streets.
      (6)   Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this division (B)
shall be fined not less than $5, nor more than $200.
(Ord. 43, passed 1-13-1976; Ord. 77-09-13B, passed 9-13-1977; Ord. 850806,
passed 8-6-1985; Ord. 850903, passed 9-3-1985; Ord. 940315B, passed 3-15-1994;
Ord. 991019A, passed 10-19-1999; Ord. 020820, passed 8-20-2002; Ord. 020820A,
passed 8-20-2002; Ord. 020820B, passed 8-20-2002; Ord. 230905-D, passed 9-5-
2023; Ord. 240206-B, passed 2-6-2024)
SCHEDULE III. U-TURNS.
   (A)   Brodie Lane.
      (1)   State law: Tex. Transportation Code §§ 544.002 and 544.004;
      (2)   Times: all times;
      (3)   Fine: the city shall cause to be erected signs that will give
notice of this prohibition; misdemeanor; any person while driving or operating
any motor vehicle on or along any portion of Brodie Lane in the city who
completes a 180-degree turn when the person began or completed the turn within
the city limits of the city is violating this division (A) and is committing
the offense of illegal U-turn. The use of the words “illegal U-turn” shall be
sufficient for the complaint, if it is sufficient in other respects, to allege
that the defendant committed the offense of illegal U-turn while driving a
motor vehicle on or along Brodie Lane within the city limits; the maximum
amount of a fine for a violation of this division (A) shall be the maximum
amount allowed for the fine by the state legislature; and
      (4)   Effective date: shall not become effective until the city causes to
be erected the signs necessary to give notice of this prohibition.
   (B)   Ernest Robles Way.
      (1)   Location: from its northernmost intersection with Jones Road to its
intersection with Highway 290 West shall not complete a 180-degree turn, or
what is also known as a U-turn, when the driver began or completed such turn
within the city limits; and
      (2)   Effective date: shall not become effective until the city causes to
be erected.
   (C)   Jones Road. 
      (1)   Prohibition: pursuant to the State Transportation Code, the City
Council determines that the driver of a motor vehicle on Jones Road shall not
complete a 180-degree turn, or what is also known as a U-turn, when the driver
began or completed the turn within the city limits; and
      (2)   Fine: any person who violates any provision of this division (C)
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; the maximum amount of a fine for a
violation of this division (C) shall be the maximum amount as allowed for a
fine by the state legislature; when a member of the City Police Department
discovers a vehicle unlawfully parked or blocking traffic in violation of this
division (C), the police officer is authorized to issue a citation, which
either may be left in a conspicuous place on the vehicle or give to the driver
or other person in charge of the vehicle.
(Ord. 940315A, passed 3-15-1994; Ord. 951107C, passed 11-7-1995; Ord. 990216,
passed 2-16-1999; Ord. 020820, passed 8-20-2002; Ord. 040720, passed 7-20-2004)
SCHEDULE IV. NO PASSING ZONES.
   (A)   It is determined by the City Council that the portion of Jones Road
from its intersection with Pillow Road easterly to the city limit line is
especially hazardous for driving on the left side of the roadway and overtaking
and passing.
   (B)   The Mayor is authorized to have solid yellow lines placed on the
pavement in both the east and west lanes and to post no passing signs so as to
appropriately mark it as a no passing zone.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any driver of a motor vehicle to drive on the
left side of the roadway or to overtake and pass in the zone. Violation hereof
and conviction thereof shall be punishable with a fine not to exceed $200.
(Ord. 781010, passed 10-10-1978)
SCHEDULE V. SCHOOL ZONES.
   (A)   After making an engineering and traffic investigation and considering
the commercial and residential growth in the vicinity of Jones Road, it is
determined that 20 mph is the maximum reasonable and prudent speed for the
operation of motor vehicles under the circumstances adjacent to the school.
 
Street/Road        Times                  Speed Limit Location
                                                      Beginning at the western
                                                      most edge of its
                   7:00 a.m. to 8:15 a.m.             intersection with
Jones Road         and 1:30 p.m. to 3:30  20 mph      Westgate Boulevard and
                   p.m.                               continuing west to the
                                                      easternmost edge of its
                                                      intersection with Lone
                                                      Oak Trail
                   7:00 a.m. to 8:15 a.m.             From its northerly most
MSG Horrigan Trail and 1:30 p.m. to 3:30  20 mph      intersection with Jones
                   p.m.                               Road continuing north for
                                                      a distance of 1,200 feet
 
   (B)   The city shall cause to be erected school zone signs that will give
notice of the designated school zones.
   (C)   (1)   Any person driving or operating any motor vehicle on or along
Jones Road beginning at the east city boundary line at the westernmost edge of
its intersection with Westgate Boulevard and continuing west to the easternmost
edge of its intersection with Lone Oak Trail or along MSG Horrigan Trail from
its northerly intersection with Jones Road continuing north for a distance of
1,200 feet at a rate of speed that is greater than the 20mph during the hours
of 7:00 a.m. to 8:15 a.m. and 1.30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. when schools are open and
in session is violating this schedule and is committing the offense of speeding
in a school zone. The use of the words “speeding in a school zone” shall be
sufficient to designate the offense.
      (2)   The maximum amount of a fine for a violation of this schedule shall
be the maximum amount as allowed by applicable state statute for the offenses.
   (D)   The provisions of this schedule pertaining to the school zones on
Jones Road and MSG Horrigan Trail shall not become effective until the city
causes to be erected school zone signs necessary to give notice of the
designated school zones.
   (E)   The times during which speed is restricted pursuant to this Schedule V
on Jones Road and MSG Horrigan Trail may be adjusted to match any change in
beginning and/or ending time of school instruction effected by the Austin
Independent School District and applicable to Sunset Valley Elementary School
after the date of adoption of this amended Schedule V. The City Administrator
or Chief of Police may cause a change of signage with an adjustment to the
periods of restricted speed limit that corresponds to any such change in the
beginning and/or ending time of instruction. Provided that signage is first
installed to provide notice of any such change in the periods(s) of the
restricted speed limit, it shall be a violation of this Schedule V to exceed
the speed of 20mph during such changed period(s). The City Administrator or
Chief of Police, as applicable, shall provide notice to the City Council in an
open meeting of such adjustment within a reasonable time of effecting any such
change in signage.
(Ord. 020820B, passed 8-20-2002; Ord. 110322-B, passed 3-22-2011; Ord. 161011,
passed 10-11-2016)
SCHEDULE VI. THROUGH-TRAFFIC PROHIBITED IN ALLEYS.
   (A)   As used in this Schedule VI, the term ALLEY refers to either Alley 1
or Alley 2 as shown on the final subdivision plat for the Villas at Sunset
Valley Homestead, each bounded on either end by Sunflower Trail in the city.
   (B)   As used in this Schedule VI, the term THROUGH-TRAFFIC means traversing
the entire length of an alley in a motor vehicle without stopping to pick up or
discharge a passenger or cargo.
   (C)   Through-traffic is prohibited on an alley.
   (D)   The Public Works Department of the city shall erect signs, in
compliance with applicable law pertaining to traffic signage, on each of the
alleys. Such signs shall be erected in a manner as to give notice to drivers of
motor vehicles of the prohibition established by this Schedule VI.
   (E)   A person who violates the prohibition of through-traffic established
by this Schedule VI on an alley shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor. A
violation of the prohibition established by this Schedule VI is punishable by a
fine of up to $500.
(Ord. 130305-B, passed 3-5-2013)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Prohibited parking
SCHEDULE I. PROHIBITED PARKING.
   (A)   No parking zones. Except for mechanical failure, an emergency or as
provided for in divisions (B) and (C) below, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a motorized vehicle in the following areas at any time, except
that the restrictions applicable to MSG Bob Horrigan Trail and Home Depot
Boulevard are limited to the times indicated below. Such areas shall constitute
no parking zones during such times:
Street/Road Location
Street/   Location
Road
Country   No parking at any time on both sides of the street from the western end of the
White     road to a point 115 feet east
Lane
Ernest    Both sides, from its intersection with Brodie Lane to its intersection with
Robles    Highway 290 West
Way
Home      Beginning a distance of 800 feet from the Brodie as measured from a point in line
Depot     with the west side curb line on Brodie to the end of Home Depot Boulevard on both
Boulevard sides of the street during the hours from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Monday through
          Sunday
Jones     The entire length of Jones Road within the city limits including any unpaved
Road      portion
          (1)   From its intersection with Jones Road, on the west side of Lone Oak Trail,
Lone Oak  to a point 50 feet south of Jones Road; and from its intersection with Jones
Trail     Road, on the east side of Lone Oak Trail, to a point 50 feet south of Jones Road
          (2)   No parking at any time on both sides of the street from the southern end of
          the road to a point 150 feet north from the terminus of the road
Oakdale   No parking at any time on both sides of the street for the entire length of the
Drive     road
          From its intersection with Jones Road, on the west side of Pillow Road, to a
          point 50 feet south of Jones Road
Pillow    From its intersection with Jones Road, on the east side of Pillow Road, to a
Road      point 50 feet south of Jones Road; and no parking to a point 525 feet south of
          Jones Road unless the vehicle displays a valid residential parking permit issued
          pursuant to division (H) of this Schedule I
          No parking on both sides at any time, from its intersection with Jones Road to a
          point 50 feet south of Jones Road; and no parking on both sides of the street,
Reese     Monday through Friday, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:15 a.m., and between
Drive     the hours of 1:30 p.m. and 3:30 p.m., from a point 50 feet south of Jones Road to
          a point 330 feet south of Jones Road, unless the vehicle displays a valid
          residential parking permit issued pursuant to division (H) of this Schedule I
MSG Bob   At any location on both side of the street north of its intersection with Jones
Horrigan  Road during the hours from 1:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. each day, Monday through
Trail     Sunday, and at all times from its intersection with Jones Road, on both sides of
          the street, to a point 50 feet north of Jones Road
          (1)   The entire length on the outer side furthest from the center of the Villas
          Subdivision;
          (2)   From a point 80 feet from the intersection of the entrance to Alley 1 to a
          point 165 feet from the entrance to Alley 1 on the inner side closest to the
          center of the Villas Subdivision;
          (3)   From a point 200 feet from the intersection of the exit from Alley 1 to a
Sunflower point 180 feet from the exit from Alley 2 on the inner side of Sunflower Trail;
Trail     (4)   From a point 80 feet from the intersection of the entrance to Alley 2 to a
          point 180 feet from the exit of Alley 2 on the inner side of Sunflower Trail;
          (5)   From a point 165 feet from the intersection of the entrance to Alley 2 to a
          point 80 feet from the entrance of Alley 2 on the inner side of Sunflower Trail;
          and
          (6)   Both sides of the straight section which connects the Villas at Sunset
          Valley Homestead to Ernest Robles Way.
 
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Bus zones. It shall be lawful for employees and agents of local
public and private elementary and pre-schools to temporarily park a school bus
in marked bus zones as provided in division (E)(2) for the purpose of picking
up or discharging students attending such local schools.
      (2)   The prohibition on parking on Sunflower Trail shall not constitute
a prohibition of:
         (a)   A temporary stop to load or unload merchandise or passengers, so
long as the motor vehicle is not left unattended; or
         (b)   A stop necessary to avoid a conflict with other traffic or to
comply with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control
device.
   (C)   Variances.
      (1)   General. The City Council may grant a variance from a prohibition
on parking upon a determination that the owner or lessee of property abutting a
part of a street where parking is prohibited meets the criteria and complies
with the procedures established in subdivision.
      (2)   Drop-off zones. The variance may be granted for the purposes of
establishing five minute drop-off zones to allow persons to drop off students,
customers, employees or visitors of property that abuts a street where parking
is prohibited.
   (D)   Application for variances.
      (1)   Application requirements. An application for a variance shall be
made in writing on a form prescribed by the Council and shall be accompanied
by:
         (a)   A letter of justification describing the terms of the variance
and explaining how it satisfies the findings herein; and
         (b)   Any other relevant information requested by the City Council in
order to properly review the application. The information may include, but is
not limited to, a traffic impact study, a safety study and a review of
alternative means other than allowing parking along the street in front of the
property for which the variance is requested.
      (2)   Report of administrative completeness.
         (a)   The City Administrator or such other designee established by the
City Council shall review each application for administrative completeness.
After receipt of a complete application, the City Administrator or such other
designee shall provide written notice to the applicant of:
            1.   A schedule of review, report and hearing date(s) to consider
action; and
            2.   Additional requests for other relevant information may be
requested at any time during the review process in order to properly review the
application.
         (b)   An organized packet of information containing a copy of the
application, all application submittals and all correspondence to and from the
applicant to be delivered to the members of the City Council.
      (3)   On-site inspection. Upon request of a member of the City Council, a
property owner with 500 feet of the subject property shall be visited by a city
representative at the site of the proposed variance and its surrounding area
and said representative shall report his or her findings to the City Council.
      (4)   Findings. Findings of the Council, together with the specific facts
upon which the findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official
minutes of the Council meeting at which the action is taken. The burden of
establishing the conditions is on the applicant. No variance shall be granted
unless the Council finds that all of the following criteria are met:
         (a)   Special circumstances or conditions affecting the property
abutting the no parking zone exist such that a strict prohibition of parking on
the street abutting the property will cause undue hardship;
         (b)   The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of
a substantial property right of the applicant;
         (c)   There is no reasonable alternative to the variance that will
alleviate the difficulty or hardship complained of;
         (d)   The variance will be no greater than the minimum required to
alleviate the difficulty or hardship complained of;
         (e)   The variance will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety or welfare; and
         (f)   The variance prescribes only conditions deemed necessary to or
desirable in the public interest.
      (5)   Action by Council. The City Council shall not grant a variance
unless it finds, based on competent evidence, that each of the conditions in
division (D)(4) have been established. The Council may, by majority vote:
         (a)   Approve the variance request;
         (b)   Approve the variance request with conditions, limitations and
safeguards; or
         (c)   Deny a variance request.
      (6)   Conditions and limitations imposed by Council. The Council may
impose such conditions, limitations and safeguards as it deems appropriate upon
the granting of any variance. Violation of any condition, limitation or
safeguard shall constitute a violation of the prohibition on parking applicable
to the affected street. The Council may require a reasonable guarantee and
evidence that the applicant will satisfy any conditions imposed in connection
with approval of a variance. A variance is not transferable.
   (E)   Signs and markings.
      (1)   No parking. The city shall erect signs in compliance with
applicable law indicating the no parking zones established in division (A).
      (2)   Bus zones. The city shall erect signs marking the areas in which
school buses may park as permitted by division (B).
      (3)   Drop-off zones. If a variance is granted under this schedule, the
city shall erect signs and/or paint curbs indicating the drop-off zone where
temporary parking for no longer than five minutes is permitted for the purpose
of dropping off students, customers, employees or visitors to the property for
which the variance is granted.
   (F)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Offense. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter 72
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (2)   Fines. The maximum amount of a fine for a violation of this chapter
shall be the amount of $500.
      (3)   Registered owner; presumption. In a prosecution for an offense
under this chapter, it is presumed that the registered owner of the unlawfully
parked motor vehicle is the person who parked the motor vehicle at the time and
place the offense occurred.
   (G)   Signage; presumption. The Director of Public Works of the city shall
cause the installation of signs, in compliance with applicable regulations for
traffic signage, to the extent the signage is not already installed. The signs
shall be installed in a manner as to give notice to operators of motor vehicles
of the prohibition on parking established by this chapter. The areas indicated
by signs existing at the time of amendment of this chapter or installed under
the direction of the Director of Public Works in conformance with the amendment
of this chapter shall conclusively be presumed to delineate the areas where
parking is prohibited.
   (H)   Residential parking permits. The Chief of Police may issue three
residential parking permits to the residents of each house located on that part
of a street for which parking is limited to those displaying a valid
residential parking permit at any time(s), as provided in this Schedule I.
Requests for residential parking permits shall be submitted to the Chief of
Police or his or her designee. The address of a person requesting residential
parking permits shall be verified by a current utility bill, auto registration
or other documentation reasonably demonstrating residency at an address within
a restricted residential parking zone. A residential parking permit shall not
guarantee or reserve to the holder any particular parking space within a
restricted residential parking area.
(Ord. 950905A, passed 9-5-1995; Ord. 951107C, passed 11-7-1995; Ord. 990216,
passed 2-16-1999; Ord. 020820, passed 8-20-2002; Ord. 090421-A, passed 4-21-
2009; Ord. 110301-A, passed 3-1-2011; Ord. 160405-B, passed 4-5-2016; Ord.
170516-B, passed 5-16-2017; Ord. 180619, passed 6-19-2018; Ord. 180717, passed
7-17-2018; Am. Ord. 190716, passed 7-16-2019; Ord. 250304-A, passed 3-4-2025;
Ord. 251202-B, passed 12-2-2025)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ABANDONED VEHICLES, WATERCRAFT AND THE LIKE
      
91.   NOISE REGULATIONS
      
92.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
93.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
94.   ANIMALS
      
95.   ALARM SYSTEMS
      
96.   PUBLIC PARKS AND OPEN SPACE REGULATIONS
      
97.   FIREWORKS
      
98.    JUNKED VEHICLES
      
99.   HANDS-FREE MOBILE COMMUNICATIONS DEVICES
      
100.   OUTDOOR LIGHTING
CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED VEHICLES, WATERCRAFT AND THE LIKE
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Enforcement authorization
   
90.03   Contract authority
   
90.04   Notice
   
90.05   Storage fees
   
90.06   Unclaimed abandoned items
   
90.07   Effective date
Cross-reference:
   Junked vehicles, see
Ch. 98
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that:
      (1)   Is inoperable, is more than five years old and has been left
unattended on public property for more than 48 hours;
      (2)   Has remained illegally on public property for more than 48 hours;
or
      (3)   Is found on private property without the consent of the owner or
person in charge of the property for more than 48 hours.
   CITY. The City of Sunset Valley, Texas.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle that is subject to registration pursuant to Tex.
Transportation Code Ch. 501.
   WATERCRAFT. A craft that is subject to registration pursuant to Tex. Parks
and Wildlife Code Ch. 31.
(Ord. 990504, passed 5-4-1999)
§ 90.02 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORIZATION.
   The police officers of the City Police Department are authorized to take
into custody any abandoned vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor found on
public or private property.
(Ord. 990504, passed 5-4-1999)
§ 90.03 CONTRACT AUTHORITY.
   The City Police Department is authorized to contract with third parties to
remove, preserve and store an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard
motor taken into custody by the Police Department. The City Council shall
consider and approve any contract with a third party provider of services
pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 990504, passed 5-4-1999)
§ 90.04 NOTICE.
   (A)   The city shall provide notice of abandonment and the taking into
custody by the city of a motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor, in
conformance with the provisions of Tex. Transportation Code Ch. 683 (the
“Code”), as amended from time to time, to the last known registered owner of
the item and each holder of a lien recorded pursuant to either Tex.
Transportation Code Ch. 501 or Tex. Parks and Wildlife Code Ch. 31. The notice
shall be sent by certified mail not later than ten days after the Police
Department takes custody of the item, and shall:
      (1)   Specify the year, make, model and identification number of the
item;
      (2)   The location of the facility where the item is held;
      (3)   Inform the owner and any recorded lien holder(s) of the right to
claim the item not later than the twentieth day after the date of the notice
upon payment of towing, preservation and storage charges; and
      (4)   State that failure of the owner or lien holder(s) to claim the item
during the specified period constitutes a waiver/release by the person of all
right, title and interest in the item and a consent to sale of the item at a
public auction.
   (B)   In the event that either the identity of the last registered owner
cannot be determined, the registration has no address for the owner or the
identity and address of any lien holder(s) cannot be ascertained, notice by
publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the county published in
the time period and containing all the information required by division (A)
above shall be sufficient notice to the person(s) to take all acts provided or
allowed by this chapter. Notice by publication shall be in conformance with
Tex. Transportation Code § 683.012, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 990504, passed 5-4-1999)
§ 90.05 STORAGE FEES.
   The city, or, if applicable, the third-party contractor who stores any
abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor, shall be entitled to a
reasonable storage fee for:
   (A)   Not more than ten days beginning on the day the item is taken into
custody and ending on the day the required notice is mailed or published; and
   (B)   Additional days beginning on the day after notice is mailed or
published and ending on the day accrued charges are paid and the item is
removed.
(Ord. 990504, passed 5-4-1999)
§ 90.06 UNCLAIMED ABANDONED ITEMS.
   (A)   In the event that neither the owner nor any lien holder timely claims
an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor seized pursuant to
this chapter, the city as directed by City Council shall either:
      (1)   Sell the item at public auction after notice published in a
newspaper of general circulation not less than two weeks before for the
auction; or
      (2)   Use the item for any Police Department purpose; provided that, in
the event that the Police Department shall subsequently cease using the item,
the item will be sold at public auction in conformance with the provisions of
division (A)(1) above.
   (B)   The City Police Department shall be entitled to reimbursement from the
proceeds of sale of an item pursuant to this chapter for:
      (1)   The cost of the auction;
      (2)   Towing, preservation and storage fees resulting from the taking
into custody; and
      (3)   The cost of notice or publication as required by this chapter or
applicable law incorporated in this chapter by reference.
   (C)   After deducting the reimbursement allowed pursuant to division (B)
above, the proceeds of sale shall be held for 90 days for the owner or lien
holder of the item. Proceeds unclaimed after 90 days shall be deposited in an
account that may be used for the payment of costs listed in division (B) above
regarding other items taken into custody pursuant to this chapter, if the
proceeds of sale of other items are insufficient to meets the reimbursable
expenses.
   (D)   The city may transfer funds in excess of $1,000 from the account
described in division (C) above to the city’s General Revenue Account to be
used by the City Police Department.
(Ord. 990504, passed 5-4-1999)
§ 90.07 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective on and after 5-17-1999.
(Ord. 990504, passed 5-4-1999)
CHAPTER 91: NOISE REGULATIONS
Section
   
91.01   Purpose
   
91.02   Definitions
   
91.03   Unreasonable noise prohibited; illustrative examples
   
91.04   Regulation of hours of conduct of noise-generating activities
 
   
91.99   Penalty
§ 91.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations, criteria and
procedures regarding unreasonable noise and to regulate the hours of conduct of
regularly recurring activities that generate sufficient noise as to disturb the
sleep of residents during customary sleeping hours.
(Ord. 980707, passed 7-7-1998; Ord. 180605-A, passed 6-5-2018)
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on
a sound level meter using the A-weighted network. The level so read is
designated dB(A) or dBA.
   CONTINUOUS SOUND. A sound the intensity of which remains essentially
constant during a given period of time. CONTINUOUS SOUND shall be measured by
the slow response setting of a sound level meter.
   DBA (DECIBEL-A-WEIGHTED). Sound pressure level as measured on the “A” scale
of a sound level meter manufactured in accordance with the specifications of
the American National Standards Institute, Inc. (ANSI), Type 2, ANSI-SI.4
(1971). Unless otherwise noted, measurements shall be made in the slow response
mode of the meter.
   DECIBEL (dB). A unit of sound pressure, equal to 20 times the logarithm to
the base 10 of the ration of the pressure of the sound measured to the
reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square
meter).
   NOISE. Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to
cause an adverse psychological effect on humans.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any sound which:
      (1)   Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals;
      (2)   Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities;
      (3)   Endangers or injures personal or real property; or
      (4)   Exceeds the applicable maximum permissible sound levels as set
forth in this chapter.
   REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY. An imaginary line along the ground surface, and its
vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from
that owned by another person, but it does not include intra-building real
property divisions.
   SOUND. Vibratory disturbance (including an oscillation) in the pressure and/
or density of a liquid or gas or in the particular displacement of a solid or
liquid. The disturbance takes place at a rate between approximately 20 and
20,000 hertz (cycles per second); and the physiological perception of a
vibration of displacement.
   SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT. Any machine or device for the amplification of
the human voice, music or any other sound. SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT, as used
herein, shall not be construed as including standard automobile radio when used
and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in which installed or warning
devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on
other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes.
   SOUND LEVEL. That which is measured in the “A” weighting network on a sound
level meter unless otherwise specified.
   SOUND LEVEL METER. The instrument, meeting the requirements of ANSI SI.4-
1971 Type II rating, used for making sound level measurements.
   SOUND PRESSURE. The instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and
the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as produced by
sound energy.
   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. The intensity in decibels (dB) of a sound.
(Ord. 980707, passed 7-7-1998)
§ 91.03 UNREASONABLE NOISE PROHIBITED; ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for
any person, between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following morning
to:
      (1)   Own, harbor, keep or have control of one or more animals on
premises owned, leased or controlled by the person, which animal(s) make any
unreasonably loud or disturbing noise;
      (2)   Cause any unreasonably loud or disturbing noise by any musical
instrument, radio, sound amplifying equipment, explosive or by any other means;
or
      (3)   Permit or allow on property owned, leased or controlled by the
person any unreasonably loud or disturbing noise by any musical instrument,
radio, sound amplifying equipment, explosive or by any other means; which noise
either:
         (a)   Causes material distress, discomfort or injury to persons of
ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof; or
         (b)   Substantially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of
private home(s) by person(s) of ordinary sensibilities.
   (B)   The following acts, among those specified in division (A) above and
among others unspecified, are declared to be nuisances in violation of this
chapter, but the enumerations shall not be deemed to be exclusive, to wit:
      (1)   The use of any sound amplifying equipment of the intensity that
disturbs persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof;
      (2)   The continued or frequent sounding of any horn or signal device on
any motor vehicle, except as a danger or warning signal;
      (3)   The running of any motor vehicle that is so out of repair, so
loaded or is operated in a manner as to create loud, grating grinding, jarring
or rattling noise; and
      (4)   The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle engine, except through a
muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises
therefrom.
   (C)   As the city desires to preserve its rural environment, reasonable
sounds made by domestic animals, including cows, sheep, chickens, goats,
horses, dogs, cats and other animals kept and maintained for personal, non-
commercial purposes shall not constitute a violation of division (A)(1) above.
   (D)   The following shall be among the criteria considered for the purpose
of determining the reasonableness of noise made by animals:
      (1)   The volume and pitch of the sound(s);
      (2)   Whether the noise is habitual or recurring;
      (3)   Whether the noise is encouraged or induced by the owner, possessor
or one controlling the animal(s); and
      (4)   The proximity of the noise to any residence, business or person
complaining of the noise.
   (E)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any noise other than an
animal noise measured at a level in excess of 65 dBA of sound pressure measured
at or beyond any point on a real property boundary line for a total five
minutes out of any hour, whether continuously or intermittently, shall
constitute an unreasonable noise in violation of this chapter.
   (F)   Agents of the City Police Department are authorized, upon receiving a
written complaint by any person affected by any alleged unreasonable noise, to
notify the one alleged to have violated this chapter in writing of any
complaint(s) and request voluntary compliance with this chapter. If voluntary
compliance is achieved within a reasonable amount of time from notification by
the City Police Department, the city shall not file charges for those
violations of this chapter. A “reasonable amount of time” is an exclusive
discretionary decision by the City’s Police Chief.
(Ord. 980707, passed 7-7-1998) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 REGULATION OF HOURS OF CONDUCT OF NOISE-GENERATING ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to engage in the following activities outside the
confines of an enclosed building with the use of any motorized vehicle or
equipment between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following morning:
      (1)   Operation of a street or parking lot sweeper;
      (2)   Operation of equipment for landscaping or yard maintenance,
including leaf blowers, lawn mowers, chain saws, hedge clippers, tillers, or
trimmers;
      (3)   Operation of cleaning equipment such as a power washers and
equipment for removal of grease trap waste; or
      (4)   Operation of trucks for emptying solid waste or recycling
containers; or
      (5)   Operation of any equipment for construction, repair, or maintenance
of improvements.
   (B)   Exceptions. The following activities are excepted from the prohibition
of division (A) above:
      (1)   Emergency utility repairs; and
      (2)   Activity necessary to prevent an imminent threat of destruction of
property or hazard to life or safety of any persons.
   (C)   Special permit. A special permit for conduct of an activity proscribed
by division (A) above for non-routine activities, the performance of which
during the restricted hours described in division (A) above is in the interest
of public safety and provides for greater convenience to the public, may be
issued on the terms and condition provided in this section. By way of example
only, installation of roof-top mechanical equipment by use of a helicopter
during restricted hours may be shown to result in reduced hazard to the public
and less disruption of traffic and inconvenience to the public. To be eligible
for a special permit pursuant to this subsection, the applicant must
demonstrate that:
      (1)   The proposed activity is not a regularly recurring one;
      (2)   Public safety or convenience will be enhanced by conduct of the
activity during restricted hours;
      (3)   There is no practicable alternative to achieve the purpose during
non-restricted hours that results in equivalent public safety or convenience;
and
      (4)   The activity is otherwise conducted in compliance with applicable
law.
   (D)   An application for a special permit shall be submitted to the City
Administrator on a form promulgated by the City Administrator. The City
Administrator may issue a special permit for the proposed activity if (s)he
finds that the applicant is eligible based on the criteria provided in division
(C) above. The City Administrator shall provide a written approval or denial of
an application for a special permit not later than ten business days after
submission of a complete application.
   (E)   An applicant may appeal a denial of a special permit by submitting a
written request for appeal not later than ten days after denial. The City
Council shall hear and decide such appeal at the next scheduled City Council
meeting for which notice may timely be given in compliance with the Texas Open
Meetings Act. The applicant shall be entitled to present evidence or
information in support of the appeal, subject to reasonable limits on time and
relevance as determined by the City Council.
(Ord. 180605-A, passed 6-5-2018)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500. In lieu of prosecuting
a person in its Municipal Court for violations of this chapter, the city may
seek injunctive relief against the person in the District Courts of the county.
(Ord. 980707, passed 7-7-1998)
CHAPTER 92: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Excavations and Openings
   
92.01   Permit required
   
92.02   Application
   
92.03   Performance bond, public liability insurance required
   
92.04   Approval; closing of streets; barricades, warning lights and watchers
   
92.05   Duties upon completion of work
   
92.06   Certificate of final inspection
   
92.07   Trench safety systems
   
92.08   Effective date
 
   
92.99   Penalty
EXCAVATIONS AND OPENINGS
§ 92.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig any trench or make any excavation
or opening or any other alteration in any street, alley, public highway, right-
of-way or easement of the city without first having obtained a permit to do so.
(Ord. 880202, passed 2-2-1988; Ord. 891219, passed 12-19-1989) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.02 APPLICATION.
   The application for a permit to dig any trench or make any excavation or
opening or any other alteration in any of the streets, alleys, public highways,
rights-of-way, or easements of the city shall be made to the city and state
clearly the name of the street or highway or location of easements or rights-
of-way in which it is proposed to make such opening; the purpose of making the
opening; the name of the person or entity who proposes to make such excavation
or opening; and any other information required under the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 880202, passed 2-2-1988; Ord. 891219, passed 12-19-1989)
§ 92.03 PERFORMANCE BOND, PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   The city shall estimate the probable cost of repairing the street,
right-of-way, easement, or highway; and shall require the applicant to file a
written bond in an amount sufficient to cover the cost, with two or more
sufficient sureties, conditioned that the street, right-of-way, easement, or
highway shall be restored in as good or better condition than it was before the
excavation or alteration was made. The bond shall be approved by the city. If
the applicant elects to do so, he or she may make a cash deposit of the sum as
may have been fixed by the city in lieu of the written bond. The bond shall
contain a provision for at least 15-days’ notice to the city in case of
cancellation.
   (B)   The conditions of the bond required in division (A) shall not be
considered to have been complied with until the city shall have accepted the
street, highway, right-of-way, or easements as being restored in good
condition. In the event that the person making the opening shall fail to leave
the highway, street, right-of-way, or easement in a good state of repair,
satisfactory to the city, then the city shall call upon the sureties to pay for
the cost of repairing the highway; provided however, that in the event of a
cash deposit instead of a bond, the city may proceed to have the street, other
highway, right-of-way, or easement, put in good condition, paying for same out
of the deposit made by him or her, and if there be any remainder of the deposit
after paying for the work, the remainder shall be refunded to the person making
the deposit.
   (C)   Before a permit may be issued hereunder, the applicant must comply
with all provisions of this subchapter pertinent to the issuance of such a
permit, including but not limited to §
92.07 below, if applicable. Also before a permit may be issued, in addition to
the performance bond required in division (A), the applicant must take out and
maintain, at its own expense, comprehensive general liability insurance
included but not limited to premises-operations and completed operations
coverage, covering the obligations assumed by the applicant in not less than
the following limits:
      (1)   General liability: $2,000,000 each occurrence; $2,000,000
aggregate.
      (2)   Property damages: $500,000 each occurrence; $500,000 aggregate.
   (D)   Any policy providing for the above-required insurance shall name the
city as an additional named insured and shall contain a provision that the
policy may not be cancelled, terminated or modified without 15-days’ written
advance notice thereof to the city.
   (E)   Cancellation of insurance will automatically cause the suspension of
the permit for 30 days unless reinstated insurance is furnished. Suspended
permits shall be automatically canceled at the end of 30 days.
   (F)   When the bond or deposit and insurance required by this section shall
have been accepted by the city, and all other applicable provisions relevant to
the granting of permits have been satisfied, the city shall issue a permit for
the excavation set out in the application, and the applicant may then proceed
with the work in the exact location named in its application, and in no other
place.
(Ord. 880202, passed 2-2-1988; Ord. 891219, passed 12-19-1989)
§ 92.04 APPROVAL; CLOSING OF STREETS; BARRICADES, WARNING LIGHTS AND WATCHERS.
   (A)   All the work of trenching, excavating or making any character of
opening in any of the streets, alleys, highways, rights-of-way, or easements of
the city, shall at all times require the approval of the city.
   (B)   The entity doing such work shall obtain the city's approval for the
closing of streets, alleys, highways, rights-of-way, or easements to the end
that the streets, highways, rights-of-way, or easements of the city shall not
be unduly disturbed and traffic thereon obstructed.
   (C)   The permittee shall erect and maintain warning signs, barricades and
sufficient safeguards around all excavations, embankments, and obstructions;
shall provide yellow warning lights on or near the work and keep them lighted
at night or other times when visibility is limited; and shall employ such
watchmen as may be necessary for the protection of the public.
(Ord. 880202, passed 2-2-1988; Ord. 891219, passed 12-19-1989)
§ 92.05 DUTIES UPON COMPLETION OF WORK.
   After the trenching, excavation or opening shall have been made, the
Permittee shall backfill the excavation with such materials and in such manner
as the city may require, and leave the street, highway, right-of-way, or
easement in at least the same or better condition than it was before the
opening was made.
(Ord. 880202, passed 2-2-1988; Ord. 891219, passed 12-19-1989) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.06 CERTIFICATE OF FINAL INSPECTION.
   After the making of such tests and inspections as may be necessary or
desirable by the city, and the satisfactory completion of the backfill and
restoration of the street, highway, alley, right-of-way, or easement along with
an approved final inspection report, the city shall certify that the work has
been completed in accordance with the provisions of the permit and issue a
certificate of final inspection. The issuance of the certificate of final
inspection shall not operate to release the applicant or his or her sureties of
any obligations under or upon this permit or the performance bond.
(Ord. 880202, passed 2-2-1988; Ord. 891219, passed 12-19-1989)
§ 92.07 TRENCH SAFETY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, the term TRENCH shall have the meaning
assigned that term in the standards promulgated by the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration.
   (B)   On all construction projects for the city within the boundaries of the
city or in its extraterritorial jurisdiction, which are subject to the
provisions of this subchapter and/or any other city ordinance pursuant to which
a construction or building permit is required and in which trench excavation
will exceed a depth of five feet, the bid documents provided to all of the
bidders and the contract shall include:
      (1)   A reference to the Occupational Safety and Health Administration's
standards for trench safety that will be in effect during the period of
construction of the project;
      (2)   A copy of any special shoring requirements imposed by the city with
a separate pay item for any such special shoring requirements based upon the
square feet of shoring used;
      (3)   A copy of any geotechnical information that was obtained for use by
the contractor in the design of the trench safety system; and
      (4)   A separate pay item for trench excavation safety protection based
on the linear feet of the trench excavated.
   (C)   On all construction projects within the boundaries of the city or in
its extraterritorial jurisdiction, which are subject to the provisions of this
subchapter and/or any other city ordinance pursuant to which a construction or
building permit is required and in which a contractor is employed and the
trench excavation will exceed five feet, the owner and the contractor must
execute a written contract concerning trench safety. The project bid documents,
if bids are used, and the written contract must include:
      (1)   A reference to the Occupational Safety and Health Administration's
standards for trench safety that will be in effect during the period of
construction of the project;
      (2)   A copy of any special shoring requirements imposed by the city,
with a separate pay item for any special shoring requirements based upon the
square feet of shoring used;
      (3)   A copy of any geotechnical information obtained by the owner for
use in the design of the trench safety systems; and
      (4)   A separate pay item for trench excavation safety protection based
on the linear feet of the trench excavated.
   (D)   Each applicant for a permit on a project subject to the provisions of
division (C) above shall certify in writing to the city that the bid documents,
if bids are used, and the written contract satisfy the requirements set forth
in division (C). In addition to or in lieu of requiring the filing of such
certification, the city may, in its discretion, require the applicant to
produce for inspection or to file with the city a copy of the contract that
complies with division (C). In addition to any other grounds authorized by city
ordinance on which the city may refuse to issue a construction, building or
excavation permit, the city shall refuse to issue a permit to an applicant who
fails to comply with the provisions of this division.
   (E)   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the contractor and all of
its subcontractors to be familiar and comply with all of the requirements of
federal and state laws, including the Occupational Safety and Health Act of
1970 (OSHA) and all amendments thereto, and to enforce and comply with all the
provisions thereof.
   (F)   The contractor shall have a competent person or persons as required
under the Occupational Safety and Health Act, on site to inspect the work and
to supervise the conformance of the contractor’s operation with federal
regulations. The contractor shall make daily inspections of the trench safety
systems to ensure that the systems meet OSHA requirements. Daily inspections
are to be made by a competent person provided by the contractor.
   (G)   The contractor shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, its
employees and agents, from any and all damages, costs (including, without
limitation, legal fees, court costs, and the cost of investigation), judgments
or claims by anyone for injury or death to persons resulting from the collapse
or failure of the trenches constructed under a permit issued by the city.
   (H)   The contractor acknowledges and agrees that this indemnity provision
provides indemnity for the city in case the city is negligent either by act or
by omission in providing for trench safety, including, but not limited to
inspections, failure to issue stop work orders, and the hiring of the
contractor, if hired by the city.
   (I)   The requirements of this section do not apply to persons or entities
subject to the safety standards adopted under Tex. Transp. Code § 111.002 and
the administrative penalty provisions of Tex. Transp. Code § 111.057.
   (J)   The requirements of divisions (C), (D), (E), (F), (G) and (H) above do
not apply to a contract governed by Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann. Art. 601b or Tex.
Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann. Art 2368a.6.
(Ord. 880202, passed 2-2-1988; Ord. 891219, passed 12-19-1989)
§ 92.08 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be effective on 1-1-1990.
(Ord. 880202, passed 2-2-1988; Ord. 891219, passed 12-19-1989)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this subchapter or
shall fail to comply therewith or any of the requirements thereof, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable for a fine, and upon
conviction of any of violations shall be fined in a sum of not more than $500;
and each day any such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. Any person violating any provision of this
subchapter relating to health safety, or sanitation shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and, upon conviction shall be fined an amount not exceeding
$1,000.
(Ord. 880202, passed 2-2-1988; Ord. 891219, passed 12-19-1989)
CHAPTER 93: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Throwing, scattering of paper, litter or rubbish
   
93.02   Storage requirements for chemically treated wood
   
93.03   Regulations for phosphorus in detergents
Graffiti
   
93.15   Definitions
   
93.16   Prohibited graffiti
   
93.17   Prosecution
   
93.18   Effective date
Solid Waste, Litter and the Like
   
93.30   Definitions
   
93.31   Pedestrians and motorists
   
93.32   Vehicles transporting loose materials
   
93.33   Commercial containerization and removal
   
93.34   Litter disposal and storage facilities during construction activities
   
93.35   Keeping property clean
   
93.36   Enforcement
   
93.37   Dumping and other material
   
93.38   Nuisances declared
   
93.39   Effective date
Unsanitary Property
   
93.50   Accumulation of stagnant water, weeds, rubbish and the like prohibited
   
93.51   Performance of clearing work by city upon default of property owner
   
93.52   Cost of clearing property to be assessed against the property; appeal
of assessment
   
93.53   Cost of clearing property to be a lien on property
Carryout Bags
   
93.60   Definitions
   
93.61   Regulations
   
93.62   Exemptions
   
93.63   Hardship variance
Food Safety
   
93.70   Definitions
   
93.71   Compliance required
   
93.72   Service of notices
   
93.73   Food manager certification
   
93.74   Food handler registration required
   
93.75   Permits for food enterprises
   
93.76   Inspections
   
93.77   Hearings
   
93.78   Specific standards for mobile food vendors, temporary vendors and
certified farmer’s market vendors
   
93.79   Employee and public restroom requirements
   
93.80   Dogs in outdoor dining areas
   
93.81   Construction plans
 
   
93.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 THROWING, SCATTERING OF PAPER, LITTER OR RUBBISH.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, scatter or deposit in any
manner whatsoever upon any street, alley or public place or upon any vacant lot
in the city, except in receptacles to be collected by regular garbage
collectors, any paper, garbage, trash, rubbish, ashes, manure or miscellaneous
waste; and the presence of the same upon any street, alley or public place
shall constitute a violation of this section on the part of the owner or
occupant upon whose half of the street or alley garbage, trash, rubbish, ashes,
manure or miscellaneous waste is permitted to remain for more than 24 hours.
(Ord. 780711C, passed 7-11-1978) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.02 STORAGE REQUIREMENTS FOR CHEMICALLY TREATED WOOD.
   (A)   Unsafe storage of arsenic treated wood prohibited.
      (1)   A person or entity that sells wood treated with Chromate Copper
Arsenate (CCA), Ammoniacal Copper Arsenate (ACA), or Ammoniacal Copper Zinc
Arsenate (ACZA) shall not store any such treated wood outdoors or in any area
where it would be exposed to rain and the potential for run-off from water in
contact with the treated wood could potentially reach streams, creeks, rivers,
or other water collection areas.
      (2)   A person or entity may not use wood treated with CCA, ACA, or ACZA
in outdoor commercial displays or outdoor merchandise shelving or bins.
      (3)   A person or entity that sells wood treated with CCA, ACA, or ACZA
must comply with all notice requirements of the EPA.
   (B)   Notice to owner to correct violation. The Deputy City Administrator
shall give written notice to the owner or operator of property on which a
violation of this section exists. The owner or operator shall have 12 hours to
correct the violation.
   (C)   Emergency abatement. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
preclude or restrict the city from taking emergency action to abate a condition
or circumstance that poses an immediate danger to the public health, safety or
welfare.
   (D)   Violation. A violation under this section is a Class C misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
(Ord. 030902, passed 9-2-2003)
§ 93.03 REGULATIONS FOR PHOSPHORUS IN DETERGENTS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      HOUSEHOLD LAUNDRY DETERGENT. A laundering cleaning compound in liquid,
bar, spray, tablet, flake, powder, or other form used for domestic clothes-
cleaning purposes. The term HOUSEHOLD LAUNDRY DETERGENT shall not mean:
         (a)   A dishwashing compound, household cleaner, metal cleaner,
degreasing compound, commercial cleaner, industrial cleaner, or other substance
that is intended to be used for non-laundry cleaning purposes;
         (b)   A detergent used in dairy, beverage, or food processing cleaning
equipment;
         (c)   A phosphorous acid product, including a sanitizer, brightener,
acid cleaner, or metal conditioner;
         (d)   A detergent used in hospitals, veterinary hospitals or clinics,
or health care facilities or in agricultural production;
         (e)   A detergent used by industry for metal cleaning or conditioning;
         (f)   A detergent manufactured, stored, or distributed for use or sale
outside of the state;
         (g)   A detergent used in any laboratory, including a biological
laboratory, research facility, chemical laboratory, and engineering laboratory;
or
         (h)   A detergent used in a commercial laundry that provides laundry
services for hospital, health care facility, or veterinary hospital.
      PHOSPHOROUS. Elemental phosphorus.
   (B)   Restrictions.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell,
offer or expose for sale, give or furnish any household laundry detergent
containing more than 0.5% phosphorus by weight within the city from and after
September 1, 1992.
      (2)   The concentration of phosphorus by weight, expressed as elemental
phosphorus in any synthetic detergent or detergent shall be determined by the
current applicable methods prescribed by the American Society for Testing and
Materials (A.S.T.M.).
   (C)   Inspection by city. The city shall retain the right, but does not
assume the duty to inspect at any time for conformance to this section.
   (D)   Notice of violation. The city shall notify any person, firm or
corporation, upon determination that a violation to the restrictions of this
section has been committed. Notice shall be sent by certified mail advising of
the alleged violation and requiring that the sale of such detergents be
discontinued within ten days from receipt of the notice.
   (E)   Penalty. Any person not complying with the provisions of this section
within the corporate limits of the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and,
upon conviction, shall be fined an amount not exceeding $200. Each day that
such violation continues shall be a separate offense. Prosecution or conviction
under this provision shall never be a bar to any other remedy or relief for
violations of this section.
(Ord. 920407, passed 5- -1992)
GRAFFITI
§ 93.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GRAFFITI. Any unauthorized marking, including, but not limited to, any
inscription, slogan, drawing, painting, symbol, logo, name, character or
figure, that is made in any manner visible to the public and made on property
that is used for commercial purposes. GRAFFITI does not include markings used
for commercial advertising purposes or markings required by applicable city
ordinance, state or federal law.
   UNAUTHORIZED. Without the permission, in advance of the creation of the
marking, of the owner or lawful occupant of the property. It shall be a
rebuttable presumption that the marking is UNAUTHORIZED if the graffiti is
inconsistent with the design and use of the subject property, there is no
specific written authorization by the owner or occupant for the graffiti or the
person causing the graffiti is unknown to the owner or occupant.
(Ord. 070731, passed 7-31-2007)
§ 93.16 PROHIBITED GRAFFITI.
   (A)   An owner or lawful occupant of any property in the city commits an
offense if the owner fails to cover, paint over or remove all graffiti from the
owner’s property that is visible from any public property or right-of-way or
from any private property not owned or controlled by the owner.
   (B)   Before filing a complaint under division (A) above, the city shall
serve the owner and, if not the same, the occupant of the property with written
notice to remove the graffiti. The notice may be served in person or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner and, as
applicable, the occupant. If a certified letter comes back undelivered and
personal delivery has been attempted and has failed, then service may be
accomplished by posting the notice on or near the front door of each building
on the premises to which the violation has occurred; however, service by
posting on the premises is not effective notice to an owner who is not the
occupant of the property. Prosecution under division (A) above shall not be
commenced until 20 days after notice is served pursuant to this division (B).
   (C)   Service of notice in this section shall be the date the notice is
personally served on the owner or occupant, as applicable, the date certified
mail return receipt shows the letter was delivered or the day the notice is
posted on the door.
(Ord. 070731, passed 7-31-2007) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.17 PROSECUTION.
   The city shall not prosecute an owner or occupant, as applicable, if:
   (A)   Within four months of the date of service of notice, the owner
received a removal notice related to the same property and the owner or
occupant, as applicable, removed, covered or repainted graffiti; or
   (B)   The owner or occupant, as applicable, approved placement of the
graffiti and notified the city of the markings prior to service of a notice
under this subchapter.
(Ord. 070731, passed 7-31-2007)
§ 93.18 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall become effective after all notice requirements have
been satisfied.
(Ord. 070731, passed 7-31-2007)
SOLID WASTE, LITTER AND THE LIKE
§ 93.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Sunset Valley, Texas.
   COMPOSTING. To permit decayable organic matter to decompose on
governmentally owned property or privately owned residential property in an
environment which prevents paniculate matter being composted from becoming
airborne and which prevents animals from removing the materials being
composted.
   GARBAGE. All decayable waste from public and private establishments
including, but not limited to, vegetable, animal and fish offal and animal and
fish carcasses. The term does not include sewage, human body waste and
industrial by-products.
   JUNK. All worn out, worthless, abandoned or discarded material including,
but not limited to, worthless metal, glass, paper, wood and/or other similar
materials; or inoperable or discarded appliances and discarded furniture.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation or unincorporated
association.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Includes, but is not limited to, the following exterior
locations: streets, street medians, roads, road medians, catch basins,
sidewalks, recreation paths, strips between streets and sidewalks, lanes,
alleys, public rights-of-way, public parking lots, school grounds, municipal
vacant lots, parks, other publicly-owned recreation facilities and municipal
waterways and bodies of water.
   REFUSE. Garbage, rubbish and other decayable and non-decayable waste,
including, but not limited to, vegetable matter and animal and fish carcasses,
and filth and other unwholesome matters as those terms are used in Tex. Health
and Safety Code Ch. 342. The term does not include sewage from a public or
private establishment or residence. The term does not include such items as
boulders, dirt, rocks, gravel, other mineral matter, trees, bushes, limbs and
grass, resulting from lot clearing or mowing.
   REGULATED PRIVATE PROPERTY. The following locations owned by private
persons: yards and grounds, driveways, entranceways, passageways, parking
areas, storage areas, vacant lots, drain ways and recreation facilities.
   RUBBISH. All non-decayable solid wastes.
   SEWAGE or WASTEWATER. Water which contains, or which has been in contact
with organic or inorganic contaminants such as human or animal wastes, cooking
fats and grease, laundry detergents or other chemical compounds.
   SOLID WASTE. Any quantity of refuse, garbage, rubbish, junk or, pursuant to
Tex. Health and Safety Code § 342.004, objectionable and or unsanitary matter,
which is not placed in a solid waste container.
   SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS. Metal or plastic receptacles used for the disposal
and storage of solid waste.
(Ord. 980915, passed 9-15-1998)
§ 93.31 PEDESTRIANS AND MOTORISTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, discard, place or
deposit solid waste in any manner or amount on any public or regulated private
property within the corporate limits of the city, except in solid waste
containers lawfully provided therefor.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of every person distributing handbills, leaflets,
flyers or any other advertising and information material to take reasonable
measures to keep the materials from littering public or regulated private
property.
   (C)   To facilitate proper disposal of solid waste by the public, every
commercial establishment and every non-residential facility open to the public
shall provide, regularly empty and maintain in good condition adequate solid
waste containers for disposal of solid waste. This requirement shall be
applicable, but not limited to, retail merchants, restaurants, shopping
centers, convenience stores, supermarkets, commercial parking lot operators and
public institutions.
(Ord. 980915, passed 9-15-1998) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.32 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING LOOSE MATERIALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport any solid waste by truck or
other motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the city unless the solid
waste is covered and secured in a manner as to prevent depositing of solid
waste on public property or regulated private property.
(Ord. 980915, passed 9-15-1998) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.33 COMMERCIAL CONTAINERIZATION AND REMOVAL.
   (A)   All commercial establishments and institutions which generate solid
waste shall obtain and use adequate containers for storage and removal of solid
waste. The containers shall not be visible from adjacent public or private
property, except that street and/or parking lot vendors shall provide adequate
containers for disposal of solid waste which may be visible from adjacent
property. Containers provided by the vendors shall be maintained on a daily
basis and will be near enough to the vendor to be easily visible to his or her
customers for their use and shall be easily accessible to the vendor for her or
his use.
   (B)   Solid waste containers which contain garbage shall be kept covered at
all times. Solid waste containers which contain rubbish shall be constructed to
prevent the rubbish from becoming airborne.
   (C)   Any solid waste container which leaks or fails to prevent spillage of
solid waste stored therein shall be repaired or replaced promptly by the owner,
tenant, agent or occupant of the property served by the container upon receipt
of written notice of the non-conformance from the city. Failure to do so within
five days after receipt of the notification shall constitute a violation of
this section.
(Ord. 980915, passed 9-15-1998) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.34 LITTER DISPOSAL AND STORAGE FACILITIES DURING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Before building permits shall be issued for construction, plans for
the adequacy, location and accessibility of solid waste containerization and
storage facilities must be approved by the city.
   (B)   To maintain the building permit, the contractor and/or owner of the
affected property must maintain adequate solid waste storage and cleanup on a
daily basis. Failure to keep the site free of solid waste and sewage or
wastewater shall constitute a violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 980915, passed 9-15-1998) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.35 KEEPING PROPERTY CLEAN.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner, agent, occupant and/or lessee of
real property to keep the property free of solid waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to dispose of solid waste into streets or other
rights-of-way.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the owner, agent, occupant and/or lessee of
real property to obtain and use adequate containers for storage and removal of
solid waste, which shall be covered at all times, with the exception of city-
approved recyclable containers.
(Ord. 980915, passed 9-15-1998) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.36 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Prior to imposing any penalty provided by this subchapter, the city
will serve or cause to be served a written notice upon the owner and, if
applicable, agent tenant/occupant of the property on which a violation of this
subchapter occurs and demand compliance with the provisions of this subchapter
within ten days. The notice shall be delivered to the owner, and, if
applicable, agent tenant/occupant at the person’s post office address. If
personal service cannot be obtained at the person’s post office address, notice
shall be given in compliance with the provisions of Tex. Health and Safety Code
§ 342.006.
   (B)   If the person(s) served with notice under this section fails or
refuses to cure the violation so noticed within ten days of the notice, the
city may proceed to require the person to remove the solid waste within a
definite period of time. If the person refuses to cure the violation, the city
may proceed to cure same, keeping an account of the expense of the cure, and
the expense shall be charged and paid by the owner of the property.
   (C)   The Mayor of the city shall make a certified statement of the expense
incurred by, and reimbursable to, the city in curing violations of this
section, including the cost of searching the property records as the search is
required. The statement shall be sent to the property owner by the city.
   (D)   The expenses of the city in curing a violation of this section, plus
interest on that amount as provided by law shall be secured by a lien against
the affected property pursuant to Tex. Health and Safety Code Ch. 342. The lien
shall be effective when the Mayor files a statement of expenses with the County
Clerk, which statement shall include the name of the owner and the legal
description of the affected property. Notice of the lien shall be given in the
manner prescribed by division (A) above.
   (E)   The city may institute a suit to foreclose upon a lien securing
payment of expenses incurred by the city pursuant to this section, plus lawful
interest.
(Ord. 980915, passed 9-15-1998)
§ 93.37 DUMPING AND OTHER MATERIAL.
   It shall be unlawful to dump solid waste on or near city streets, regulated
private property, parks, parking lots, highways and rights-of-way; provided,
however, that, a reasonable amount of decayable organic matter may be deposited
on regulated private property by the owner or resident thereof for composting
purposes. Special exceptions will be made for city-wide, city-sponsored
environmental and landscaping projects. An example of this special exception
would be the city’s chipping and shredding brush collection.
(Ord. 980915, passed 9-15-1998) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.38 NUISANCES DECLARED.
   (A)   The conditions set forth in division (B) below are hereby declared to
constitute nuisances which create or tend to create a danger to the public
health, safety or welfare or impair the environment of the city.
   (B)   It shall constitute a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person
owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real
property, occupied or unoccupied, within the city to:
      (1)   Permit, allow or cause any sewage or wastewater to be disposed,
stored, deposited or exposed on the property; or
      (2)   Permit, allow or cause the deposit of any solid waste in a
watercourse on the property without a permit or in violation of permit terms.
(Ord. 980915, passed 9-15-1998) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.39 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall become effective on and after 10-2-1998.
(Ord. 980915, passed 9-15-1998)
UNSANITARY PROPERTY
§ 93.50 ACCUMULATION OF STAGNANT WATER, WEEDS, RUBBISH AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for an owner of any lot or parcel of vacant ground
within the city to fail to keep the property owned by him or her free from
stagnant water, weeds, tall grass, rubbish, garbage, brush, trash or any other
objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter of whatsoever nature, or to fail
to keep the sidewalks in front of his or her property free and clear from weeds
and tall grass from the line of the property to the established curb line next
adjacent thereto, or to fail to fill up, drain or regrade any vacant lots,
ground or yards or any other property owned by him or her which shall be
unwholesome or have stagnant water therein, or which from any other cause, is
in a condition as to be liable to produce disease, or to fail to keep any
house, building, establishment, lot, yard or ground owned by him or her at all
times free from filth, carrion or impure or unwholesome matter of any kind.
(Ord. 76-8-10A, passed 8-10-1976) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.51 PERFORMANCE OF CLEARING WORK BY CITY UPON DEFAULT OF PROPERTY OWNER.
   In the event any owner shall fail or refuse to remedy any of the conditions
prohibited by §
93.50, within ten days after notice to do so, the city may do the work or cause
the same to be done, and pay therefor, and charge the expenses in doing or
having the work done or improvements made, to the owners of the property,
whereupon the charge shall be a personal liability of the owner to the city.
The notice may be in writing, served upon the owner in person by an officer or
employee of the city, or may be by letter addressed to the owner at his or her
post office address, or if personal service may not be had, or the owner’s
address or his or her address be not known, then notice may be given by
publishing a brief summary of the order as many as two times within ten
consecutive days in some daily newspaper of general circulation published in
the city addressed “Sanitary Improvements”, “To Whom It May Concern”, and the
publication shall be deemed sufficient notice.
(Ord. 76-8-10A, passed 8-10-1976)
§ 93.52 COST OF CLEARING PROPERTY TO BE ASSESSED AGAINST THE PROPERTY; APPEAL
OF ASSESSMENT.
   In addition to the remedy provided in §
93.51 and cumulative thereof, the Mayor, after giving to the owner of the
property ten-days’ personal notice in writing, or by notice sent by registered
United States mail addressed to the owner at his or her post-office address, or
by publication as many as two times within ten consecutive days if the owner’s
address or whereabouts be not known, may cause any of the work or improvements
mentioned in §
93.50, to be done at the expense of the city on the account of the owner of the
property on which the work or improvements are done, and cause all of the
actual cost to the city to be assessed on the real estate or lot on account of
which the expense is incurred; provided that, the owner of any real estate may
appeal to the City Council from the order of the City Mayor by filing a written
statement with the City Clerk within ten days after receipt of the notice
provided for above, stating that the real estate complied with the provisions
of §
93.50 before the expiration of the ten-day period. The City Council shall set a
date for a hearing upon the appeal to determine whether the real estate
complied with the provisions of §
93.50 before the expiration of the ten-day period. The authority of the City
Mayor to proceed to cause the work to be done shall not be suspended while an
appeal from his or her order is pending, but if it shall be determined by the
City Council that the premises complied with the provisions of §
93.50 before the expiration of the ten-day period, then no personal liability
of the owner shall arise nor shall any lien be created against the premises
upon which the work was done.
(Ord. 76-8-10A, passed 8-10-1976)
§ 93.53 COST OF CLEARING PROPERTY TO BE A LIEN ON PROPERTY.
   In the event any of the work mentioned §
93.50 is done by the city as mentioned in §§
93.51 and
93.52, the Mayor shall cause a statement of the expense incurred in doing the
work to be made put and certified to by him or her and filed with the County
Clerk, stating the description of the property upon which the work was done,
the character of work done and the name of the owners of the property,
whereupon the city shall have a privileged lien upon the land or premises upon
which the work was done for the amount of the expenditure, second only to liens
for lawful ad valorem taxes and liens for street improvements, together with
interest on the amounts at the rate of 10% per annum. For any expenditures and
interest, suit may be instituted and a personal judgment obtained against the
owner of the property and recovery and foreclosure had in the name of the city
against the owner of the property in any court having jurisdiction, and the
statement of the expenditures so made and filed, or a certified copy thereof,
shall be prime facie proof of the amount expended in any work or improvement.
(Ord. 76-8-10A, passed 8-10-1976)
CARRYOUT BAGS
§ 93.60 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. Any commercial enterprise that provides, through its
employees or contractors, carryout bags to its customers. The term includes
sole proprietorships, joint ventures, partnerships, corporations, or any other
legal entity whether for profit or not for profit.
   CARRYOUT BAG.  A bag provided by a business establishment to a customer,
typically at the point of sale, for the purpose of transporting purchases.
   REUSABLE CARRYOUT BAG. A carryout bag that is specifically designed and
manufactured for multiple reuse, and meets the following criteria:
      (1)   Displays in a highly visible manner on the bag exterior, language
indicating the bag's ability to be reused and recycled;
      (2)   Is constructed out of either:
         (a)    Cloth, other washable fabric, or other durable material
suitable for multiple reuse, whether woven or non-woven;
         (b)   Recyclable plastic, with a consumer carry handle and a minimum
thickness of four millimeters; or
         (c)   Recyclable paper.
   SINGLE-USE CARRYOUT BAG. A carryout bag that is not a reusable carryout bag.
(Ord. 130219-C, passed 2-19-2013; Ord. 140916-A, passed 9-16-2014)
§ 93.61 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Beginning on the effective date of this subchapter, the city will
engage in a public education campaign to inform business establishments and
citizens of the requirements regarding carryout bags.
   (B)   Beginning September 1, 2013 no person may provide single-use carryout
bags at any city facility, city-sponsored event, or any event held on city
property.
   (C)   Beginning September 1, 2013 a business establishment within the city
limits may not provide single-use carryout bags to its customers.
   (D)   Beginning September 1, 2013 a business establishment within the city
limits must provide prominently displayed signage advising customers of the
benefit of reducing, reusing and recycling and of the need to use reusable
carryout bags.
   (E)   A business establishment within the city limits may provide or sell
reusable carryout bags to its customers or any person. Subject to applicable
regulations regarding the use of public property, including those pertaining to
reservations, solicitation, and hours of operation, a person may provide or
sell reusable carryout bags at any city facility, city-sponsored event, or any
event held on city property.
(Ord. 130219-C, passed 2-19-2013; Ord. 140916-A, passed 9-16-2014)
§ 93.62 EXEMPTIONS.
   This subchapter does not apply to:
   (A)   Bags used to cover laundry or dry cleaning, bags used to hang goods or
information on doors, bags used to cover newspapers delivered to any premises,
or the sale of unused bags for waste collection and disposal;
   (B)   Bags used by restaurants and providers of prepared foods to take away
prepared food must be made of paper. Single-use plastic bags are only allowed
if necessary to prevent moisture damage, such as transportation of soups,
sauces, salad dressings and other liquids;
   (C)   Bags provided by a business establishment and used by a consumer
inside a business establishment to:
      (1)   Contain bulk items, such as produce, nuts, grains, candy, or small
hardware items;
      (2)   Contain or wrap frozen foods, meat, or fish, whether or not
prepackaged;
      (3)   Contain or wrap flowers, potted plants or other items to prevent
moisture damage to other purchases; or
      (4)   Contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods.
(Ord. 130219-C, passed 2-19-2013; Ord. 140916-A, passed 9-16-2014)
§ 93.63 HARDSHIP VARIANCE.
   (A)   The City Administrator may grant a variance from a requirement of this
subchapter only after determining that:
      (1)   Application of this subchapter would cause undue hardship based
upon unique circumstances; or
      (2)   Application of this subchapter would deprive a person or business
enterprise of a legally protected right.
   (B)   The request for variance shall be submitted on a Hardship Variance
Request.
   (C)   A variance granted under this section must be the minimum departure
necessary to address the hardship.
   (D)   The City Administrator shall prepare written findings to support the
grant or denial of a variance request under this section.
(Ord. 130219-C, passed 2-19-2013; Ord. 140916-A, passed 9-16-2014)
FOOD SAFETY
§ 93.70 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Except as
provided herein, a term defined by Tex. Administrative Code, Title 25, Part 1,
Ch. 229, Subch. K (Texas Food Establishment) has the same meaning for this
subchapter.
   BAKED GOODS. Cookies, cakes, breads, danishes, donuts, pastries, pies, and
other items that are prepared by baking in an oven. A BAKED GOOD does not
include a potentially hazardous food item.
   BONA FIDE EDUCATIONAL PURPOSE.  Providing cooking demonstrations solely for
the purpose of informing, training, or educating persons how to prepare foods
or providing samples in order to inform persons of the quality and
characteristics of the sample and is not done in conjunction with the sale of
food or food products.
   CERTIFIED FARMER’S MARKET. A farmer’s market that has been certified by the
Texas Department of Agriculture pursuant to Tex. Administrative Code, Title 4,
Subch. D.
   CONCESSION STAND. A food establishment operated by a city or county, a non-
profit organization, or public school district from which limited foods are
served during athletic or entertainment events.
   FARM AND FOOD PRODUCTS. Any agricultural, horticultural, forest or other
product of the soil or water, including, but not limited to, fruits,
vegetables, eggs, dairy products, meat and meat products, poultry and poultry
products, fish and fish products, grain and grain products, honey, nuts, maple
products, apple cider, fruit juice, wine, ornamental or vegetable plants. This
term does not include live animals.
   FARM PRODUCE.  Herbs and spices in their natural or dried state, vegetables,
fruits, unshelled nuts, berries, grains, honey, watermelons and other melons,
and cantaloupes in their natural state.
   FARMER/GROWER. A person whose produce or plants are organically, sustainably
or naturally grown and grown within the defined local area. Organically grown
produce must be certified by the State of Texas.
   FARMER'S/ARTISAN MARKET. A building, structure or location at which a group
of two or more farmers or artisans or a combination thereof, from a defined
local area who directly sell to the public farm and food products, either
primary or secondary producer food specialty items, handcrafted items, goods or
wares, and/or natural flowers and plants at which 80% of itinerant vendors must
have grown, reared, caught, brewed, pickled, baked, smoked or processed the
goods themselves.
   FARMER’S MARKET VENDOR.  A vendor operating an individual booth at a
certified farmer’s market with a Class A, B, or C permit described in §
93.78(C).
   FOOD ENTERPRISE. An operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves,
vends, or otherwise provides food for human consumption. It includes:
      (1)   A food establishment;
      (2)   A mobile food establishment;
      (3)   A temporary food establishment;
      (4)   A certified farmer’s market vendor; and
      (5)   A food processing plant.
   FOOD HANDLER. A food enterprise employee who works with unpackaged food,
food equipment or utensils, or food contact surfaces.
   FOOD SPECIALTY ITEMS. Baked goods, jams, jellies, large-portion prepackaged
products, spices, condiments, cheeses, meats, seafood and pasta. FOOD SPECIALTY
ITEMS may or may not be intended for immediate consumption on premises.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY. The lawfully appointed health authority of the city or
authorized representative. If a health authority has not been appointed by the
city, the term HEALTH AUTHORITY means the lawfully appointed health authority
of Travis County or its authorized representative.
   ITINERANT VENDOR. Any local farmer, grower, producer, person or artisan with
no established business location within the geographical boundaries of the city
who is associated with a permit holder that has been issued a farmers/artisan
market special use permit. This term excludes any business within the city
related to a home occupation permit.
   LIMITED FOODS.  Foods requiring limited handling and preparation and that
may be heated for hot holding and service. The term does not include foods
cooked from a raw state or that are cooled and reheated for subsequent service.
   LOCAL AREA. Within the borders of the State of Texas provided no suitable
product from a primary producer, farmer, artisan or grower is available within
a radius of 150 miles from the city limits.
   MARKET MANAGER. A person who is designated as the person in charge of a
farmer’s market.
   MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. One of two types of mobile food units:
   (A)   A restricted unit that offers only prepackaged food in individual
servings; beverages that are not potentially hazardous and are dispensed from
covered urns or other protected vessels; and packaged frozen foods.
Preparation, assembly or cooking of foods is not allowed. A FOOT PEDDLER is a
restricted unit and is limited to one portable ice chest, cooler, case or unit
per permit, capable of being carried by one person.
   (B)   An unrestricted unit that may serve food as allowed in division (A)
above, and may cook, prepare and assemble a full menu of food items:
      (1)   Except as provided below, an unrestricted unit must be secured and
completely enclosed; and
      (2)   Foods such as hot dogs, coffee, or shaved ice, or food with prior
approval from the Health Authority, may be served from vehicles with three
sides and a cover.
   PERSON IN CHARGE. An employee who possess a food manager certificate at a
food enterprise, bed and breakfast limited or unrestricted mobile food
establishment. If the person possessing a food manager certificate is not
present, then if an employee appears to be a supervisor, that employee is the
person in charge.
   PRODUCER, PRIMARY. All produce grown, reared or caught on the producer's
land within the defined local area. For domesticated livestock or plants this
means grown or finished (having spent at least 50% of its life) on the
producer's land. For fish and other seafood this means caught from either
inshore waters within the local area or offshore waters along the Texas
coastline.
   PRODUCER, SECONDARY. All produce must be brewed, pickled, baked, smoked or
processed by the itinerant vendor using at least one ingredient of origin from
within the defined local area (not merely bought locally). The minimum local
ingredient is 10% of each product. Receipts should be kept as proof of origin
for inspection.
   SAMPLING. The demonstration or promotion of a food and its characteristic
via offering a small serving of the food which cannot be sold, and is not, sold
and which may not consist of a whole meal, an individual portion or a whole
sandwich.
   TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. A food establishment that operates for a
period of no more than 14 consecutive days in conjunction with a single special
event or celebration, and no more than a total of 30 days in a calendar year,
and shall also include an establishment that is granted an exemption by the
Health Authority.
      (1)   A person or organization is allowed four temporary events in a
calendar year unless granted an exemption by the Health Director.
      (2)   Division (1) above does not apply to vendors under contract with
the city or Travis County to provide food and beverage services at properties
owned and overseen by the city or Travis County.
      (3)   A farmer’s market is not a temporary food establishment.
   UNSAFE FOOD.   
      (1)   Food that contains any chemical, poisonous or injurious substance
which may be harmful to the health of a consumer;
      (2)   Food that is not packaged in conformity with this subchapter;
      (3)   Food that contains a contaminated or putrid substance; or
      (4)   Food that has been prepared, packed or held under unsanitary
conditions whereby it may have become contaminated, or may have been rendered
diseased, unwholesome, or harmful to health.
   VIOLATION. Failure to follow this subchapter or the commission of an act
prohibited by this subchapter. A VIOLATION may result in re-inspection fees
being assessed, permit suspension or charges being filed in municipal court for
reasons including but not limited to:
      (1)   Scoring below a 70 on a food enterprise inspection;
      (2)   Using an unapproved source;
      (3)   Home prepared foods; or
      (4)   Food out of temperature compliance.
(Ord. 120918-D, passed 9-18-2012; Ord. 131203-C, passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 170620-
A, passed 6-20-2017)
§ 93.71 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   A person may not manufacture for supply, possess with intent to
supply, display, sell or supply, with or without charge, any food that is
adulterated or misbranded.
   (B)   All food shall be prepared, packaged, transported and supplied in
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   A person operating a food establishment, vending machine, mobile food
establishment, temporary event, farmer’s market, or farmer’s market vendor
booth shall comply with this subchapter, and except as provided in §
93.80, the city adopts the Tex. Administrative Code, Title 25, Part 1, Ch. 229,
Subch. K (Texas Food Establishment Rules) and N (Current Good Manufacturing
Practice and Good Warehousing Practices in Manufacturing, Packing and Holding
Human Food).
   (D)   Food supplied under the provisions of this subchapter may be examined
or sampled by the Health Authority as often as necessary for enforcement of any
applicable federal, state or local law.
   (E)   A person operating a food processing plant or central preparation
facility shall comply with this subchapter and the requirements of 21 C.F.R.
Part 110 (Current Good Manufacturing Practice in Manufacturing, Packing Or
Holding Human Food).
   (F)   At all times, including while being stored, prepared, displayed,
served or transported, food shall be protected in accordance with Tex.
Administrative Code, Title 25, Subsection K (Texas Food Establishment Rules).
(Ord. 120918-D, passed 9-18-2012; Ord. 131203-C, passed 12-3-2013)
§ 93.72 SERVICE OF NOTICES.
   (A)   A notice provided in this subchapter is properly served when:
      (1)   It is delivered to the permit holder or person in charge; or
      (2)   The notice is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested to the last known address of the permit holder.
   (B)   The Health Authority shall retain a copy of the notice in its records.
(Ord. 120918-D, passed 9-18-2012; Ord. 131203-C, passed 12-3-2013)
§ 93.73 FOOD MANAGER CERTIFICATION.
   (A)   Requirements for food manager certificate.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (2) below, a person may not operate
a food enterprise unless at least one employee has a current, valid food
manager certificate issued by the Health Authority.
      (2)   A food manager certificate is not required for a person who
operates:
         (a)   A food establishment providing only beverages or prepackaged
food that are not potentially hazardous.
         (b)   A nonprofit organization which only serves food to its own
members;
         (c)   A food products establishment inspected at least once each week
by state or federal food sanitation inspectors, or that only stores prepackaged
food that is not potentially hazardous.
         (d)   Retail food stores under single ownership which do not engage in
preparation of food may assign one certified food manager to supervise up to
four stores.
         (e)   A vending or mobile food unit establishment that offers only
beverages, prepackaged food, or non-potentially hazardous snack foods, if a
certified food manager is in charge at the central preparation facility that
supplies the products for the vending machine or mobile food unit.
      (3)   The person in charge shall post the food manager certificate in a
prominent public location in the food enterprise.
   (B)   Application for food manager certificate.
      (1)   A person who seeks a food manager certificate must submit an
application to the Health Authority. The application must include:
         (a)   The applicant's full name;
         (b)   The applicant's mailing address;
         (c)   Applicant's date of birth;
         (d)   A copy of a governmental issued identification document that
includes a photograph of the applicant;
         (e)   The name and address of the applicant's employer;
         (f)   The applicant's job title and a description of the applicant's
duties; and
         (g)   The applicant's signature.
      (2)   An applicant shall pay the certificate issuance fee established by
separate ordinance, except that an employee of a public school located in the
city is not required to pay the fee.
      (3)   A food manager certificate is void if the applicant obtains the
certificate by knowingly providing false information on the application.
   (C)   Issuance of food manager certificate. The Health Authority shall issue
a food manager certificate to an applicant who pays the required fee and who:
      (1)   Provides evidence of current certification from a food management
program accredited by the Department of State Health Services in accordance
with Tex. Administrative Code Title 25, § 229.176 (Accreditation of Certified
Food Management Programs); or
      (2)   Passes an examination and obtains certification as provided in Tex.
Administrative Code Title 25, § 229.176 (Certification of Food Managers).
      (3)   A food manager certificate expires on the date indicated on the
food manager certificate.
      (4)   A food manager certificate is not transferable.
(Ord. 120918-D, passed 9-18-2012; Ord. 131203-C, passed 12-3-2013)
§ 93.74 FOOD HANDLER REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, a person employed or
volunteering as a food handler shall register as a food handler not later than
the thirtieth day after employment or volunteering with a food service
enterprise. After a person's thirtieth day of employment or volunteering, it is
unlawful for the person to be employed as a food handler at the food service
enterprise without a valid food handler registration.
   (B)   The requirements of this section do not apply to:
      (1)   A food enterprise that provides only beverages or prepackaged food
that is not potentially hazardous food;
      (2)   A non-profit organization that serves food only to members of the
organization;
      (3)   A food processing plant that is inspected at least once each week
by a state or federal food sanitation inspector or that only stores prepackaged
food;
      (4)   A vending machine or mobile food establishment that offers only
prepackaged food, if a certified food manager is in charge at a central
preparation facility that supplies the products for the vending machine or
mobile food establishment;
      (5)   A retail food establishment that sells or offers only prepackaged
foods;
      (6)   A person who verifies by affidavit that he or she does not ever
work with unpackaged food, food equipment or utensils, or food contact
surfaces; or
      (7)   A concession stand that offers only limited foods and maintains a
certified food manager, registered with the City of Austin, on duty during all
hours of operation. The valid, registered food manager certificate issued to
the food manager on duty must be posted in compliance with §
93.73(A)(3).
   (C)   A person required by this section to have a food handler registration
shall first successfully complete a food handler training class approved by the
State of Texas. The person shall pay the food handler training course fee as
required by the training course provider.
   (D)   A person may submit an application to the Health Authority for food
handler registration after the person successfully completes a food handler
training course. The application must include:
      (1)   The applicant's full name;
      (2)   The applicant's mailing address;
      (3)   The applicant's date of birth;
      (4)   A copy of a governmental issued identification document that
includes a photograph of the applicant; and
      (5)   The applicant's signature.
   (E)   An applicant shall pay a non-refundable registration fee established
by a separate ordinance except that an employee of a public school is not
required to pay the registration fee.
   (F)   The Health Authority may issue a food handler registration on receipt
of proper application and the required registration fee.
   (G)   A person must successfully complete a food handler training course
every two years and maintain a current food handler registration with the
Health Authority.
   (H)   A food handler registration is not transferable from one person to
another. The food handler registration remains in effect if a person changes
employment during the food handler registration's effective period.
   (I)   A person operating a food enterprise shall ensure every food handler
has a current food handler registration. Upon request by the Health Authority,
a person operating a food enterprise shall provide a list of all food handlers
at the establishment that have been employed for more than 30 days along with a
signed statement verifying the listed employees possess current food handlers
registration.
   (J)   The Health Authority may suspend or revoke a food handler registration
if the Health Authority determines that:
      (1)   An applicant obtained the food handler registration by knowingly
providing false information on the application;
      (2)   A person is infected with or is a carrier of any food-borne
communicable disease; or
      (3)   The continuation of the person's food handler registration presents
a significant public health threat.
   (K)   A person whose food handler registration has been suspended or revoked
may reapply for a new food handler registration after successfully completing a
food handling training course, paying both the food handler training course fee
and registration fee established by separate ordinance or by approval of the
Health Authority.
(Ord. 120918-D, passed 9-18-2012; Ord. 131203-C, passed 12-3-2013)
§ 93.75 PERMITS FOR FOOD ENTERPRISES.
   (A)   Permit required.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (4) below, a person must hold a
permit issued by the Health Authority to operate a food enterprise.
      (2)   A permit shall be required, however no permit fee shall be assessed
for any food enterprise or operation of the city, operated under assistance
from the Texas Commission for the Blind or operated by a public school system
located in the city.
      (3)   A person must hold a permit issued by the Health Authority to
operate a group residence with more than six residents with food is provided,
stored, or prepared onsite or by a third party operator or facilitator.
      (4)   A permit is not required for vending machines that only dispense
non-potentially hazardous food.
      (5)   A person must comply with the requirements of this subchapter to
receive or retain a permit.
      (6)   A permit issued under this subchapter is not transferable.
      (7)   A permit holder or person in charge of a food enterprise shall post
a permit required by this subchapter in a prominent location
   (B)   Permit application.
      (1)   A person who seeks to operate a food enterprise must submit to the
Health Authority a written application on a form provided by the Health
Authority. The application must include:
         (a)   The name and address of each applicant;
         (b)   The location and type of the proposed food establishment or
operation;
         (c)   Signature of each applicant; and
         (d)   Other information, as requested by the Health Authority,
necessary to regulate the type of operation for which the permit is issued.
      (2)   Prior to approval of an application for permit the Health Authority
shall inspect the proposed food enterprise to determine compliance with the
requirements of this subchapter.
      (3)   If the Health Authority determines that the proposed food
enterprise complies with this subchapter, the Health Authority shall issue a
permit to the applicant.
      (4)   If the Health Authority determines that the proposed food
enterprise does not comply with this subchapter, the Health Authority shall:
         (a)   Deny a permit to the applicant; or
         (b)   Issue a permit to the applicant that is subject to appropriate
conditions.
      (5)   The Health Authority may modify or remove a condition to a permit
issued under division (B)(4)(b) after a re-inspection.
      (6)   A permit is void if the applicant obtains the permit by knowingly
providing false information on the application.
   (C)   Permit fees.
      (1)   An annual permit fee to operate a food enterprise shall be paid to
the Health Authority upon application for a permit, except for a food
enterprise operated by a public school system, or under contract or operation
of the city.
      (2)   The permit fees shall be in an amount established in Exhibit A
attached to Ord. 190108-B and also located on file in the office of the City
Secretary.
      (3)   Permit fees shall be refunded in the event that no permit is
issued.
   (D)   Permit expiration. All permits issued under this subchapter expire one
year from the date of issuance, except that a permit for temporary food
establishment or a permit subject to conditions expires on the date indicated
on the permit.
   (E)   Suspension of permit.
      (1)   The Health Authority may, without warning, notice or hearing,
suspend any permit issued under this subchapter if:
         (a)   The holder of the permit does not comply with the requirements
of this subchapter;
         (b)   The food establishment or operation otherwise constitutes a
substantial hazard to public health; or
         (c)   The permit holder, his agent, employee or representative impeded
the lawful inspection of the establishment by the Health Authority.
      (2)   Suspension of a permit is effective immediately on service of
notice.
      (3)   Food operations shall immediately cease, when a permit is
suspended.
      (4)   The permit holder may file with the Health Authority a written
request for hearing on the suspension within ten days. If no written request
for hearing is filed within ten days, the suspension is sustained.
      (5)   The Heath Authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons
for the suspension no longer exist.
   (F)   Revocation or denial of certification, registration or permit
application.
      (1)   The Health Authority may deny or revoke a certification,
registration or permit issued under this subchapter if the person in charge,
certification, registration or permit holder or employee:
         (a)   Commits serious or repeated violations of any requirements of
this subchapter;
         (b)   Interferes with the Health Authority in the performance of the
Health Authority’s duties; or
         (c)   Knowingly provides false information on an application.
      (2)   Prior to revocation or upon denial, the Health Authority shall
notify the holder of the certification, registration or permit or the person in
charge, in writing, of the reasons for which the certification, registration or
permit is subject to revocation or denial and that the permit will be revoked
or denied at the end of a specified time period following service of notice.
      (3)   The permit holder or applicant may file a request for hearing on
the denial of application or revocation of a certification, registration or
permit within ten days. If no request for hearing is filed within the ten day
period, the revocation or denial becomes final upon expiration of the time
specified in the notice of pending revocation or denial.
      (4)   The holder of a revoked certification, registration, or permit or
denied certification, registration or permit application must make a written
application.
(Ord. 120918-D, passed 9-18-2012; Ord. 131203-C, passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 181023-
A, passed 10-23-2018; Ord. 190108-B, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 93.76 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Inspection authority.
      (1)   The health authority shall be permitted to enter any food
establishment or any private or public property where vending machines or
mobile food vendors or temporary food service operations are located during
regular business hours or at another reasonable time for the purpose of making
inspections to determine compliance with this subchapter.
      (2)   The health authority shall display identification upon request.
      (3)   The health authority shall be permitted to examine the records of
the food establishment or operation to obtain information pertaining to:
         (a)   Food and supplies purchased, received, or used; or
         (b)   An employee.
      (4)   The health authority may examine or sample food that is stored,
prepared, packaged, served otherwise provided for human consumption by a food
establishment.
   (B)   Inspections generally.
      (1)   After inspecting a food establishment, the health authority shall
record the health authority's findings on an appropriate inspection report
form.
      (2)   The health authority shall provide a copy of the inspection report
to the person in charge of the food establishment. This copy shall be posted in
the food establishment in a manner which allows customers to easily read the
report.
      (3)   The completed inspection report filed by the health authority to
the city is a public document.
      (4)   If a violation is found, the health authority shall:
         (a)   Prescribe on the inspection report a reasonable period for
correction of the violation; and
         (b)   Perform re-inspections at reasonable time intervals to determine
whether required corrections are made.
   (C)   Hold order and contamination of food.
      (1)   The health authority may place a hold order on food after:
         (a)   Determining that the food is stored, prepared, transported, or
served in violation of applicable law; or
         (b)   Determining that there is probable cause to believe the permit
holder is in violation of federal, state or local law; and
         (c)   Giving written notice to the permit holder or the person in
charge.
      (2)   The health authority shall label or otherwise identify food that is
subject to a hold order. No food subject to a hold order shall be used, served,
sold, or moved from the establishment.
      (3)   The health authority shall permit storage of the food under
conditions specified in the hold order. The hold order may prescribe storage
conditions for the food.
      (4)   The health authority shall state in the hold order:
         (a)   The reasons for the hold order;
         (b)   That the permit holder or the person in charge may file a
written request for hearing on the hold order, and shall state that a request
for hearing may be filed within ten days, and that if no hearing is requested,
the food shall be destroyed. A hearing shall be held if so requested, and on
the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the hold order may be vacated,
or the owner or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order
to denature or destroy such food.
(Ord. 120918-D, passed 9-18-2012)
§ 93.77 HEARINGS.
   (A)   Hearings provided for in this subchapter shall be conducted by the
health authority or the designee of the city at the time and place determined
by the health authority.
   (B)   The health authority shall:
      (1)   Make and record a final finding based on the evidence presented at
the hearing;
      (2)   Sustain or affirm, modify, or rescind the order considered at the
hearing; and
      (3)   Provide a written decision to the permit holder.
(Ord. 120918-D, passed 9-18-2012)
§ 93.78 SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR MOBILE FOOD VENDORS, TEMPORARY VENDORS AND
CERTIFIED FARMER’S MARKET VENDORS.
   (A)   Specific standards for mobile food vendors.
      (1)   Adoption of state standards. In addition to provisions contained in
this subchapter, enforcement of the subchapter shall be in accordance with the
Tex. Department of State Health Services, Tex. Food Establishment Rules, §
229.169 (Mobile Food Establishments).
      (2)   Permit required. For a mobile food establishment permit, the Health
Authority shall:
         (a)   Describe on the permit the food items that may be sold or
served; and
         (b)   Provide to the permit holder a sticker that indicates a permit
expiration date and describes the food items that may be sold or served.
         (c)   A person operating a mobile food establishment shall prominently
display the sticker at all times when the mobile food vending unit is in
operation.
      (3)   Items to be sold.
         (a)   A person operating a mobile food unit may only sell a food item
described in the permit.
         (b)   A person operating a mobile food unit may not sell a non-food
item.
      (4)   Sanitary requirements.
         (a)   If a person who operates a mobile food establishment maintains
food at a hot holding temperature by mechanical means, that person shall comply
with fire and explosion safety standards established by the Fire Marshal.
         (b)   If a person uses a pressurized fuel system or container in
conjunction with the mobile food establishment, that person shall comply with
fire and explosion safety standards established by the Fire Marshal.
         (c)   A mobile food establishment shall be equipped with an attached
trash receptacle approved by the Health Authority. The operator must hold,
store, and dispose of solid and liquid waste in a receptacle approved by the
Health Authority and comply with any other applicable city code requirements.
         (d)   All mobile food vendors shall comply with the following sanitary
requirements:
            1.   A mobile food establishment shall provide only single service
articles for use by the consumer;
            2.   A mobile food establishment shall comply with the regulations
the Health Authority adopts regarding time, temperature, plumbing, operation
and maintenance requirements for mobile food establishments;
            3.   A mobile food establishment shall comply with the regulations
the Health Authority adopts regarding a mobile food establishment's provisions,
mandatory central preparation facility, serving area and operations;
            4.   A mobile food establishment shall demonstrate that the vehicle
is readily moveable if requested;
            5.   A mobile food establishment shall comply with all requirements
of the Health Authority prohibiting alteration, removal, attachments, placement
or change in, under, or upon the mobile food establishment that would prevent
or otherwise reduce ready mobility of the mobile food establishment unit;
            6.   If at one location for more than two hours, a written
agreement from a business within 150 feet of the mobile food establishment,
allowing employees of the mobile food establishment to have use of flushable
restrooms (or other facilities as approved by the Health Authority) during
hours of operation;
            7.   The Health Authority shall require a mobile food establishment
to come, on an annual basis, to a location designated by the Health Authority
for an inspection;
            8.   All food and supplies must be stored within the mobile unit;
            9.   A person who operates a mobile food establishment may not
place food, equipment, or supplies that are part of its operations outside of
the permitted unit and must conduct all of its operational activities within
the mobile food establishment; and
            10.   A person who operates a mobile food establishment must store
ice in a covered container that is continuously drained into a waste holding
tank. No other food items may be stored with ice for human consumption.
            11.   A scoop must be provided and must be kept either in the ice
with the handle up or in a rack inside the ice container.
            12.   Customers shall not be allowed to serve themselves ice.
            13.   The Health Authority may require that mobile food
establishments found to violate this section come for a re-inspection at a
location designated by the Health Authority.
      (5)   Use of public property. A person may not operate a mobile food
establishment on public property without an approved special use permit.
      (6)   Alteration of mobile food vending units. After permit approval, a
mobile food vending unit may not be structurally altered without the approval
of the Health Authority.
   (B)   Specific standards for a temporary food establishment.
      (1)   A food establishment set up for a temporary event shall comply with
the requirements of this section. The Health Authority may impose additional
requirements to protect against health hazards related to the conduct of a
temporary food establishment, may prohibit the sale of some or all potentially
hazardous foods, and when no health hazard will result, may waive or modify
requirements of these rules.
      (2)   The Health Authority may impose requirements on cooking, freezing,
reheating, treating juice, cooked-food storage temperature and time control.
      (3)   Equipment.
         (a)   Equipment shall be located and installed and cleaned in a way
that prevents food contamination and that also facilitates cleaning of the
establishment.
         (b)   Equipment for cooling or heating food, and holding cold or hot
food shall be adequate in number and capacity to provide food temperatures as
specified under requirements the Health Authority imposes under Article 4,
paragraph B.
         (c)   Food contact surfaces of equipment shall be protected from
contamination by consumers and other contaminant sources. Where necessary to
prevent contamination, effective shields for such equipment shall be provided.
         (d)   Alternative manual warewashing equipment, such as a receptacle
that substitutes for the compartments of a multi-compartment sink, may be used
when there are special cleaning needs or constraints and the Health Authority
has approved the use of alternative equipment.
      (4)   A temporary food establishment shall provide only single-service
articles for use by consumers.
      (5)   Water from an approved source shall be made available in a
temporary food establishment for food preparation, hand washing and for
cleaning and sanitizing utensils and equipment. Water need not be under
pressure, but shall come from an approved source approved by the Health
Authority.
      (6)   Packaged food may not be stored in direct contact with ice or water
if the food is subject to the entry of water because of the nature of its
packaging, wrapping, or container or its positioning in the ice or water.
      (7)   All waste water and sewage generated from the establishment shall
be disposed of through an approved sanitary sewer system that is constructed,
maintained, and operated according to rules promulgated by the Health Authority
and applicable law.
      (8)   Hand washing facilities shall include an insulated container with a
spigot that can be turned on to allow potable, clean, free-flowing warm water,
a waste water container, soap, disposable towels, and a waste receptacle. Hand
washing facilities are not required if the only food items offered are
commercially pre-packaged foods that are dispensed in their original
containers.
      (9)   A temporary food establishment shall comply with regulations the
Health Authority adopts regarding floors, ceilings and outer openings of food
preparation areas.
      (10)   The Health Authority shall apply this section to promote
safeguarding public health and ensuring that food is safe, unadulterated, and
honestly presented when offered to the consumer.
      (11)   If necessary to protect against public health hazards or
nuisances, the Health Authority may impose specific requirements in addition to
those requirements contained in this section.
   (C)   Specific instructions for certified farmer’s market vendors.
      (1)   Permit required.
         (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate as a farmer’s
market vendor within the city limits at a certified farmer’s market without
first having obtained a Class A, B, or C permit as required by this division
(C).
         (b)   A Class A permit allows a vendor to offer only prepackaged
foods, beverages that are dispensed from covered urns or other protected
vessels available for customer self-service, and packaged frozen food. The
preparation, assembly, reheating, or cooking of foods is not allowed under this
permit.
         (c)   A Class B permit allows a vendor to offer baked goods, bulk food
items, beverages that are dispensed from covered urns or other protected
vessels available for employee service (including ice service), and sampling.
All food operations under a Class A permit are allowed under a Class B permit.
         (d)   A Class C permit allows the on-site preparation of foods and
open foods and includes but is not limited to the sampling of foods. Vendors
may cook, prepare, and assemble a full menu of food items. All food operations
under Class A and B permits are allowed under a Class C permit.
         (e)   Every person, before opening, maintaining, or operating as a
farmer’s market vendor at a certified farmer’s market, shall file an
application for and obtain one of the permits described in division (C)(1) of
this section.
         (f)   Farmer’s market vendors operating at multiple markets
simultaneously shall obtain a site-specific permit for each location.
         (g)   An applicant for a certified farmer’s market vendor's permit
must file the application with the Health Authority. The application must
include:
            1.   The name and address of the applicant and the applicant's
identification number as shown on a current and valid government-issued
identification document that includes a photograph of the applicant;
            2.   The class of permit the applicant will operate under;
            3.   The signature of each applicant;
            4.   A notarized statement from the owner of a central preparation
facility stating the farmer's market vendor uses the facility as its base of
operation or proof that the applicant has its own central preparation facility;
            5.   Name and address of the certified farmer’s market where the
vendor will operate; and
            6.   Other information reasonably required by the Health Authority.
         (h)   Upon receiving the application with the fee set forth by Council
for a farmer’s market vendor permit under this section, the Health Authority
may approve the application for a farmer’s market vendor. A farmer’s market
vendor permit is effective for one year from the date of issuance.
         (i)   An applicant for a certified farmer’s market permit shall submit
the application to the Health Authority not later than the tenth day before the
effective date for which the permit is sought.
         (j)   An application for renewal of a farmer’s market vendor permit
must be received by the department, accompanied by the applicable fee, at least
ten days before the expiration date of the previous permit. All information
provided in a renewal application must be current and valid.
         (k)   A person operating under a farmer’s market vendor permit shall
promptly display the permit where it is readily visible or as designated by the
Health Authority.
         (l)   In the event the Health Authority determines that the vendor
booth of the applicant does not comply with the provisions of this section or
other city ordinances, the Health Authority shall disapprove such application
for issuance or renewal of a farmer’s market vendor permit.
         (m)   An applicant who has been refused a farmer’s market vendor
permit or renewal of a farmer’s market vendor permit may, within ten days,
appeal to the Health Authority by filing a copy of such application, the
application's denial and requesting the Health Authority grant a hearing to
overrule the action.
         (n)   A cottage food production operation, as that term is defined in
Tex. Health and Safety Code, Ch. 437, is exempt from the permit requirements of
this section.
         (o)   A farmer’s market or farmer’s market vendor booth that is
conducting a cooking demonstration, or providing samples of food, for a bona
fide educational purpose is exempt from paying permit fees described in §
93.75(C).
         (p)   Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, a farmer’s
market vendor may prepare and distribute samples of farm produce only, at a
farmer’s market, without a permit, if the farmer’s market vendor complies with
the sanitary conditions in Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 437.020(c).
         (q)   A farmer’s market vendor may conduct a cooking demonstration
only if the vendor verifies in writing with the farmer’s market at which the
vendor is conducting the demonstration that the farmer’s market is in
compliance with the establishment operator requirements of Tex. Health and
Safety Code, § 437.0203(c), and the vendor complies with all other requirements
of Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 437.0203.
         (r)   A person may provide samples, or conduct a cooking
demonstration, for a bona fide educational purpose, only in a defined physical
location designated in writing by the market manager.
         (s)   A certified farmer’s market may have only one designated
physical location for the activities described in division (C)(1)(r) above.
      (2)   Sanitary requirements.
         (a)   A person operating as a farmer’s market vendor shall comply with
Tex. Administrative Code, Title 25, Part 1, Ch. 229, Subch. K (Texas Food
Establishment Rules) regarding equipment, floors, dust control, ceilings and
outer openings of food preparation areas at a temporary event.
         (b)   A farmer’s market vendor shall comply with the requirements of
this section. The Health Authority may impose additional requirements to
protect against health hazards related to the conduct of a farmer’s market
booth, may prohibit the sale of some or all potentially hazardous foods and,
when no health hazard will result, may waive or modify requirements of these
rules.
         (c)   The Health Authority may impose requirements on cooking,
freezing, reheating, treating juice, and cooked-food storage temperatures.
         (d)   A person operating under a farmer’s market vendor permit shall
comply with the following requirements:
            1.   With the exception of egg vendors, all certified farmer’s
market vendors operating at a farmer’s market must operate out of a central
preparation facility as its base of operation;
            2.   The Health Authority must approve the preparation, serving, or
displaying of potentially hazardous foods at a farmer’s market in accordance
with permit requirements.
            3.   An employee or volunteer of a farmer’s market vendor shall be
a registered food handler if operating under a Class B or Class C permit with
the provisions of § 10-3-34. The registered food handler certificate shall,
upon request, be provided to the Health Authority.
            4.   At least one employee or volunteer of a farmer’s market vendor
shall be a registered food manager if the vendor is operating under a Class C
permit with the provisions of §
93.73 through §
93.74. The food manager certificate shall be prominently posted on the vendor
booth.
            5.   A farmer’s market vendor shall have sufficient potable water
from a source approved by the Health Authority for cleaning foods, equipment
and utensils under a Class B or Class C permit.
            6.   A farmer’s market vendor operating under a Class B or C permit
shall provide an approved facility for employee hand washing consisting of
warm, free-flowing clean running water at a minimum temperature of 100 degrees
Fahrenheit, soap, and individual paper towels or other approved hand-drying
device. If the vendor is unable to maintain the water at the above temperature,
the vendor shall provide another control measure, such as a hand sanitizer or
single-use gloves, which is approved by the Health Authority.
            7.   A farmer’s market vendor operating under a Class B or C permit
shall provide an approved facility for washing, rinsing, and sanitizing of
equipment and utensils used in the preparation and serving of food products.
The facility shall consist of at least three containers or compartments, each
of adequate size so as to permit the total immersion of all utensils used in a
booth at a farmer’s market.
            8.   A farmer’s market vendor operating under a Class B or C permit
must wear disposable plastic gloves when preparing samples of food or produce
and must observe proper hand-washing techniques immediately before preparing
samples of food or produce.
         (e)   The Health Authority may inspect each farmer’s market vendor
booth offering food products as is necessary for the enforcement of this
section.
         (f)   The market manager of a certified farmer’s market shall be
responsible for ensuring compliance with the provisions of §
93.73 through §
93.74 and for ensuring that all shared or common facilities and operations
comply with this chapter. In the case of repeated violations of this section,
the Health Authority may impose restrictions on the preparation of food
products at a farmer’s market vendor booth under a Class B or Class C permit.
         (g)   The market manager shall obtain from the operator of a food
cottage production operation the operator's or vendor's name, address, date of
birth, and a copy of the person's government-issued identification. The market
manager shall provide this information to the Health Authority upon request.
         (h)   A farmer’s market vendor may not set up food sampling operations
as unattended self-service displays for customers.
         (i)   A farmer’s market vendor shall provide containers with covers to
protect food products during storage and display and shall put sneeze guards,
or other method or equipment, pre-approved by the Health Authority, into place
to protect food products from consumer contamination.
         (j)   Farmer’s market vendors shall correct all violations at the time
of inspection unless an extension is allowed by the Health Authority. No
extension shall be granted where the violation poses a significant risk of
food-borne illness to the public.
         (k)   If a farmer’s market vendor does not correct violations at the
time of inspection, or within the specified extension time limits, the Health
Authority shall immediately order the booth to suspend operations.
         (l)   Repeated violations by a farmer’s market vendor operating at a
certified farmer’s market without a valid permit or with a suspended permit
constitutes an offense under this chapter.
(Ord. 120918-D, passed 9-18-2012; Ord. 131203-C, passed 12-3-2013)
§ 93.79 EMPLOYEE AND PUBLIC RESTROOM REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The owner or person in charge of a food establishment that
relinquishes possession of food to a consumer directly for consumption on
premises shall provide its employees with at least one restroom, with
associated hand washing facilities, conveniently located within the
establishment.
   (B)   The owner or person in charge of a food retail store or food products
establishment shall provide:
      (1)   If less than five employees are on duty at one time, not less than
one restroom; or
      (2)   If five or more employees are on duty at one time, not less than
two restrooms, one for each sex.
   (C)   Employee restrooms shall be conveniently located within the
establishment and have associated hand washing facilities.
   (D)   The owner or person in charge of a food establishment shall provide at
least two restrooms for public use, one for each sex, and conveniently
accessible from the seating or dining area when:
      (1)   Alcoholic beverages are provided for consumption on premises;
      (2)   Seating for 20 or more persons is provided; or
      (3)   Reusable tableware is provided.
   (E)   Public restrooms are not required to be located in an individual food
establishment if the food establishment shares a common seating area, including
a food court, with another food establishment. Restrooms required under
divisions (D) and (E) may be utilized as employee restrooms when those
restrooms are:
      (1)   Located within 75 feet of the main food preparation area of a food
establishment; and
      (2)   Are under the operational control of the food establishment.
(Ord. 120918-D, passed 9-18-2012)
§ 93.80 DOGS IN OUTDOOR DINING AREAS.
   A food establishment that relinquishes possession of food to a consumer
directly for consumption on premises may permit a customer to be accompanied by
a dog in an outdoor dining area if:
   (A)   The food establishment posts a sign in a conspicuous location stating
that dogs are allowed in the outdoor dining area;
   (B)   A customer and the dog access the outdoor dining area directly from
the exterior of the food establishment;
   (C)   The dog does not enter the interior of the food establishment;
   (D)   The customer does not allow the dog on a seat, table, countertop or
similar surface; and
   (E)   In the outdoor dining area, the food establishment does not:
      (1)   Prepare food; or
      (2)   Permit open food, except for food that is being served to a
customer.
(Ord. 120918-D, passed 9-18-2012)
§ 93.81 CONSTRUCTION PLANS.
   (A)   A person may not construct or remodel or convert an existing structure
for use as a food establishment unless the health authority has approved the
building plan.
   (B)   Building plans shall be submitted to the health authority for review
and preliminary approval before construction, remodeling or conversion is
begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout,
arrangement, mechanical plans, construction materials of work areas, type and
model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities.
   (C)   The health authority shall grant preliminary approval of these plans
if they meet the requirements of all applicable laws.
   (D)   The health authority shall inspect the food establishment prior to
commencement of operations to determine compliance with the approved plans and
specifications with the requirements of all laws.
(Ord. 120918-D, passed 9-18-2012)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §
93.01 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
fined any sum not less than $1, nor more than $200. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   (1)   An owner who violates any provision of §§
93.15 through
93.18 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon the conviction of any
violation, the owner shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.
      (2)   Every day the violation exists is considered a separate offense.
   (D)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of
§§
93.30 through
93.39. Any violation of any provision of §§
93.30 through
93.39, after the ten-day notice, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$2,000.
      (2)   In addition to the enforcement and penalty provisions of §§
93.30 through
93.39, the city may, by appropriate action, seek injunctive relief and may
petition a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin or order the abatement of
any violation of §§
93.30 through
93.39.
      (3)   In addition to any other penalty provided by §§
93.30 through
93.39, a violation of §
93.33 is punishable by suspension of any building permit issued by the city for
development on the affected property for any period up until the time that full
compliance with the provisions of this §§
93.30 through
93.39 is achieved.
   (E)   In the event any owner shall refuse to remedy any of the conditions
prohibited by §
93.50 after personal notice to do so, and the owner fails to appeal from the
ruling of the public official, then, and in the event, the refusal to remedy
the conditions shall constitute a misdemeanor and the owner upon conviction
shall be fined by a fine not to exceed $200.
   (F)   A person commits an offense if the person:
      (1)   Knowingly provides false information on an application for a food
manager certificate;
      (2)   Uses a food manager certificate that has not been issued to the
person by the health authority;
      (3)   Knowingly provides false information on an application for a permit
required by §§
93.71 et seq.;
      (4)   Uses a permit that has not been issued to the person by the health
authority;
      (5)   Performs an act prohibited by §§
93.71 et seq. or fails to perform an act required by §§
93.71 et seq.;
      (6)   Operates a booth for the sampling of food products at a farmers
market without a valid permit or with a suspended permit; or
      (7)   Impedes the conduct of an inspection authorized to be conducted
under §§
93.70 through
93.80, or under Tex. Health and Safety Code §
431.042 (The Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act).
   (G)   Except as otherwise provided, proof of criminal negligence is required
for conviction of an offense under §§
93.70 et seq. Proof of a higher degree of culpability than criminal negligence
constitutes proof of criminal negligence.
   (H)   An offense under division (F) is punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000. A person commits a separate offense each day that the person performs
an act prohibited by or fails to perform an act required by division (F).
   (I)   The health authority may seek to enjoin violations of §§
93.71 et seq.
(Ord. 76-8-10A, passed 8-10-1976; Ord. 780711C, passed 7-11-1978; Ord. 980915,
passed 9-15-1998; Ord. 070731, passed 7-31-2007; Ord. 120918-D, passed 9-18-
2012)
CHAPTER 94: ANIMALS
Section
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Keeping animal in motor vehicles; safety
   
94.03   Feeding of deer and other wildlife
   
94.04   Animals causing damage; nuisance
   
94.05   Animal registration
   
94.06   Restraint and confinement of dogs
   
94.07   Prohibited livestock
   
94.08   Commercial use
   
94.09   Proper care of animals
   
94.10   Defecation by an animal (scoop the poop)
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter the following terms and words shall have
the meanings indicated:
   ANIMAL. A nonhuman live vertebrate creature, wild or domestic.
   AT LARGE. Animals loose outside of their owner's property with no human
supervision.
   COMMERCIAL AREAS. An area within the city whose primary purpose is for
commercial purposes such as shopping, offices, or restaurants. This would
include all areas in the Highway Commercial or Neighborhood Commercial Zoning
Districts and adjacent public sidewalks.
   COMPETENT VOICE CONTROL. In order to establish competent voice control all
of the following criteria must be met:
      (1)   The person exhibiting voice control has the dog under verbal
control and within sight at all times regardless of distractions (such as
wildlife, traffic, other animals, food, other people or noise);
      (2)   The dog under voice control does not bark at, jump on, act
aggressively toward, or advance on people or other domestic animals; and
      (3)   The dog under voice control will consistently come to its handler
immediately upon command.
   CONSERVATION AREAS. An area within the city that is in the Conservation
Zoning District.
   EDIBLE MATTER. As pertains to this chapter any wheat, pelleted livestock
food, corn in any form, fruit, vegetables, hay, alfalfa, human food scraps, any
form of commercially sold wildlife feed, birdseed or livestock feed, or any
other edible matter. The term shall not include:
      (1)   Any live or dead vegetation, including ornamental landscaping,
flowers and a vegetable garden;
      (2)   Any wild or native vegetation growing or appearing without the
intervention of human effort; or
      (3)   Any vegetation used for composting; provided that, composting
vegetation is enclosed in a container or fence reasonably sufficient in keeping
wild animals out.
   GREENSPACE. An area within the city that is within the Greenspace/
Preservation Zoning District
   OWNER. Any person who has, harbors, or keeps an animal on or about its
premises. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered
for three or more consecutive days.
   PARKS. An area within the city that is within the Parkland Zoning District.
(Ord. 141217-C, passed 12-17-2014)
§ 94.02 KEEPING ANIMAL IN MOTOR VEHICLES; SAFETY.
   (A)   A person may not keep an animal in a motor vehicle or other enclosed
space in which the animal's health or life is endangered by high temperature,
low temperature or inadequate ventilation.
      (1)    A peace officer may, after attempting to locate the animal's
owner, remove the animal from a vehicle or enclosed space using any reasonable
means, including breaking a window or lock. If professional services are
required to remove the animal, the owner is responsible for the cost.
      (2)   Neither a peace officer who removes an animal from a vehicle or
enclosed space in accordance with this section, nor his/her employing agency
shall be liable for any resulting property damage.
   (B)   A person may not transport an animal in a motor vehicle on a public
roadway unless:
      (1)   The animal is safely enclosed within the vehicle and outside of the
driver’s operating area; or
      (2)   If the animal is transported in an unenclosed vehicle, including a
convertible, pickup truck, flatbed truck, or motorcycle, the animal shall be
confined in a secure and appropriately sized vented container or confined in a
manner that prevents the animal from falling or jumping from the vehicle or
otherwise being injured.
(Ord. 080708, passed 7-8-2008; Ord. 141217-C, passed 12-17-2014) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.03 FEEDING OF DEER AND OTHER WILDLIFE.
   (A)   No person shall purposely feed wild deer, cause wild deer to be fed or
provide food or edible matter to wild deer through a ground-feeding station,
salt lick or other means to feed wild deer in the city on any public or private
land.
   (B)   No person shall purposely feed raccoons, coyotes, opossum, skunks,
ringtail cats, and foxes except as allowed by wildlife rehabilitators holding
appropriate state and/or federal permits. Except as allowed to wildlife
rehabilitators holding state and/or federal permits.
   (C)   A person shall be deemed to have purposely fed or caused the wildlife
listed in divisions (A) and (B) above to be fed if:
      (1)   A person places edible matter on the ground or any place less than
six feet off the ground that is not intended for domestic livestock;
      (2)   The distribution of edible matter is through a commercially sold
automatic feeder; or
      (3)   The edible matter is in an area that is neither in an enclosed
building nor in an area that is not fully enclosed by a fence or other
enclosure sufficient to keep out wild animals and without a closed receptacle
reasonably sufficient to keep wild animals from eating the edible matter.
   (D)   The presence of edible matter on the ground or any place less than six
feet off the ground that is not intended for domestic livestock is hereby
declared to be a nuisance if the edible matter is:
      (1)   Outside an enclosed building, fence or other enclosure sufficient
to keep out wild deer; and/or;
      (2)   Not enclosed in a receptacle reasonably sufficient to keep wild
deer from eating the edible matter.
   (E)   No person shall permit, allow or suffer the presence of edible matter
that constitutes a nuisance on land owned, leased, occupied or controlled by
the person.
   (F)   The prohibition of this section shall not apply to any peace officer
or other agent of the city acting in conformance with an animal control
program.
(Ord. 010403, passed 4-3-2001; Ord. 141217-C, passed 12-17-2014) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.04 ANIMALS CAUSING DAMAGE; NUISANCE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any domestic
animal that creates a nuisance or causes damage to the property of another.
Acts constituting a nuisance include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Repeatedly causing trash or garbage to be removed from a trash or
garbage container;
      (2)   Repeatedly defecating on the property of another person;
      (3)   Attacks or chases another animal when that animal is on the
property of its owner or custodian; and
      (4)   An animal off property with no human supervision;
      (5)   Acting in a threatening manner in any location other than the
property of its owner or custodian toward any person other than its owner or
custodian;
      (6)   Damages private or public property, other than the private property
of its owner; and
      (7)   The frequent or continuous noise caused by any such animal in that
it violates existing noise and/or nuisance ordinances;
   (B)   Any animal, whose behavior is described in division (A) above, is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
   (C)   If any person complains to any officer of the city that he or she is,
or has been, so disturbed or interfered with, the person's complaints shall be
promptly investigated.
(Ord. 820914, passed 9-14-1982; Ord. 141217-C, passed 12-17-2014) Penalty, see
§
94.99
§ 94.05 ANIMAL REGISTRATION.
   In order to protect the health and safety of animals during disasters such
as wildfires and floods, all animals excluding fowl and animals kept at all
times in cages/crates shall be registered.
   (A)   Within the city limits, the owner or custodian of any animal over the
age of four months shall register them within 30 days after the animal is
brought into the city or within 30 days after the animal reaches the age of
four months;
   (B)   Upon registration of a cat or dog the owner or custodian must present
proof of current vaccination against rabies or waiver signed by a licensed
veterinarian;
   (C)   Upon registration of equine the owner or custodian must present proof
of a negative Coggins Test or waiver from a licensed veterinarian no more than
12 months prior to registration of the animal;
   (D)   Registered dogs and cats will be issued a City of Sunset Valley tag
displaying the animal's registration number and city's phone number; and
   (E)   The City Secretary shall enter in a register kept by him or her for
that purpose the name and address of the owners or custodians of all registered
animals, the description of the animals, the tag number issued for dogs and
cats, and the date of its issuance.
(Ord. 810310, passed 3-10-1981; Ord. 870721, passed 7-21-1987; Ord. 141217-C,
passed 12-17-2014; Ord. 150120-A, passed 1-20-2015) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.06 RESTRAINT AND CONFINEMENT OF DOGS.
   (A)   Dogs must be kept under direct control at all times. Direct control
can be through confinement or use of a handheld leash or lead. The leash must
be held by a person of age and ability to control the dog.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (B)(1), a person may not restrain a dog
with a chain or tether unless the person is holding the chain or tether. The
prohibition of this division (B) does not apply to a temporary restraint:
      (1)   During a lawful animal event, veterinary treatment, grooming,
training, or law enforcement activity; or
      (2)   That is required to protect the safety or welfare of a person or
the dog, if the dog’s owner or handler remains with the dog throughout the
period of restraint.
   (C)   A person restraining a dog with a chain or tether shall attach the
chain or tether to a properly fitting collar or harness worn by the dog. A
person may not wrap a chain or tether directly around a dog’s neck. A chain or
tether used to restrain a dog must, by design and placement, be unlikely to
become entangled.
   (D)   A person may not restrain a dog in a manner that does not allow the
dog to have access to necessary shelter and water. This does not apply to dogs
restrained on restaurant patios or at outdoor venues with their owners present.
(Ord. 141217-C, passed 12-17-2014; Ord. 170718-C, passed 7-18-2017; Ord.
231219-C, passed 12-19-2023)
§ 94.07 PROHIBITED LIVESTOCK.
   Hogs and pigs (Suideae), with the exception of pot-bellied pigs, shall not
be maintained within the city.
(Ord. 150505, passed 5-5-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of municipality to prohibit or otherwise regulate the keeping of
livestock and swine, see Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code § 215.026(b).
§ 94.08 COMMERCIAL USE.
   The use of animals, for profit or commercial purposes, in single family
residential districts shall comply with all applicable divisions of §§ 2.517
and 2.601(e) of the Land Development Code.
(Ord. 150505, passed 5-5-2015)
§ 94.09 PROPER CARE OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   An animal's owner shall keep the animal in a clean, sanitary, and
healthy condition.
   (B)   An animal's owner or handler shall provide for the animal:
      (1)   Regular and adequate amounts of nutritious food that is appropriate
for the species and that maintains the animal in good health;
      (2)   A constant and adequate supply of clean, fresh, potable water that
keeps the animal hydrated; and
      (3)   Care and medical treatment for injuries, parasites, and diseases
that are sufficient to maintain the animal in good health and to minimize
suffering.
   (C)   An animal's owner shall provide the animal with shelter that:
      (1)   Is large enough for the animal to enter, stand, turn around, and
lie down in a natural manner;
      (2)   Keeps the animal dry;
      (3)   Provides the animal with natural or artificial shade from direct
sunlight;
      (4)   Protects the animal from excessive heat and cold and other adverse
weather conditions; and
      (5)   Is adequately ventilated.
   (D)   An animal's owner may not confine the animal to the extent that it is
forced to stand, sit, or lie in its own excrement.
   (E)   An animal's owner shall regularly maintain the animal and its shelter
to prevent odor or a health or sanitation problem.
   (F)   An animal's owner shall provide the animal with exercise space that is
large enough to prevent injury and keep the animal in good condition.
   (G)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that:
      (1)   The animal's treatment was as directed by a licensed veterinarian;
or
      (2)   The owner's care is proper though the animal is not in good health
for reasons not in the control of the owner, including but not limited to the
animal's age, natural causes, disease, and injuries caused by a third-party who
is not a resident of the owner's household, or accidental injuries caused by
the owner.
(Ord. 150616-C, passed 6-16-2015)
§ 94.10 DEFECATION BY AN ANIMAL (SCOOP THE POOP).
   (A)   It is the duty of each person in control of an animal to promptly
remove feces left by such animal on property not belonging to the person in
control of the animal. In regards to horses within the greenspace and
conservation areas, removing manure off the trail is sufficient.
   (B)    It shall be the duty of each person in control of an animal to be in
possession of materials to remove feces left by such animals.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that
the person in control of the animal is the owner of property or has permission
from the owner of a property to allow the animal to defecate on the property.
(Ord. 150616-C, passed 6-16-2015)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (A)   A violation of §
94.02 shall be punishable by fine up to a maximum of $500.
   (B)   A person who violates the proscription set forth in §
94.03 commits a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $1
and not more than $500.
   (C)   A person who enters a restricted area in which deer control activities
are occurring, or who refuses to leave the area when notice of restricted
access has been given to the person(s) either by the presence of sufficient
signage or by verbal notice provided by an agent of the city commits a Class C
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $1 and not more than $500.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a person to violate any provision of §
94.04 or to interfere with, hinder or molest any city employee in the
performance of the employee's duties under §
94.04. The penalty for any violation of §
94.04 shall be a fine not to exceed $200. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense. In the event that any person has any animal or
animals that have been found to be in violation of §
94.04(A)(3) or (4); three or more times within a six-month period, the
Municipal Judge may direct the Chief of Police or his or her designate to cause
the animal or animals to be permanently removed from the city. The penalty
shall be cumulative and not exclusive of any other rights or remedies the city
or person may have.
   (E)   Any person who violates any provision of §
94.05 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject
to a fine not to exceed $200. Each day of the violation shall constitute a
separate offense. The penalty shall be cumulative and not exclusive of any
other rights or remedies the city may have.
   (F)   Any person who violates the provisions of §
94.06 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be subject to a fine as follows: The fine for the first offense for an
animal running at large shall be not less than $50, nor more than $500. With
each subsequent conviction of the same person for an animal running at large,
the minimum fine shall be increased $50, provided that such fine shall not
exceed $500.
(Ord. 810310, passed 3-10-1981; Ord. 820914, passed 9-14-1982; Ord. 870721,
passed 7-21-1987; Ord. 010403, passed 4-3-2001; Ord. 080708, passed 7-8-2008;
Ord. 141217-C, passed 12-17-2014)
CHAPTER 95: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
95.01   Definitions
   
95.02   Exemptions
   
95.03   Operation and maintenance of alarm systems
   
95.04   Policies and procedures
   
95.05   Police response
   
95.06   False notifications
   
95.07   Permit required
   
95.08   Permit application
   
95.09   Permit denial, grounds
   
95.10   Permit renewal
   
95.11   Permit revocation
   
95.12   Appeal
   
95.13   Reinstatement of permit
   
95.14   Fees
   
95.15   Violations
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   ALARM NOTIFICATION. A notification intended to summon the police, which is
designed either to be initiated purposely by a person or by an alarm system
that responds to a stimulus characteristic of unauthorized intrusion. (Does not
include recorded messages to any police or fire station, which are prohibited
by §
95.15(C) of this chapter.)
   ALARM SITE. The specific property served by an alarm system that is under
the control of one owner, tenant, or lessor.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Any electrical, mechanical, or electronic device or assembly
or equipment that emits, transmits, or relays a signal intended to summon, or
that would reasonably be expected to summon, by direct or indirect means, the
aid of the police services of the city.
   ALARM SYSTEMS BUSINESS. Any person who or entity that sells, installs,
services, monitors, or responds to alarm systems.
   AUTOMATIC DIAL. Any device connected to an alarm system which automatically
sends a prerecorded message or coded signal indicating the activation of the
alarm system to a predetermined location.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of Police of the city or the designated
representative of the Chief of the Police.
   CITY. The City of Sunset Valley, Texas.
   FALSE ALARM NOTIFICATION. An alarm notification to the Police Department,
when the responding officer or a subsequent investigation, finds no evidence on
which to reasonably base a conclusion of unauthorized intrusion, or attempted
unauthorized intrusion, robbery, attempted robbery, or other illegal activity
that the alarm was intended to report.
   LOCAL ALARM. An alarm system that emits a signal at the alarm site that is
audible or visible from the exterior of the structure.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization,
or any legal entity.
   RELAYING INTERMEDIARY. Any person who reports the activation of an alarm to
the Police Department for compensation.
(Ord. 960220, passed 2-20-1996; Ord. 150303-B, passed 3-3-2015)
§ 95.02 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following types of alarm systems are exempted from the regulations of
this chapter:
   (A)   An alarm system installed on a motor vehicle, unless the vehicle is
permanently located at a site;
   (B)   An alarm system designed to alert only the inhabitants of the premises
which does not have a local alarm;
   (C)   An alarm system installed upon the premises occupied by the United
States Government, or the state government when they occupy property owned by
the state;
   (D)   Any alarm system designed solely to detect or give notice of fire or
smoke, or air quality; and
   (E)   Any communication device not designed solely for alarm notification,
except to the extent that one of its functions is to emit, transmit, or relay a
signal intended to summon, or that would reasonably be expected to summon, by
direct or indirect means, the aid of the police services of the city.
(Ord. 960220, passed 2-20-1996; Ord. 150303-B, passed 3-3-2015)
§ 95.03 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF ALARM SYSTEMS.
   (A)   A permit holder shall:
      (1)   Maintain the premises containing an alarm system in a manner that
ensures proper operation of the alarm system;
      (2)   Maintain an alarm system in a manner that will minimize false alarm
notifications;
      (3)   Respond or cause a representative to respond within 30 minutes when
notified by the Police Department to repair or inactivate a malfunctioning
alarm system, to provide access to the premises, or to provide security for the
premises; and
      (4)   Not manually activate an alarm system for any reason other than the
occurrence of an event for what the alarm system was intended.
   (B)   A permit holder of a local alarm shall adjust the mechanism or cause
the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal will sound for no longer
than 15 minutes after being activated.
(Ord. 960220, passed 2-20-1996; Ord. 150303-B, passed 3-3-2015) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.04 POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Chief of Police may institute policies and procedures to implement
this chapter, notice of which shall be published and made available to every
applicant for a permit. If any such policy or procedure affects a current
permit holder, the applicable policies and procedures shall be provided to
current permit holders.
   (B)   The Chief of Police may publish standards of operation for alarm
systems. Each applicant and permit holder will be provided copies of these
standards and all changes thereto.
(Ord. 960220, passed 2-20-1996; Ord. 150303-B, passed 3-3-2015)
§ 95.05 POLICE RESPONSE.
   (A)   The response, if any, made to a signal from a permitted alarm system
shall be subject to the policies and procedures of the Police Department and
will be in accordance with the priorities set for police response.
   (B)   The issuance of a permit authorizing the use of an alarm system is not
intended to nor shall it create a contract with the city, either express or
implied, nor does it create a duty or guarantee of response by the Sunset
Valley Police Department. The issuance of permit shall not constitute a waiver
of governmental immunity.
(Ord. 960220, passed 2-20-1996; Ord. 150303-B, passed 3-3-2015)
§ 95.06 FALSE NOTIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The holder of an alarm permit shall pay a service fee for each false
alarm notification that is in excess of six within any 12-month period.
   (B)   For alarm systems that have the capability of indicating a robbery or
other crime against a person, the holder of an alarm permit for such alarm
system shall pay a service fee for each false alarm notification indicating
that a robbery or other crime against a person has occurred that is in excess
of two such alarms within any 12-month period. Each false alarm of a crime
against a person shall be counted as a false alarm notification pursuant to
division (A) of this section, but in the event that a fee is due pursuant to
both divisions (A) and (B) of this section, only the higher of the two fees
shall be due and payable.
   (C)   For any alarm notification for which a false notification fee is
assessed, the Chief of Police has the authority to investigate the
circumstances of the alarm and may waive the payment of the fee when
circumstances indicate there is no defect in the alarm setting or operation of
the alarm system and the cause for the alarm could not reasonably have been
prevented. The Chief of Police may also waive the fee for a false notification
of an unpermitted alarm system if circumstances indicate that the owner or user
of the alarm system were unaware of the requirement of a permit.
(Ord. 960220, passed 2-20-1996; Ord. 150303-B, passed 3-3-2015)
§ 95.07 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   An alarm system may not be operated without a permit issued by the
City Administrator or his designee.
   (B)   A separate permit is required for each alarm site.
   (C)   The permit holder shall keep the alarm permit at the alarm site and
shall produce the permit for inspection upon the request of any member of the
Police Department.
(Ord. 960220, passed 2-20-1996; Ord. 150303-B, passed 3-3-2015) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.08 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for permit shall be made by a person who owns, leases,
resides at, or manages the alarm site.
   (B)   The application and the required fee shall be submitted to the city on
a form provided by the city, as promulgated by the City Administrator.
   (C)   Any false statement made by an applicant shall be grounds for denial
of a permit or revocation of a permit. False statements may be subject to
prosecution of applicable criminal offense(s).
   (D)   An alarm permit is issued to an individual or corporate entity and is
nontransferable and nonrefundable.
   (E)   The date of issuance will be the date the application is processed and
approved. An initial permit is valid for the period ending on December 31 of
the year of issuance and must thereafter be renewed each year. Renewal permits
are issued on a calendar year basis. If a permit is not renewed and the alarm
is still active, a late fee as provided in the fee schedule will be assessed.
(Ord. 960220, passed 2-20-1996; Ord. 150303-B, passed 3-3-2015)
§ 95.09 PERMIT DENIAL, GROUNDS.
   A permit may be denied for:
   (A)   Any false statement on the application; or
   (B)   An applicant has failed to pay a service fee that is due, or has had a
permit for an alarm system revoked and the violation causing the revocation has
not been corrected.
(Ord. 960220, passed 2-20-1996; Ord. 150303-B, passed 3-3-2015)
§ 95.10 PERMIT RENEWAL.
   An application to renew a permit must be submitted no later than November 30
of each year, which is one month prior to the end of the term of a pending
permit. A late fee will be assessed if an application is submitted late (See §
95.14 Fees). Renewal Permits are valid through December 31 of the year for
which the renewal permit is issued.
(Ord. 960220, passed 2-20-1996; Ord. 150303-B, passed 3-3-2015) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.11 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   The City Administrator shall revoke an alarm permit if it is determined
that:
   (A)   There was a false statement made in the application for a permit.
   (B)   The permit holder has failed to pay fees due and payable pursuant to
this chapter or has failed to demonstrate that adjustments or improvements to
an alarm system have been made following the number of false alarms for which a
fee is payable pursuant to §
95.06.
   (C)   The permit holder does not maintain the alarm system in a manner that
minimizes false alarm notification or ensures proper operation of the alarm
system.
(Ord. 960220, passed 2-20-1996; Ord. 150303-B, passed 3-3-2015)
§ 95.12 APPEAL.
   (A)   If the City Administrator or his/her designee refuses to issue a
permit or revokes a permit, he or she shall notify the applicant or holder in
writing by hand delivery to the applicant or holder at the city's
administrative offices or by both certified mail, return receipt requested and
by regular U.S. Mail to the address where the alarm is located as disclosed in
the latest application. The applicant or holder may appeal the decision by
filing a notice of appeal with the Mayor, setting forth the reasons for appeal.
Notice of an appeal must be received not later than 15 calendar days after the
date the notice of denial or revocation is hand delivered or deposited in the
mail in the manner provided in this division (A). The timely receipt of the
notice of appeal will stay a revocation of a permit. If the notice of appeal is
not timely, a revocation or denial of an application is final.
   (B)   The Mayor will designate one or more hearing officer(s), which may be
the full City Council, to hear the appeal. A hearing shall reasonably
expeditiously be held. Notice of the time and place for the hearing shall be
forwarded to the applicant/holder in the manner provided in division (A) of
this section. At the hearing, the formal rules of evidence do not apply. The
hearing officer(s) shall make his/her/their decision on the basis of a
preponderance of the evidence presented. The hearing officer(s) shall render a
decision within 30 days after the date of the hearing. The hearing officer(s)
may affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the City Administrator. The
decision of the hearing officer(s) is final.
(Ord. 960220, passed 2-20-1996; Ord. 150303-B, passed 3-3-2015)
§ 95.13 REINSTATEMENT OF PERMIT.
   A permit may be reinstated by the City Administrator or his/her designee
when the revoked permit holder pays the application fee and shows:
   (A)   That the all fees required by this chapter have been paid; and
   (B)   That the alarm system is operated in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter, and if the cause of a revocation was excessive false alarms,
repairs or adjustment of the alarm system necessary to correct such false
alarms have been made.
(Ord. 960220, passed 2-20-1996; Ord. 150303-B, passed 3-3-2015)
§ 95.14 FEES.
   Schedule of fees. The following fees are payable at the time of the
following acts or incidents, except that a late fee is due and payable when the
underlying fee remains unpaid for more than 30 days:
Type of Fee Amount
Type of Fee                                Amount
Application fee                            $0
Renewal fee                                $0
Reinstatement fee                          $0
False alarm notification of:
Robbery or crime against a person          $8
All other incidents                        $40
Late payment fee                           $5
Response to unpermitted alarm notification $200
 
(Ord. 960220, passed 2-20-1996; Ord. 150303-B, passed 3-3-2015) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.15 VIOLATIONS.
   No person shall operate, cause to be operated, or allow the operation of an
alarm system:
   (A)   Without a current permit issued under the provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   Without being in compliance with the procedures and provisions of this
chapter, including but not limited to the payment of fees when due; or
   (C)   That automatically dials the 911-Emergency Communications Systems and/
or sends a pre-recorded message to the Police or Fire Department.
(Ord. 960220, passed 2-20-1996; Ord. 150303-B, passed 3-3-2015) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   A person who fails to comply with the prohibitions of §
95.15 shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more
than $500 but not less than $100 upon first conviction, and not less than $200
nor more than $500 upon a second and subsequent convictions. Each violation is
a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation
is committed or continued.
(Ord. 960220, passed 2-20-1996; Ord. 150303-B, passed 3-3-2015)
CHAPTER 96: PUBLIC PARKS AND OPEN SPACE REGULATIONS
Section
   
96.01   Short title
   
96.02   Purpose
   
96.03   Applicability
   
96.04   Definitions
   
96.05   Acts prohibited
   
96.06   Hours of operation
   
96.07   Closure/temporary restrictions and actions
   
96.08   Compliance
 
   
96.99   Penalty
§ 96.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Public Park and Open
Space Regulations Chapter of the City of Sunset Valley, Texas.
(Ord. 910716A, passed 7-16-1991; Ord. 170606-D, passed 6-6-2017)
§ 96.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules and regulations for the use
of and conduct in the parks and open spaces owned by the city. The provisions
of this chapter are deemed to be necessary to promote the health, safety,
property, and general welfare of the city.
(Ord. 910716A, passed 7-16-1991; Ord. 170606-D, passed 6-6-2017)
§ 96.03 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply in all parks, recreation venues, and open spaces
under the jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 910716A, passed 7-16-1991; Ord. 170606-D, passed 6-6-2017)
§ 96.04 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be
interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this
chapter its most reasonable application. A term specifically defined in this
section shall control over any inconsistent definition for the term provided
elsewhere in this code. As used herein, the following shall mean:
   CAMP. The use of a public area for living accommodation purposes, including
any of the following:
      (1)   Storing personal belongings;
      (2)   Making a camp fire;
      (3)   Using a tent or shelter or other structure of vehicle for a living
accommodation;
      (4)   Carrying on cooking activities; or
      (5)   Digging or earth breaking activities.
   FIREARMS. Any pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun, bb gun, air gun, sling shot,
assault weapon, spring gun or other weapon in which the propelling force is gun
powder, a string or air.
   OPEN SPACE. All city-owned property or easements that are undeveloped with
the exception of landscaped areas, trails and related amenities (benches,
wayfinding, etc.). These areas are publicly accessible including areas
designated Government, Utility, and Institutional (GUI), Greenspace/
Preservation (G), Conservation (C), and Planned Unit Development (PUD)
districts according to zoning regulations.
   PERSON. Any natural person, corporation, company, association, joint stock
association, firm, partnership or copartnership.
   PUBLIC AREA. An outdoor area accessible to the public, including a street,
highway, other right-of-way, park, parking lot, alleyway, pedestrian way and
the common areas of a school, hospital, office building or business.
   PUBLIC PARK. All city-owned property, including easements, or property
leased by the city designated for use as a park or playground and/or designated
as Parkland (P) according to zoning regulations and recreational venues within
areas leased by the city.
   SOLICITING. The selling of goods or services by sample or by taking order
for future delivery with or without accepting advance payment for the goods, or
the seeking of any form of contributions.
   TRAIL. A path through a grassland or woodland area of city-owned property
for the passage of people and animals.
   VEHICLE. Any conveyance, including without limitation motor vehicles,
trailers of all types, campers, motorized vehicles or vehicles propelled by
other than muscular power.
   VENDING. Selling or trading any item or service.
   WEAPON. An instrument of offensive or defensive combat, or anything used, or
designed to be used, in destroying, defeating or injuring another.
(Ord. 910716A, passed 7-16-1991; Ord. 170606-D, passed 6-6-2017; Ord. 190604,
passed 6-4-2019)
§ 96.05 ACTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, it shall be
unlawful for any person to do any of the following in a public park or open
space:
      (1)   Mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove
any structures, equipment, or facilities.
      (2)   Dump, discard or leave any rubbish, refuse, garbage or other
similar material.
      (3)   Litter or fail to deposit any rubbish, refuse, garbage or other
material in receptacles provided for same in any public park or open space;
where receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried
away from the park or open space by the person responsible for its presence and
properly disposed of elsewhere.
      (4)   Bring or use any glass container.
      (5)   With the exception of Valley Creek Park or as approved by the City
Council with a special use permit, consumption of alcohol is prohibited within
city-owned properties zoned Parkland, Greenspace/Preservation, Conservation
Area or Planned Unit Development.
      (6)   Drive or park any vehicle within a public park or open space,
except in an area designated for motor vehicle use. This does not apply to city
vehicles used to conduct official city business within parks and open spaces.
      (7)   Bring into or have in his or her possession any firearm or weapon;
provided, however that such prohibition does not apply to a licensed peace
officer carrying the firearm or weapon in the line of duty, other carriers duly
licensed by the state, or firearms allowed by applicable state law.
      (8)   Possess or discharge any fireworks.
      (9)   Camp or stay overnight anywhere except in an area specifically
designated for overnight camping.
      (10)   Cause, create or contribute to any unreasonable noise which
unreasonably interferes with any other person's use or enjoyment of the public
park, open space or an adjacent property owner's enjoyment of such adjacent
property.
      (11)   Light, build or maintain a campfire or ground fire; provided,
however, that nothing herein shall prohibit the use of any self-contained
cooking device.
      (12)   Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs or
plants or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment,
blasting or other means or agency without prior approval or direction of an
authorized agent of the city.
      (13)   Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind,
whether permanent or temporary, or run or string any public service utility
into, upon or across such lands without the prior consent of the city.
      (14)   Damage, cut, carve, mark, transplant or remove any plant or injure
the bark or flowers or seed of any tree or plant, dig in or otherwise
substantially disturb grass areas, or in any way injure the natural beauty or
usefulness of any public park or open space unless authorized or directed by an
agent of the city in connection with any improvement project such as invasive
species removal programs.
      (15)   Hunt or molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, tease, shoot
or throw missiles at any animal, wildlife, reptile or bird. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, defensive hazing of coyotes and any act of self-defense involving a
poisonous snake or other harmful animal is permitted for the purpose of self-
defense.
      (16)   Remove or have possession of any wild animal, reptile or bird, or
the nests or eggs thereof, found within any public park or open space.
      (17)   Post, paint, affix, cast or leave about any bill, billboard,
placard, picket, handbill, circular or advertisement.
      (18)   Enter any area posted as "Closed to Public."
      (19)   Walk a dog or other animal without a leash or under competent
voice control as described in
Chapter 94.
      (20)   Solicit or operate any private business of any type unless
authorized by the city's designated agent.
      (21)   Enter or occupy any public park or open space when it is closed.
      (22)   Ride horses or bicycles on trails marked for hiking only. Hiking
only trails are found on the map adopted by the City Council and published to
the public.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person camps in a public area that
is not designated as a camping area by signage posted by an authorized agent or
department of the city. This division does not apply to permitted camping or
cooking in a park in compliance with park regulations.
   (C)   A person is camping if the person engages in any of the activities
included in the definition of CAMP, as set forth in §
96.04, if it reasonably appears, based on the totality of the circumstances,
that the person conducting the activity is using a public area for living
accommodation purposes, regardless of the person's intent or engagement in
other activities.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that a person owns the
property or has secured the permission of the property owner to camp in the
public area.
(Ord. 910716A, passed 7-16-1991; Ord. 130820, passed 8-20-2013; Ord. 170606-D,
passed 6-6-2017; Ord. 190604, passed 6-4-2019) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.06 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Public parks and open spaces designated by signage for use as parks or
hiking and/or riding trails shall be open to the public from 6:00 a.m. until 9:
00 p.m. everyday. Trails located in the Cougar Creek Greenbelt and city-owned
property zoned Planned Unit Development that allow passage between the City
Hall Complex and the shopping centers will not be subject to the curfew hours.
The recreational venue on property leased at 5207 Brodie Lane will also not be
subject to the curfew hours. In addition, special extended hours or closures
may be permitted or enforced by an authorized agent of the city or as directed
by the City Council with notice to the public. It shall be unlawful to enter or
occupy such park or open space at any time it is closed to the public.
(Ord. 910716A, passed 7-16-1991; Ord. 170606-D, passed 6-6-2017) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.07 CLOSURE/TEMPORARY RESTRICTIONS AND ACTIONS.
   (A)   The City Council may close any area owned by the city and/or dedicated
or designated as a public park, recreational area, greenbelt and/or preserve as
it may deem necessary for the conservation and preservation of natural features
or constructed facilities located therein.
   (B)   In the event of any condition presenting a threat to the health,
safety, or welfare of the public, nearby household pets, or surrounding
property, the Mayor is authorized to order any of the following temporary
measures when reasonably necessary for protection against such hazard(s):
      (1)   Prohibit access to affected public land or buildings by persons or
animals;
      (2)   Restrict the types of uses that may be made of affected public land
or buildings;
      (3)   Arrange for the capture, removal, and/or euthanasia of domestic or
wild animals located on public land.
   (C)   The Mayor shall report to the City Council any such measure ordered by
the Mayor at the next City Council meeting for which there is sufficient notice
pursuant to the Texas Open Meetings Act for the City Council to take up the
matter (the "next available Council meeting".) Any measure so ordered by the
Mayor shall cease to be in effect the day following the next available Council
meeting unless the City Council approves the measure at such meeting.
   (D)   Conditions presenting a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the
public may include but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   Imminent threats of attacks by coyotes or other wild animals;
      (2)   Imminent risk of wildfires;
      (3)   The presence of suspected armed or dangerous fugitives;
      (4)   Presence of environmental contaminants;
      (5)   A closure or restriction on use of public land pursuant to other
applicable law.
      (6)   At the direction of the Sunset Valley Police Department due to any
potential risk to public safety.
(Ord. 910716A, passed 7-16-1991; Ord. 130820, passed 8-20-2013; Ord. 17606-D,
passed 6-6-2017)
§ 96.08 COMPLIANCE.
   It shall be an offense for any person to violate any provision of this
chapter, or fail to comply after having been advised by an officer of the city
to cease such violation or failure. A police officer is authorized to require
any person to leave any public park or open space in order to discontinue any
such violation, and the failure to leave upon such order shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 910716A, passed 7-16-1991; Ord. 17606-D, passed 6-6-2017) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction of any such violation shall be
fined a sum not to exceed $500, except that any person convicted of violating §
96.05(H) or (K) shall be fined a sum not to exceed $2,000. Each day any such
violation shall continue shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 910716A, passed 7-16-1991; Ord. 17606-D, passed 6-6-2017)
CHAPTER 97: FIREWORKS
Section
   
97.01   Definitions
   
97.02   Sale prohibited
   
97.03   Use prohibited
   
97.04   Exceptions
   
97.05   Seizure of fireworks
   
97.06   Nuisance declared
 
   
97.99   Penalty
§ 97.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Sunset Valley.
   FIREWORKS. Any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or
combination of substances, or article or device prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration
or detonation, and shall include without limitation blank cartridges, toy
pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns, in which any such explosives are
used, the type of unmanned balloons which require fire underneath to propel the
same, firecrackers, lady fingers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, dayglo
bombs, sparklers or other devices containing any such explosive substance. The
term FIREWORKS shall also include "special or Class B fireworks" and "common or
Class C fireworks", as those terms are defined in Tex. Ins. Code § 5.43-4 § 1
(2) and (3) (Vernon's 1991).
   PERSON. Any individual or entity, including without limitation an owner,
manager, officer, employee, occupant, partnership, unincorporated association
or corporation.
   SELL. Selling, offering to sell, exhibiting, or possessing with intent to
sell or offer to sell any fireworks within the city.
   USE. Purchasing, possessing, setting off or otherwise causing to explode or
discharge or burn any fireworks or explosives of inflammable material within
the city. This provision shall also mean and  include casting, throwing,
lighting, or firing any fireworks or explosives of inflammable material into
the city.
(Ord. 910618A, passed 6-18-1991)
§ 97.02 SALE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any fireworks to the public or
to any person within the city or to allow or permit the sale of fireworks on
his or her premises or premises under his or her control.
(Ord. 910618A, passed 6-18-1991) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.03 USE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any fireworks within the city or
to allow or permit the use of fireworks on his or her premises or premises
under his or her control.
(Ord. 910618A, passed 6-18-1991) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   The following are exempted form the prohibitions of this chapter:
   (A)   Toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices that use paper or
plastic caps manufactured in accordance with 49 C.F.R. § 173.100(p)(1983), any
amendments thereto and that are packed and shipped according to the regulations
of the United States Department of Transportation;
   (B)   Model rockets and model rocket motors designed, sold, and used for the
purpose of propelling recoverable aero models;
   (C)   Propelling or expelling charges consisting of a mixture of sulfur,
charcoal, and potassium nitrate;
   (D)   Novelties and trick noisemakers;
   (E)   The sale, and use in emergency situations, of pyrotechnic signaling
devices or distress signals for aviation or highway use;
   (F)   The use of fuses and railway torpedoes by railroads;
   (G)   The sale of blank cartridges for use in radio, television, film, or
theater productions or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletic events; or
   (H)   The use of any pyrotechnic device by military organizations or law
enforcement authorities.
(Ord. 910618A, passed 6-18-1991)
§ 97.05 SEIZURE OF FIREWORKS.
   The Chief of Police and/or any police officer of the city may, in addition
to any other enforcement action authorized herein, seize, take, remove or cause
to be removed all fireworks sold or offered for sale, possessed, stored, held
or used in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 910618A, passed 6-18-1991)
§ 97.06 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   The sale and/or use of fireworks within the city in violation of this
chapter is hereby specifically declared to be a nuisance dangerous to the
public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 910618A, passed 6-18-1991) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly or intentionally
violates any provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   An offense under this chapter is a misdemeanor and shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $2,000. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense. These penal provisions shall be cumulative of, and not in
lieu of, any other remedies which may exist at law or in equity.
(Ord. 910618A, passed 6-18-1991)
CHAPTER 98: JUNKED VEHICLES
Section
   
98.01   Definitions
   
98.02   Declaration of nuisance
   
98.03   Procedures for abatement and removal
   
98.04   Disposal to demolisher
   
98.05   Enforcement
 
   
98.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned vehicles, watercraft and the like, see
Ch. 90
§ 98.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANTIQUE AUTO.  A passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old.
   COLLECTOR. The owner of one or more antique or special interest vehicles,
who collects, purchases, acquires, trades, or disposes of special interest or
antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to restore,
preserve, and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic
interest.
   DEMOLISHER. A person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into
processed scrap or scrap metal or to otherwise wreck or dismantle a motor
vehicle.
   JUNKED VEHICLE.
      (1)   Any motor vehicle, as defined in Tex. Transportation Code, Chapter
683, Subch. E., as amended, that:
         (a)   Is self-propelled; and
         (b)   Is:
            1.   Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
            2.   Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
               A.   Seventy-two consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public
property; or
               B.   Ninety consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private
property.
         (c)   Does not have lawfully attached to it:
            1.   An unexpired license plate; and
            2.   A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate.
      (2)   An aircraft that does not have lawfully printed on the aircraft an
unexpired federal aircraft identification number registered under the Federal
Aviation Administration aircraft registration regulations in 14 C.F.R. Part 47;
or
      (3)   A watercraft that:
         (a)   Does not have lawfully on board an unexpired certificate of
number; and
         (b)   Is not a watercraft described by Tex. Parks and Wildlife Code, §
31.055.
   MOTOR VEHICLE.  A motor vehicle subject to registration under the
Certificate of Title Act (Tex. Transportation Code, Ch. 501), except that, for
purposes of this chapter, MOTOR VEHICLE includes a motorboat, outboard motor,
or vessel subject to registration under Tex. Parks and Wildlife Code, Ch. 31.
   SPECIAL INTEREST VEHICLE.  A motor vehicle of any age that has not been
altered or modified from original manufacturer's specifications, and because of
its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists.
   STORAGE FACILITY.  A garage, parking lot, or any type of facility or
establishment for the servicing, repairing, storing, or parking of motor
vehicles.
(Ord. 130521-C, passed 5-21-2013)
§ 98.02 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   The City Council hereby declares that a junked vehicle that is located in a
place where it is visible from a public place or public right-of-way is
detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce
the value of private property, invites vandalism, creates fire hazards,
constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety
of minors, and is detrimental to the economic welfare of the state by producing
urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the
municipalities in the state, and is a public nuisance.
(Ord. 130521-C, passed 5-21-2013)
§ 98.03 PROCEDURES FOR ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL.
   (A)   The City Council hereby establishes procedures for the abatement and
removal of a junked vehicle or a part of a junked vehicle as a public nuisance,
from private property, public property, or public rights-of-way.
   (B)   The City Administrator or other designee of the City Council shall
provide not less than ten days' notice stating the nature of the public
nuisance on private property, that it must be removed and abated within ten
days, and that a request for a hearing must be made before expiration of the
ten-day period. The notice shall be personally delivered, sent by certified
mail with a five-day return requested, or delivered by the United States Postal
Service with signature confirmation service to the last known registered owner
of the junked vehicle, each lienholder of record of the junked vehicle, and the
owner or occupant of the premises on which the junked vehicle is located, or if
the junked vehicle is on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to
location on the right-of-way. If any notice is returned undelivered by the
United States post office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be
continued to a date not less than 11 days after the date of the return. If the
post office address of the last known registered owner of the junked vehicle is
unknown, notice shall be placed on the junked vehicle.
   (C)   A public hearing shall be held before the removal of the junked
vehicle. The hearing shall be held before the City Council or its designee, if
a hearing is requested by a person to whom notice is required to be given
within ten days after service of notice to abate the nuisance. At the hearing,
the junked vehicle shall be presumed to be inoperable unless demonstrated
otherwise by the owner of the junked vehicle.
      (1)   A resolution or order requiring the removal of a junked vehicle
that is a motor vehicle must include a description of the vehicle and the
correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, and the
license plate number, if the information is available at the site of the junked
vehicle.
      (2)   A resolution or order requiring the removal of a junked vehicle
that is an aircraft must include a description of the vehicle and the federal
aircraft identification number as described by Federal Aviation Administration
aircraft registration regulations in 14 C.F.R. Part 47, if the information is
available at the site of the junked vehicle.
      (3)   A resolution or order requiring the removal of a junked vehicle
that is a watercraft must include a description of the vehicle and the
identification number, as set forth in the watercraft's certificate number, if
the information is available at the site of the junked vehicle.
   (D)   The City Administrator or other designee of the City Council shall
give notice to the State Department of Transportation not later than the fifth
day after the date of removal. The notice shall identify the vehicle. The
department shall immediately cancel the certificate of title to the vehicle
pursuant to the Certificate of Title Act (Tex. Transportation Code, Ch. 501).
   (E)   The requirements of this section shall not apply to a vehicle that is
completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not
visible from the street or other public or private property, a vehicle that is
stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the
business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or an unlicensed operable or
inoperable antique or special interest vehicle stored by a collector on the
collector's property, if the vehicle and the outdoor storage area are
maintained in a manner so that they do not constitute a health hazard and are
screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees,
shrubbery, or other appropriate means.
   (F)   The procedures set forth in this chapter shall be administered by
regularly salaried, full-time employees of the city, except that the removal of
a vehicle or vehicle part from property may be by any duly authorized person.
   (G)   A junked vehicle shall not be reconstructed or made operable after
abatement and removal of the junked vehicle pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 130521-C, passed 5-21-2013)
§ 98.04 DISPOSAL TO DEMOLISHER.
   A junked vehicle may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or
demolisher.
(Ord. 130521-C, passed 5-21-2013)
§ 98.05 ENFORCEMENT.
   A person authorized by the city to administer the procedures authorized by
this chapter may enter private property for the purposes specified in the
procedures to examine a vehicle, obtain information as to the identity of the
vehicle, or remove or cause the removal of a vehicle that constitutes a
nuisance. A court of competent jurisdiction, including the city's municipal
court, may issue orders necessary to enforce the procedures for abatement of a
junked vehicle.
(Ord. 130521-C, passed 5-21-2013)
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if that person maintains a public nuisance
as determined under this chapter.
   (B)   A person who commits an offense under this chapter is, on conviction,
subject to a fine not to exceed $200. On conviction, the court shall order
removal and abatement of the nuisance.
(Ord. 130521-C, passed 5-21-2013)
CHAPTER 99: HANDS-FREE MOBILE COMMUNICATION DEVICES
Section
   
99.01   Definitions
   
99.02   Use of hand-held mobile communication devices prohibiteed
   
99.03   Posting of signs
 
   
99.99   Penalty
§ 99.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DATA ENTRY. Any form of input into a hand-held mobile communication device.
   ENGAGING IN A CALL. Talking on, physically dialing or typing, or listening
on a hand-held mobile communication device.
   HAND-HELD MOBILE COMMUNICATION DEVICE. A text-messaging device or other
electronic, two-way communication device that uses a commercial mobile service,
as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 332, that is designed to receive and transmit voice
communication, text message or pictorial communication, or both, whether by
internet or other electronic means. The term includes a mobile telephone, and a
personal digital assistant (PDA).
   HANDS-FREE MOBILE COMMUNICATION DEVICE. A mobile telephone or device that
has an internal feature or function that is equipped with an attachment or
addition, whether or not permanently part of the mobile telephone, by which a
user engages in a call or the operation of the communication device, without
the use of either hand (or prosthetic device or aid in the case of a physically
disabled person) whether or not the use of either hand (or prosthetic device)
is necessary to activate or deactivate the mobile telephone.
   PARKED.  For the operator to completely cease movement of a vehicle in a
lawful manner and location. PARKED does not include or mean a vehicle stopped
in a lane of traffic due to either a lawful traffic control device, or the
conditions on the roadway, or traffic congestion patterns then existing.
   TEXT MESSAGE. A two-way communication (whether real-time or asynchronous) in
which data (composed in whole or in part of text, numbers, images, or symbols)
is sent, entered, or received by a method other than by voice and transmitted
through either a short message service (SMS) or a computer network. The term
does not include a communication transmitted through a global positioning or
navigation system.
   VEHICLE. Any device on wheels designed for or transporting one or more
persons.
(Ord. 6-27-2016)
§ 99.02 USE OF HAND-HELD MOBILE COMMUNICATION DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if, while operating a vehicle on a public
roadway or any other passageway described under this code, the person uses a
hand-held mobile communication device to:
      (1)   Engage in a call;
      (2)   Send, read, or write a text message;
      (3)   View pictures or written text whether transmitted by internet or
other electronic means;
      (4)   Engage in gaming; or
      (5)   Engage in any other use of the device.
   (B)   This section does not apply to an operator of a vehicle who is using a
hand-held mobile communication device:
      (1)   While the vehicle is legally parked, at a complete stop, or is
being operated on private property;
      (2)    If the device is affixed to the vehicle, whether permanently or
temporarily, and being actively utilized as a global positioning or navigation
system;
      (3)    If the device is being used in conjunction with a hands-free
mobile communication telephone or other such device through Bluetooth or other
comparable technology;
      (4)   While operating an authorized emergency vehicle in an official
capacity; or
      (5)   Who is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission while
operating a radio frequency device other than a hand held mobile communication
device.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section if the
person was using a hand-held mobile communication device for the purpose of:
      (1)   Communicating with an emergency response operator, a fire
department, a law enforcement agency, a hospital, a physician's office, or a
health clinic regarding a medical or other emergency; or
      (2)   Preventing injury or death to a person or damage or destruction of
property.
(Ord. 160621, passed 6-27-2016)
§ 99.03 POSTING OF SIGNS.
   Pursuant to Tex. Transportation Code § 545.425(b-2), the City Council hereby
directs and authorizes the City Administrator to take all actions necessary to
effect installation of signs located at all points where, roads, state
highways, U.S. highways, and interstate highways enter into the city limits,
informing vehicle operators that using hand-held communication devices while
operating a vehicle is strictly prohibited and that violators are subject to a
fine.
(Ord. 160621, passed 6-27-2016)
§ 99.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person convicted of an offense under this chapter shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $500.
   (B)   An offense under this chapter is not a moving violation.
(Ord. 160621, passed 6-27-2016)
CHAPTER 100:OUTDOOR LIGHTING
Section
   
100.01   Purpose
   
100.02   Definitions
   
100.03   Light trespass and glare standards
   
100.04   Exception
   
100.05   Exemptions
   
100.06   Effective date
 
   
100.99   Penalty
§ 100.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards to protect against
outdoor light trespass and glare that are hereby determined to constitute a
nuisance.
(Ord. 180807, passed 8-7-2018)
§ 100.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GLARE. Lighting entering the eye directly from light fixtures or indirectly
from reflective surfaces that causes visual discomfort or reduced visibility.
   LIGHT FIXTURE. The complete lighting unit (fixture), consisting of a bulb or
bulbs, and ballast(s) (when applicable), together with the parts designed to
distribute the light (reflector lens, diffuser) to position and protect the
bulb(s), and to connect the light fixture to the power source.
   OUTDOOR LIGHT TRESPASS. Light from an outdoor light fixture that directly
illuminates real property not owned or used in common with the property on
which the light fixture is located.
(Ord. 180807, passed 8-7-2018)
§ 100.03 LIGHT TRESPASS AND GLARE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Each outdoor light fixture, including security lighting, shall be
located, aimed and shielded so that all direct illumination from it is confined
to areas within the boundaries of the real property on which the light fixture
is located.
   (B)   The direct source of illumination (bulb) from an outdoor light fixture
located within 50 feet of the public right-of-way, or located on the side or
rear of a structure at any distance facing toward adjoining properties, shall
not be visible from any boundary of the real property on which the fixture is
located. For single-family residences located on Sunflower Trail, the direct
source of illumination (bulb) from an outdoor light fixture located within 20
feet of the public right-of-way, or located on the side or rear of structures
at any distance facing toward adjoining properties, shall not be visible from
any boundary of the real property on which the fixture is located.
(Ord. 180807, passed 8-7-2018) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.04 EXCEPTION.
   Excepted from the requirements of §
100.03 are outdoor lights at a stadium operated by a public school district
during sporting and other events sponsored or authorized by the public school
district. Use of such stadium lighting is allowed between one hour prior to
sunset and 10:30 p.m. the same evening, except that if the stadium lighting is
used in connection with a specific organized activity or event in progress at
10:30 p.m., such use may continue until the end of the event.
(Ord. 180807, passed 8-7-2018)
§ 100.05 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following items are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   Lighting equipment required by law to be installed on motor vehicles;
   (B)   Lighting fixtures maintained by a governmental entity within a public
right-of-way or public easement for the principal purpose of illuminating a
road, highway, sidewalk, or trail; except that no exemption shall apply to any
such lighting that is primarily directed toward property outside the right-of-
way or public easement;
   (C)   Lighting for public monuments and statuary on public property;
   (D)   Lighting solely for signs regulated by and in compliance with Chapter
14 of the Land Development Code;
   (E)   Temporary lighting for theatrical, television, performance areas and
construction sites;
   (F)   Underwater lighting in swimming pools and other water features;
   (G)   Temporary lighting and seasonal lighting with individual bulbs less
than ten watts and 70 lumens;
   (H)   Lighting that is only used for emergency conditions or situations;
   (I)   Lighting approved for a special event in connection with a special use
permit; and
   (J)   Lighting required by federal or state laws and regulations.
(Ord. 180807, passed 8-7-2018)
§ 100.06 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be effective on January 1, 2019
(Ord. 180807, passed 8-7-2018)
§ 100.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $200. Enforcement pursuant
to this section shall not have any effect on any other remedy available
pursuant to applicable law, including suit for injunctive relief.
(Ord. 180807, passed 8-7-2018)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   VEHICLE TOWING
      
111.   SOLICITATION
      
112.   HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX
      
113.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
CHAPTER 110: VEHICLE TOWING
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Purpose
   
110.02   Definitions
   
110.03   License, registration required
   
110.04   Tow rotation list
   
110.05   Publication
   
110.06   Effective date
Regulations
   
110.20   Driving tow trucks to scene of collision prohibited
   
110.21   Vehicle storage facility
   
110.22   Soliciting towing business on city street prohibited
   
110.23   Duties of tow companies
 
   
110.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the performance of vehicle towing
in the city and to provide for the public health and safety in the removal of
unauthorized vehicles and vehicles involved in traffic incidents and to ensure
orderly response to traffic incidents in the public streets and parking
facilities.
(Ord. 090127, passed 1-27-2009)
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Sunset Valley.
   CONSENT TOW. Any tow of a vehicle initiated by the owner or operator of the
vehicle or by a person who has possession, custody or control of the vehicle.
The term does not include a tow of a motor vehicle initiated by a peace officer
investigating a traffic accident or a traffic incident that involves the
vehicle.
   NON-CONSENT TOW. Any tow of a vehicle that is not a consent tow.
   PERSON. A person or entity.
   TOW COMPANY. An individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity
engaged in the tow business and includes the owner, operator, employee or agent
of the tow company, but does not include a political subdivision of the state.
   TOW ROTATION LIST. A list prepared and maintained by the City Police
Department of tow companies which have requested and qualified to appear
thereon.
   TOW TRUCK. A vehicle, including a wrecker, equipped with a mechanical device
used to tow, winch or otherwise move another vehicle.
   VSF. A garage, parking lot or other facility used to store or park vehicles,
including a facility licensed pursuant to Tex. Occupations Code Ch. 2303.
(Ord. 090127, passed 1-27-2009)
§ 110.03 LICENSE, REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Unlawful to operate without license. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate a tow company and make non-consent tows in the city unless
the person possesses all current, valid licenses and permits required by state
law for the type of tow performed.
   (B)   Registration.
      (1)   All tow companies who perform non-consent tows in the city shall
first submit a registration to the City Police Department on a form provided by
the city. Provided that, the applicant remains in compliance with applicable
state law, a registration shall remain valid for a period of two years.
Registrants must comply with the regulations provided in §§
110.20 through
110.23. A fee of $15 is payable for each registration.
      (2)   All registrants shall be required to provide a list of all
authorized tow truck operators with driver’s license numbers on the
registration. The list may be amended from time to time by the registrant
without additional fee for the duration of the then pending registration.
(Ord. 090127, passed 1-27-2009) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.04 TOW ROTATION LIST.
   The City Police Department has established and maintains a tow rotation
list. This section provides qualifications and procedures for participating in
the tow rotation list.
   (A)   Qualifications. To be qualified for inclusion on the tow rotation list
a tow company must:
      (1)   Maintain a 24-hour tow service;
      (2)   Have not less than one telephone number which is answered 24 hours
a day, seven days a week;
      (3)   Use a VSF for storage of any vehicle towed in the city that meets
or exceeds the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) accessibility criteria
established by the United States Department of Justice and certify same in an
application for participation in the tow rotation list;
      (4)   Maintain a valid registration to perform non-consent tows in the
city;
      (5)   Comply with all state regulations; and
      (6)   Comply with all regulations of §§
110.20 through
110.23.
   (B)   Restrictions. Only those tow trucks that are included on the tow
company’s tow truck license are authorized to respond to a rotation call. Only
those persons identified in a registration submitted to the City Police
Department are authorized to perform a tow pursuant to the city’s tow rotation
list procedure. A tow company may not substitute a tow truck owned or operated
by another person when responding to a dispatch. A list of authorized drivers
and trucks will be in each patrol vehicle.
   (C)   Forfeiture of calls. Failure of any tow rotation list participant to
respond to the location dispatched by the city within 40 minutes of being
called will result in the forfeiture of that call. A tow company may not
complete a tow more than 40 minutes after the person was dispatched without
prior approval of a city police officer.
   (D)   Temporary removal from list. Should a tow company wish to be removed
from the tow rotation list for a specific period of time, the tow company shall
notify the City Police Department. It shall be the tow company’s responsibility
to notify the Police Department of the date when the tow company wishes to be
restored to the tow rotation list.
   (E)   Unneeded calls. If a tow company is called to respond to a scene by a
police officer and subsequently is not needed, that tow company will be placed
as “next in line” on the tow rotation list.
   (F)   Fee for being on the tow rotation list. A tow company desiring to be
placed on the tow rotation list shall pay an annual administrative fee of $200
to defray the cost of administering, updating and maintaining the tow rotation
list. This fee shall not be prorated or refundable.
   (G)   Violations.
      (1)   A tow truck driver with more than four violations of traffic laws
in the prior two years will not be permitted to respond to calls for service. A
tow company shall notify the City Police Department whenever a driver
authorized on the tow company’s registration exceeds the allowed number of
violations.
      (2)   The City Police Department may from time to time investigate the
driver record of authorized listed drivers.
(Ord. 090127, passed 1-27-2009)
§ 110.05 PUBLICATION.
   A caption that summarizes the purpose of this chapter and the penalty for
violating this chapter shall be published as provided by Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code §
52.011.
(Ord. 090127, passed 1-27-2009)
§ 110.06 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be effective immediately upon adoption. However, this
chapter shall be enforced until publication has occurred in compliance with §
110.05.
(Ord. 090127, passed 1-27-2009)
REGULATIONS
§ 110.20 DRIVING TOW TRUCKS TO SCENE OF COLLISION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall drive, or cause to be driven, a tow truck to the scene of a
collision on a street within the city for the purpose of towing a vehicle
involved in the collision unless the person has been called to the scene by the
City Police Department or other person involved in the collision.
(Ord. 090127, passed 1-27-2009) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.21 VEHICLE STORAGE FACILITY.
   Each person performing non-consent tows shall utilize a vehicle storage
facility located in the county for storage of vehicles towed. This VSF must be
in compliance with all state regulations.
(Ord. 090127, passed 1-27-2009) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.22 SOLICITING TOWING BUSINESS ON CITY STREET PROHIBITED.
   No tow company shall solicit in any manner, directly or indirectly, a person
owning/operating any vehicle which is wrecked or involved in a traffic accident
on a public street. This prohibition applies regardless of whether the
solicitation is for the purpose of soliciting business of towing, repairing,
selling or purchasing the vehicle.
(Ord. 090127, passed 1-27-2009) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.23 DUTIES OF TOW COMPANIES.
   It shall be the obligation of all tow companies performing tows in the city
to operate the tow business in the city in a safe manner, to include, but not
limited to, the following.
   (A)   Taking direction from investigating officer. Upon arrival at the scene
of a collision within the city, tow truck operators shall take directions from
the police officer investigating the collision.
   (B)   Removing debris of collision. Tow truck operators that engage and tow
any vehicle from the scene of a collision within the city shall remove all
debris (other than hazardous materials) of the collision from the public
street. This duty specifically includes the removal of vehicle parts, glass and
other debris. The debris shall be disposed of in a lawful manner which will
keep it out of the gutters, storm sewers, streams, public right-of-way or
property not belonging to the tow company.
   (C)   Disengaging. A tow truck that removes a vehicle from the original
location shall not disengage from the vehicle until the vehicle has been
deposited with the appropriate VSF, except when the vehicle is released to the
owner or operator or when the owner or operator specifies the location of
disengagement. This restriction is enacted to prohibit tow trucks from engaging
an unauthorized vehicle in a parking facility and moving it to a close
location, then returning for another unauthorized vehicle, ultimately towing
all the relocated vehicles to a VSF.
   (D)   Drops. A stationary tow truck that has connected a vehicle shall
release the vehicle to its owner or operator upon payment of the “drop fee” and
will not tow the vehicle, except when the vehicle is being taken into custody
by a police officer. A vehicle is “connected” if it is at least partially
attached to the tow truck or when skates/dollies have been placed under the
vehicle. A vehicle is not “connected” if the tow truck has merely backed up to
the vehicle.
   (E)   Response while impaired prohibited. No driver of a wrecker shall
respond to a dispatch when he or she is under the influence of alcoholic
beverages, controlled substances or is otherwise impaired.
   (F)   Proficiency. All operators and wrecker drivers on the rotation list
shall be proficient and competent in the operation of the wrecker, as
determined by state law.
   (G)   Reflective wear required. All tow truck drivers shall wear reflective
vests, coats or shirts while on the scene of any dispatch. These vests will be
in compliance with TDLR requirements.
   (H)   Notification of make and model. Tow companies shall notify the City
Police Department of the make and model of the vehicle towed and the location
from which the vehicle was towed at the time the tow is effected, unless the
tow company was dispatched pursuant to the tow rotation list procedure.
   (I)   Felony offenses. No person convicted a felony offense in the prior
five years shall make a non-consent tow in the city.
(Ord. 090127, passed 1-27-2009) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   In addition to criminal penalties provided in this chapter, a tow
company registered on the tow rotation list may be subject to sanctions for a
violation of a provision of this chapter, depending on the nature of
infraction, number of infractions, culpability of the tow company for the
actions of its drivers and other circumstances. The sanctions shall be
determined by the City Chief of Police. The sanctions may range from warning,
to suspension or termination of the registration to participate in the tow
rotation list. The level of sanction shall be determined by the severity of the
offense, whether the tow company has any prior violations and whether the
conduct indicates a likelihood of a repeat offense, all in consideration of the
continuing safety and convenience of the public. The tow company will be given
advance notice of the sanction to be imposed and will be permitted to make a
written presentation to the Chief of Police prior to enforcement of the
sanction. The Chief of Police shall have the final decision as to the action
taken. The Chief of Police may elect to present the findings to the City Public
Safety Committee for a recommendation prior to making a final decision.
   (B)   A violation of this chapter shall be a Class C misdemeanor punishable
by fine up to a maximum of $500.
(Ord. 090127, passed 1-27-2009)
CHAPTER 111: SOLICITATION
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Application
   
111.03   Application for registration
   
111.04   Certificate of registration
   
111.05   Duration
   
111.06   Nontransferable registration
   
111.07   Hours and places of solicitations
   
111.08   Revocation of registration
   
111.09   Appeal from revocation/denial of registration certificate
   
111.10   Placement on a no solicitation list
   
111.11   Prohibited conduct
Commercial Solicitations
   
111.20   Registration required
   
111.21   Exceptions
Religious/Political/Charitable Solicitations
   
111.30   Application of subchapter
   
111.31   Registration required
   
111.32   Exceptions
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   RESIDENCE and RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Refers to a separate living unit
occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons.
   SOLICIT and SOLICITATION. Refers to any one or more of the following
activities occurring in person (excluding communications: (i) by telephone or
other remote electronic means; (ii) delivered by private or U.S. mail service;
or (iii) printed or recorded material distributed to property and not to
persons) on public or private property neither owned nor leased by the one
soliciting, nor conducted with the permission of the owner, lessee, or resident
of the property:
      (1)   To offer for sale or to obtain orders for the purchase of goods or
services for money or other consideration;
      (2)   To obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing, or any other
valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable, religious, or
political nonprofit association, organization, corporation, or project;
      (3)   To poll, canvass, or engage in any other communications in
connection with any political, religious, or charitable, endeavor, that does
not include any verbal or written request for contributions of money or other
property;
      (4)   To request or obtain signatures on any petition, communication, or
statement of support for any purpose, where no verbal or written request for
contribution of money or other property is made; or
      (5)   To request money or property for personal use, which request
neither is nor is proposed to be: (i) a commercial exchange for mutual
consideration; or (ii) a contribution for the benefit of any third party
charitable or non-profit purpose (included in this definition shall be conduct
commonly referred to as panhandling).
(Ord. 110301-B, passed 3-1-2011)
§ 111.02 APPLICATION.
   The regulations contained in this subchapter shall apply to all solicitors
and persons conducting solicitations in the city except as otherwise expressly
provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 110301-B, passed 3-1-2011)
§ 111.03 APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Except with regard to solicitations described in §
111.01(3) and (4), and except as provided with regard to exceptions provided in
§§
111.20,
111.21, and
111.30 through
111.32, any person desiring to solicit within the city must be eligible to
register, and shall, prior to engaging in any solicitation, file a written
application for a registration to solicit with the City Administrator, which
application shall show:
      (1)   The name, physical description (sex, height, weight, and hair
color) and address and telephone number of the applicant; if the applicant is
an entity, the name, address, and telephone number of the entity shall be
provided, along with the name(s), address(es), telephone number(s), and
physical descriptions of the person(s) who will be soliciting in the city;
      (2)   For an individual, the name and address of the employer or firm, as
applicable, which such applicant represents;
      (3)   A general description of the goods or services that are the subject
of the proposed solicitation;
      (4)   For solicitations involving the sale of goods or services, whether
the applicant will request, accept or receive payment in advance of final
delivery of goods or services;
      (5)   The period of time such applicant intends to solicit in the city;
      (6)   A description of any vehicle(s) to be used by the applicant or its
identified agents in connection with such solicitation.
   (B)   For an application for registration involving representation of a
company, entity or person other than the person submitting the application, the
applicant shall show satisfactory proof of his or her authority to serve as a
representative or agent. All persons submitting an application shall present
valid identification (driver's license, passport, or other government-issued
photo identification), or, if the person has no such identification, the person
shall attest in writing that he or she has no such identification and shall
permit a photograph of the person to be taken and included with the
application.
   (C)   A person or entity, as applicable, shall not be eligible for a
registration to solicit in the city if:
      (1)   The person has been convicted of an offense prescribed by this
chapter during the one year period prior to submitting to the city an
application for registration to solicit;
      (2)   The person has been convicted of an offense in any jurisdiction
involving aggressive or disruptive conduct while soliciting during the one year
period prior to submitting to the city an application for registration to
solicit;
      (3)   The person identifies on the application for registration to
solicit a sponsoring person, organization, or company that has either been
convicted of an offense prescribed by this chapter, or was the sponsoring
person, organization, or company identified in the applicable registration of a
person convicted of an offense prescribed by this chapter during the one year
period prior to submitting to the city an application for registration to
solicit;
      (4)   The person has ever been convicted of sexual based offense and/or
is a registered sex offender; or
      (5)   The person or entity includes in the application any material false
information.
   (D)   Certificate(s) of registration described in §
111.04 shall be issued by the City Administrator not later than two business
days after submission of an application therefore unless it is determined that
the applicant or any person or entity identified in the application is
ineligible for registration. Written notice of ineligibility will promptly be
provided in person or by delivery to the address for the person or entity
provided in the application.
(Ord. 110301-B, passed 3-1-2011)
§ 111.04 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   When issued in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, certificates
of registration shall contain the following information: The name of the
sponsoring company, entity or person (as applicable), the name of the
individual solicitor, a registration number, the date of expiration, and the
signature of the City Administrator or his or her designee. It shall be
unlawful for any person who is required by the provisions of this chapter to
register or to be identified in a registration to solicit to engage in
solicitation without having such certificate in his or her possession; and it
shall further be unlawful for such solicitor to fail or refuse to show or
display such certificate upon the request of any person demanding the same.
(Ord. 110301-B, passed 3-1-2011)
§ 111.05 DURATION.
   A registration shall not remain valid for a period in excess of 180 days,
and may be earlier revoked as provided in this chapter. Upon expiration of a
registration, the applicant may apply for a renewal of the registration on a
form provided by the City Administrator, which may, as applicable, provide for
a verification of information included in an original application, or minor
amendments of such information.
(Ord. 110301-B, passed 3-1-2011)
§ 111.06 NONTRANSFERABLE REGISTRATION.
   No registration issued pursuant to this chapter shall be assignable or
transferable, whether by a sponsoring entity, or by any person identified in an
application.
(Ord. 110301-B, passed 3-1-2011)
§ 111.07 HOURS AND PLACES OF SOLICITATIONS.
   (A)   No solicitation to a residence shall occur between the hours of 8:30
p.m. and 8:30 a.m. the following day.
   (B)   When allowed pursuant to applicable law, solicitation on the public
property described in this division shall be subject to the following
restrictions:
      (1)   A person shall not engage in solicitation while standing in any
public street or on any median located on Brodie Lane or Ernest Robles Way, and
shall not unreasonably block, obstruct or hinder passage on a public street
while engaging in solicitation.
      (2)   While engaging in solicitation a solicitor may not block, obstruct
or unreasonably hinder passage on any public sidewalk, trail, or passageway, or
unreasonably interfere with or obstruct the conduct of business in any public
or private building.
      (3)   A person shall not solicit an occupant of any motor vehicle either:
(i) traveling or stopped for a traffic light on Brodie Lane or an access road
of U.S. Highway 290 in the city limits; or (ii) traveling or stopped for the
traffic light on Ernest Robles Way within 300 feet of its intersection with
Brodie Lane.
      (4)   Solicitation on public property, when permitted, shall not occur
whenever the particular public property is closed to the public and signage is
located on the property announcing the hours of operation or hours the property
is open to the public.
(Ord. 110301-B, passed 3-1-2011) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.08 REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   If, after issuance of a registration certificate, it is determined
that the applicant has knowingly given false or misleading information on his
or her application, any registration certificate issued upon his or her
application shall be revoked, and no further solicitation pursuant to such
registration certificate shall be permitted.
   (B)   If a solicitor who has been issued a registration certificate is
convicted of theft or fraud or of a violation of any state penal law in
connection with the solicitation for which the registration certificate was
issued, the solicitor's registration certificate shall be deemed revoked and no
further solicitation pursuant to such registration certificate shall be
permitted.
   (C)   If a solicitor who has been issued a registration certificate pursuant
to this chapter violates any provision of this chapter, the solicitor's
registration certificate shall be revoked and no further solicitation pursuant
to such registration certificate shall be permitted.
   (D)   Revocation of a registration certificate shall be effective when
written notice thereof is provided to the address of either the individual
solicitor or the address of any sponsoring company, entity, or person at the
address listed in the application for registration submitted to the City
Administrator, or delivered in person to the person subject to revocation.
(Ord. 110301-B, passed 3-1-2011)
§ 111.09 APPEAL FROM REVOCATION/DENIAL OF REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE.
   A person or entity whose registration certificate has been revoked or who/
which was determined to be ineligible for a registration may appeal the action
to the City Council by submitting to the City Administrator a letter of appeal
setting out all bases for the appeal not later than ten days after notice of
the action complained of. A hearing on the appeal will then be scheduled for
the next regular meeting of the Council for which notice may timely be provided
pursuant to the Open Meetings Act, or at a special meeting of the City Council,
to be held not later than 15 days after receipt of the request for appeal. The
City Council will render a decision on the appeal within ten days of such
hearing.
(Ord. 110301-B, passed 3-1-2011)
§ 111.10 PLACEMENT ON A NO SOLICITATION LIST.
   (A)   The City Administrator will maintain a list of those residents who
have posted no solicitation signs on their property in accordance with this
chapter and/or state law and who have requested that their address be included
on the list. Owners or occupants of residences within the city may contact the
City Administrator and request to be placed on the list. A request to be
included on such list shall be valid for a one-year period.
   (B)   The City Administrator shall furnish the list described in division
(A) of this section to every person or organization that is granted a
registration pursuant to this chapter. Such list will include addresses only of
affected properties.
   (C)   No person shall solicit in person at a residence if the owner or
occupant of such residence has posted a sign no larger than two square feet at
the entrance of the driveway leading to the property, or conspicuously affixed
on or near the front door of such property, a sign which reads "No Solicitors
or Canvassers Allowed."
(Ord. 110301-B, passed 3-1-2011)
§ 111.11 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   A person engaged in solicitation shall not:
   (A)   Make unwanted physical contact with the person being solicited unless
that person's permission is obtained;
   (B)   Misrepresent the purpose of the solicitation;
   (C)   Misrepresent the affiliation of those engaged in the solicitation;
   (D)   Continue efforts to solicit from an individual once that individual
informs the solicitor that he or she does not wish to give anything to or to
buy anything from that solicitor;
   (E)   Fail to obtain a registration pursuant to this chapter when required
by the terms of this chapter to so register;
   (F)   Knowingly or willfully provide false or misleading information in any
registration submitted pursuant to this chapter; or
   (G)   Solicit during any times, or at any places, or in any manner
prohibited by this chapter.
(Ord. 110301-B, passed 3-1-2011) Penalty, see §
111.99
COMMERCIAL SOLICITATIONS
§ 111.20 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   No persons shall solicit in the city for the sale of goods,
merchandise, wares, services or anything of value or to take or attempt to take
orders for the future delivery of goods, merchandise, wares or anything of
value, or take or attempt to take orders for services to be furnished or
performed in the future, without first registering therefore.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall also apply to solicitations for a
charitable, educational, political, patriotic, or philanthropic purpose that
does include a verbal or written request for contributions of money or other
property.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to individuals or
organizations making solicitations for religious, charitable, or political
endeavors that do not include any verbal or written request for contributions
of money or other property.
   (D)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons or
organizations requesting or obtaining signatures on any petition,
communication, or statement of support for any purpose where no verbal or
written request for contribution of money or other property is made.
(Ord. 110301-B, passed 3-1-2011) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.21 EXCEPTIONS.
   The registration requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the
following:
   (A)   Ordinary commercial salespersons who sell or exhibit for sale goods,
wares or merchandise to persons regularly engaged in the business of buying,
selling and dealing in the same within the city.
   (B)   Persons soliciting on the property by express prior invitation of the
person residing on such premises.
   (C)   Persons soliciting pursuant to an occupational license granted by a
state agency.
(Ord. 110301-B, passed 3-1-2011)
RELIGIOUS/POLITICAL/CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
§ 111.30 APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER.
   This subchapter applies to the types of solicitation described in §
111.01(2).
(Ord. 110301-B, passed 3-1-2011)
§ 111.31 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to conduct any charitable solicitations on the streets,
in any office building or any other public or private place, or by house-to-
house canvass in the city unless the person conducting the same and responsible
therefore shall first have obtained a registration certificate in compliance
with the terms of §§
111.01 through
111.11.
(Ord. 110301-B, passed 3-1-2011) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.32 EXCEPTIONS.
   The registration provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any:
   (A)   Organization which solicits funds solely from its own members or from
its own assemblies, not using public streets or public places for such
purposes;
   (B)   Individuals or organizations making solicitations for religious or
non-profit charitable endeavors that do not include any verbal or written
request for contributions of money or other property.
(Ord. 110301-B, passed 3-1-2011)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.
(Ord. 110301-B, passed 3-1-2011)
CHAPTER 112: HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Tax levied; amount; exceptions
   
112.03   Collection of tax
   
112.04   Quarterly reports to City Treasurer
   
112.05   Rules and regulations of City Treasurer; access to books and records
   
112.06   Allocation and use of revenue derived from levy of tax
   
112.07   Effective date
 
   
112.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Taxation and levies, see
TSO IX
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Sunset Valley.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Sunset Valley.
   CONSIDERATION. The cost of the room in a hotel only if the room is
ordinarily used for sleeping, and not including the cost of any food served or
personal services rendered to the occupant of the room unless related to the
cleaning and readying of the room for occupancy.
   HOTEL. Any building or buildings located within the corporate limits or
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city in which the public may, for a
consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations, including, without limitation,
hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming
houses, bed and breakfasts or other buildings where rooms are furnished for a
consideration, but not including, hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes or
dormitories wholly owned, leased or operated by an institution of higher
education.
   OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of
any room or rooms in a hotel if the room is one which is ordinarily used for
sleeping and if the occupant is other than a permanent resident, as hereinafter
defined.
   OCCUPANT. Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to
use or possess any room or rooms in a hotel under any lease, concession,
permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement, other than a permanent
resident, as hereinafter defined.
   PERMANENT RESIDENT. Any on-site employee who has the right to use or possess
a room in a hotel.
   PERSON. Any individual, company, corporation or association owning,
operating, managing or controlling any hotel.
   QUARTERLY PERIOD. The regular calendar quarters of the year, the first
quarter being composed of the months of October, November and December; the
second quarter being the months of January, February and March; the third
quarter being the months of April, May and June; and the fourth quarter being
the months of July, August and September.
(Ord. 000215, passed 2-15-2000)
§ 112.02 TAX LEVIED; AMOUNT; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   There is hereby levied a tax of 7% on the consideration paid for a
room in a hotel on every occupant who, under a lease, concession, permit, right
of access, license, contract or agreement, pays for the use or possession or
for the right to the use or possession of a room that is in a hotel, costs $2
or more each day, and which is ordinarily used for sleeping.
   (B)   Exceptions are as follows:
      (1)   No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident;
      (2)   No tax shall be imposed hereunder on the United States, the state
or an agency, institution, board or commission of the state, other than an
institution of higher education. For purposes of this chapter, INSTITUTION OF
HIGHER EDUCATION has the meaning assigned by Tex. Education Code Art. 61.003
(Vernon 1991). No tax shall be imposed on an officer or employee of a
governmental entity described in this division (B)(2) when traveling on or
otherwise engaged in the course of official duties for the governmental entity.
   (C)   The City Council shall be authorized to reduce the rate of taxation
applied to hotels within the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction when
necessary to ensure that the combined rate of state, county and municipal hotel
occupancy taxes in the extraterritorial jurisdiction does not exceed 15% of the
price paid for a room in a hotel.
(Ord. 000215, passed 2-15-2000)
§ 112.03 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   (A)   Collection generally. Every person owning, operating, managing or
controlling any hotel or collecting payment for occupancy in any hotel shall
collect the tax levied by this chapter for the city.
   (B)   Collection procedures on purchase of hotel.
      (1)   If a person who is liable for the payment of a tax under this
chapter is the owner of a hotel and sells the hotel, the successor to the
seller or the seller’s designee shall withhold an amount of the purchase price
sufficient to pay the amount of tax due until the seller provides a receipt
issued by the City Treasurer showing that the amount has been paid or a
certificate issued by the City Treasurer showing that no tax is due.
      (2)   The purchaser of a hotel who fails to withhold an amount of the
purchase price as required by this section is liable for the amount of tax
required to be withheld to the extent of the value of the purchase price.
      (3)   The purchaser of a hotel may file a written request with the City
Treasurer for the issuance of a certificate stating that no tax is due or for
the issuance of a statement of the amount required to be paid before a
certificate may be issued. The City Treasurer shall issue the certificate or
statement not later than the sixtieth day after the date that the City
Treasurer receives the request.
      (4)   If the City Treasurer fails to issue the certificate or statement
within the period provided by division (B)(3) above, the purchaser is released
from the obligation to withhold the amount of tax from the purchase price or
pay the amount of tax due.
(Ord. 000215, passed 2-15-2000)
§ 112.04 QUARTERLY REPORTS TO CITY TREASURER.
   (A)   On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every
person required to collect the tax imposed by this chapter, as amended from
time to time, shall file a report with the City Treasurer showing the
consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the
amount of the tax collected on the occupancies, and the amount of permanent and
regular exemptions granted. A copy of the concurrent quarterly “Texas Hotel and
Motel Tax Report” filed with the state by the hotel shall be attached to the
quarterly report. The names, addresses and identification relied upon in the
granting of exemptions to the collection of the tax levied by this chapter, and
any other information the City Treasurer may reasonably required shall be
accessible for review by the city. The tax due on the occupancies shall be paid
at the time of filing the quarterly report. The report shall be in the form
prescribed by the City Treasurer. The City Treasurer is hereby authorized and
directed to do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the terms of
this chapter. The City Treasurer shall have the authority to request and
receive, within a reasonable time, additional documentation verifying the
information contained in the report to the city by the hotel.
   (B)   All hotels collecting taxes hereunder shall hold the monies in a
separate liability account and may not use the monies for any purpose other
than payment to the city as provided for herein.
(Ord. 000215, passed 2-15-2000)
§ 112.05 RULES AND REGULATIONS OF CITY TREASURER; ACCESS TO BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   The City Treasurer shall have the power to make the rules and regulations as
are reasonable and necessary to effectively collect the tax levied hereby, and
shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and records necessary to
enable it to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this
chapter and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 000215, passed 2-15-2000)
§ 112.06 ALLOCATION AND USE OF REVENUE DERIVED FROM LEVY OF TAX.
   (A)   The revenue derived from the hotel occupancy tax imposed and levied by
this chapter may be used only to promote tourism and the convention and hotel
industry, according to the following allocations for the purposes stated as
follows.
      (1)   The funds collected shall be allocated to the Tourism/Promotion
Fund and may be used for:
         (a)   Historical restoration and preservation projects or activities
or advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to
encourage tourists and convention delegates to visit preserved historic sites
or museums which are not in the immediate vicinity of convention facilities; or
which are located elsewhere in the city or its vicinity that would be
frequented by tourists, convention delegates or other visitors to the city;
         (b)   The Cultural Arts Fund, for the encouragement, promotion,
improvement and application of the arts, including instrumental and vocal
music, dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, architecture, design and
allied fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion
pictures, radio, television, tape and sound recording and other arts related to
the presentation, performance, execution and exhibition of these major art
forms; and
         (c)   The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement,
enlargement, equipping, repairing, operation and maintenance of civic centers,
civic center buildings, auditoriums, exhibition halls and visitor information
centers that are owned by the municipality or other governmental entity or that
are managed in whole or in part by the municipality.
      (2)   Revenue derived from the hotel occupancy tax shall be expended only
in a manner which directly enhances and promotes tourism and the convention and
hotel industry as hereinbefore delineated. The revenue shall not be used for
the general revenue purposes or general governmental operations of the city.
   (B)   The provisions of the Tex. Tax Code § 351.101(c) through (j) (Vernon
1982), as the same may be amended from time to time, shall govern the use of
tax revenues for promotion of tourism as these divisions apply.
(Ord. 000215, passed 2-15-2000)
§ 112.07 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be effective from the date of its
adoption.
(Ord. 000215, passed 2-15-2000)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   If any person shall fail to file a report as required herein or
shall file a false report or shall fail to pay to the City Treasurer the tax as
imposed herein when the report or payment is due, he or she shall pay in
addition to the amount otherwise required to be paid hereunder an additional
sum equal to 5% of the amount due as penalty and, after the first 30 days, he
or she shall pay an additional 5% of the tax. However, the penalty shall never
be less than $1. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of 10% per
annum beginning 60 days from the due date.
      (2)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter,
including persons who fail to collect the tax, fail to file a return, file a
false return or who are delinquent in his or her tax payment, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined in any sum not to exceed
$500, and each 24 hours of any violation shall constitute a separate offense.
      (3)   The city is hereby authorized to take the following actions against
any person required to collect the tax imposed hereby and pay the collection
over to the city and who has failed to file a report, or filed a false report,
or failed to pay the tax when due:
         (a)   Bring suit against the person for non-compliance to collect the
tax not paid; and/or
         (b)   Any other remedy provided under state law.
   (B)   The City Attorney is hereby authorized to take the following actions
against any person required to collect the tax imposed hereby and pay the
collection over to the city and who has failed to file a report, or filed a
false report, or failed to pay the tax when due. The suit may seek to enjoin
the person from operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the
report is filed or both, as applicable and as provided in the injunction.
   (C)   The enforcement mechanisms delineated herein are cumulative and not
exclusive and the city shall have the right to pursue any other remedies
permitted under equity or law.
(Ord. 000215, passed 2-15-2000)
CHAPTER 113: TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
Section
   
113.01   Tax authorized
   
113.02   Exemption application
   
113.03   Rate of tax
   
113.04   Copies of provisions
   
113.05   Effective date
   
113.06   Provisions cumulative
Cross-reference:
   Taxation and levies, see
TSO IX
§ 113.01 TAX AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold
within the city.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications services
is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications
device from which the call or other communication originates.
   (C)   If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated
at the address to which the call or other communication is billed.
(Ord. 870707, passed 7-7-1987)
§ 113.02 EXEMPTION APPLICATION.
   The application of the exemption provided for in Tex. Tax Code §§ 321.002 et
seq., is hereby repealed by the city, as authorized by this statute.
(Ord. 870707, passed 7-7-1987)
§ 113.03 RATE OF TAX.
   The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate
imposed by the city for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by
the legislature of the state.
(Ord. 870707, passed 7-7-1987)
§ 113.04 COPIES OF PROVISIONS.
   The City Secretary shall forward to the Comptroller of the state by United
States registered or certified mail a copy of this chapter along with a copy of
the minutes of the City Council’s vote and discussion on this chapter.
(Ord. 870707, passed 7-7-1987)
§ 113.05 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This section shall become effective as of 10-1-1987.
(Ord. 870707, passed 7-7-1987)
§ 113.06 PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE.
   This chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be cumulative of all other
ordinances of the city and this chapter shall not operate to repeal or affect
any other ordinances. The tax provided for hereunder shall not serve as an
offset to, be in lieu of or in any way reduce any amount payable to the city
pursuant to any franchise, street use ordinance, charter provision, statute or,
without limitation by the foregoing enumeration, otherwise payable by any
provider of telecommunications service; it being the express intent hereof that
all obligations, impositions and agreements of every kind and nature shall
remain in full force and effect without reduction or limitation hereby.
(Ord. 870707, passed 7-7-1987)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   FIREARMS; HUNTING
CHAPTER 130: FIREARMS; HUNTING
Section
   
130.01   Discharge prohibited; definition
   
130.02   Wild game; shooting, killing, hunting
   
130.03   Exceptions
   
130.04   Effective date
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 DISCHARGE PROHIBITED; DEFINITION.
   Except as provided in §
130.03, it shall be unlawful to discharge any firearms of any type within the
city limits. For the purposes of this chapter, a FIREARM shall mean any device
designed, made or adapted to expel a projectile through a barrel by using the
energy generated by an explosion, burning substance, gas, compressed air or
spring and mechanical devices or any other device to propel an object in a
controlled direction.
(Ord. 871006A, passed 10-6-1987) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 WILD GAME; SHOOTING, KILLING, HUNTING.
   The willful shooting, killing or hunting of any wild game within the city
limits is hereby specifically prohibited.
(Ord. 871006A, passed 10-6-1987) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the following:
   (A)   Any certified state peace officer from discharging a firearm in the
performance of his or her official duty;
   (B)   Any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person
or property; and/or
   (C)   Any fully enclosed pistol range which has received approval for
operation from the City Council.
(Ord. 871006A, passed 10-6-1987)
§ 130.04 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective on 10-25-1987.
(Ord. 871006A, passed 10-6-1987)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$500. Each day of the violation shall constitute a separate offense. The
penalty shall be cumulative and not exclusive of any other rights or remedies
the city may have.
(Ord. 871006A, passed 10-6-1987)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
CHAPTER 150: LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Editor's note:
   This Chapter 150 was originally enacted by an ordinance passed on September
17, 1996. Said ordinance was subsequently amended by ordinances passed on:
November 4, 1996; January 21, 1997; February 17, 1998; March 3, 1998; July 7,
1998; July 21, 1998; May 18, 1999; June 1, 1999; March 7, 2000; March 6, 2001;
March 19, 2002; October 15, 2002; February 18, 2003; January 12, 2005; January
10, 2006; February 7, 2006; March 21, 2006; April 18, 2006; October 17, 2006;
February 20, 2007; April 3, 2007; May 15, 2007; May 13, 2008; June 10, 2008;
June 24, 2008; January 13, 2009; May 5, 2009; July 7, 2009; September 8, 2009;
January 19, 2010; August 17, 2010; November 1, 2011; March 20, 2012; February
19, 2013; March 19, 2013; April 2, 2013; July 16, 2013; October 8, 2013;
December 3, 2013; May 6, 2014; May 20, 2014; September 2, 2014; November 11,
2014; December 17, 2014; January 20, 2015; March 25, 2015; July 7, 2015; July
2, 2017; June 5, 2018; August 7, 2018; July 2, 2019; and October 29, 2019.
Subsequent amendments to the ordinance passed on October 29, 2019 will be
indicated by legislation histories placed at the end of the affected sections.
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Short title
   
150.002   Purposes
   
150.003   Authority
   
150.004   Jurisdiction
   
150.005   Relationship to Comprehensive Plan
   
150.006   Definitions
   
150.007   General rules of construction
   
150.008   Conflict with private restrictions
   
150.009   Inconsistent provisions
   
150.010   Extension of deadlines
   
150.011   Applicability of land development to City of Sunset Valley
   
150.012   Grandfathering established by date of initial application
   
150.013   Exceptions
   
150.014   Procedure; applicable to all applications and requests for approval
   
150.015   Deadlines and expiration dates not extended
   
150.016   Updating submittals; requirements
   
150.017   No vested rights
   
150.018   State law primacy
   
150.019   Application defined
   
150.020   Fair notice requirements
   
150.021   Suspension and revocation of permit or license
Zoning Commission
   
150.030   Zoning Commission created
   
150.031   Term of office
   
150.032   Powers and duties
   
150.033   Organization and rules
Board of Adjustment
   
150.045   Term of office of prior members of Board of Adjustment
   
150.046   Membership
   
150.047   Procedures
   
150.048   Qualifications for membership
Zoning Procedures
   
150.060   Public hearings of applications for special use permit zoning
variances, zoning changes and zoning amendment and appeals from administrative
action
   
150.061   Joint meetings by the Zoning Commission and the City Council
   
150.062   Similar applications within six months prohibited
   
150.063   Application fees
   
150.064   Amendments
   
150.065   Suspending issuance of permits and approvals
   
150.066   Variances
Zoning General Provisions; Enforcement
   
150.080   Purpose
   
150.081   The zoned district in general
   
150.082   Establishment of zoning districts
   
150.083   Official Zoning Map
   
150.084   Rules for interpreting district boundaries
   
150.085   Zoning of newly annexed areas
   
150.086   Enforcement
Zoning; Land Use
   
150.100   Determination of permitted uses and structures
   
150.101   Special uses; authorization required
   
150.102   General criteria applicable to all special uses and temporary special
uses
   
150.103   Specific criteria applicable to individual special uses and temporary
special uses
   
150.104   General requirements for all special uses and temporary special uses
   
150.105   Regulations for adjoining districts
   
150.106   Accessory uses and structures
   
150.107   Nonconforming legal lots
   
150.108   Nonconforming uses of land and structures
   
150.109   Non-complying structures
   
150.110   Prohibited uses
   
150.111   Elimination of nuisance factors
   
150.112   Visibility along streets and at street corners
   
150.113   Streets
   
150.114   Signs
   
150.115   Solid waste containers
   
150.116   Television dish antennas
   
150.117   Permit required for certain home occupations in SF, Single Family
Residential Districts
SF, Single Family Residential Districts
   
150.130   Intent of SF, Single Family Residential Districts
   
150.131   SF, Single Family Residential District permitted uses
   
150.132   Special uses permitted in SF, Single Family Residential
   
150.133   Specific standards, SF District
   
150.134   SF, Single Family Residential District
O, Neighborhood Office
   
150.145   Intent of O, Neighborhood Office
   
150.146   O, Neighborhood Office permitted uses
   
150.147   Special uses permitted in O, Neighborhood Office
   
150.148   Specific standards, O District
   
150.149   O, Neighborhood Office District
NC, Neighborhood Commercial
   
150.160   Intent of NC, Neighborhood Commercial
   
150.161   NC, Neighborhood Commercial permitted uses
   
150.162   Special uses permitted in NC, Neighborhood Commercial
   
150.163   Specific standards, NC District
   
150.164   NC, Neighborhood Commercial District
HC, Highway Commercial
   
150.175   Intent of HC, Highway Commercial
   
150.176   HC, Highway Commercial permitted uses
   
150.177   Special uses permitted in HC, Highway Commercial
   
150.178   Specific standards, HC District
   
150.179   HC, Highway Commercial District
GUI, Governmental, Utility and Institutional
   
150.190   Intent of Governmental, Utility and Institutional District
   
150.191   GUI, Governmental, Utility and Institutional District permitted uses
   
150.192   Special uses permitted in GUI, Governmental, Utility and
Institutional
   
150.193   Specific standards in GUI District
   
150.194   GUI, Governmental, Utility and Institutional District
CO, Conditional Overlay Combining District
   
150.205   CO, Conditional Overlay Combining District intent
   
150.206   Conditional Overlay Combining District
P, Parkland; G, Greenspace and Preservation; and C, Conservation
   
150.220   Intent of Parkland District
   
150.221   Parkland District permitted uses and development standard
   
150.222   Intent of Greenspace/Preservation District
   
150.223   Greenspace/Preservation District permitted uses and development
standard
   
150.224   Intent of the Conservation District
   
150.225   Conservation District permitted uses and development standard
Planned Unit Development
   
150.235   Planned Unit Development of Single Family Residential zoned land
General Standards for all Zoning Districts
   
150.245   How to measure lot area, width, depth
   
150.246   Building setback distances
   
150.247   Setbacks for accessory structures other than fences, walls, solid
waste containers and mailboxes
   
150.248   Lot coverage
   
150.249   Height of structure
   
150.250   Minimum floor area for dwellings
   
150.251   Construction requirements
   
150.252   Impervious cover requirements
Subdivision General Provisions
   
150.265   Authority, applicability of Land Development Code
   
150.266   Purpose
   
150.267   Special provisions
   
150.268   Fiscal security requested
   
150.269   Variances
   
150.270   Authority of the City Council
Subdivision Procedures
   
150.280   Subdivision fair notice
   
150.281   Preliminary plat and accompanying data
   
150.282   Final plat
   
150.283   Standards and specifications
   
150.284   Vacation of plat or subdivision
   
150.285   Burden of proof
Platting Requirements
   
150.295   Monuments
   
150.296   Alleys
   
150.297   Utility easements
   
150.298   Streets
   
150.299   Blocks
   
150.300   Crosswalk ways
   
150.301   Lots
   
150.302   Sidewalks
   
150.303   Short form subdivisions
   
150.304   Parks and other public uses
   
150.305   Wastewater system installation
   
150.306   Responsibility for payment of installation costs
   
150.307   Drainage
   
150.308   Water system installation
   
150.309   Regional water quality control facilities for Single Family
Residential subdivisions
Watershed Development
   
150.320   Authority, applicability of Land Development Code
   
150.321   Purpose
   
150.322   Permit required
   
150.323   Variances and administrative approvals
   
150.324   Exemptions
   
150.325   Site plan submittals
   
150.326   Additional requirements for issuance of watershed development permit
for deposits of fill unrelated to onsite construction activities
   
150.327   Single family residential small project requirements
   
150.328   Critical water quality zone
   
150.329   Water quality transition zone
   
150.330   Upland zone
   
150.331   Building sites
   
150.332   Impervious cover
   
150.333   Impervious cover limits for non-commercial, non-residential
development
   
150.334   Standards and specifications; general
   
150.335   Erosion sedimentation control and construction sequencing; dust
control
   
150.336   Water quality controls
   
150.337   Additional pollution reduction requirements
   
150.338   Landscape
   
150.339   Ecological considerations
   
150.340   Standards for vegetative buffer water quality controls
   
150.341   Violations
   
150.342   Adopting Drainage Criteria Manual
   
150.343   Drainage; general
   
150.344   Overland flow
   
150.345   Drainage facilities
   
150.346   Design criteria
   
150.347   Easements
   
150.348   Roadway drainage
   
150.349   Maintenance and compliance
Flood Loss Control
   
150.360   Statutory authorization
   
150.361   Findings of fact
   
150.362   Statement of purpose
   
150.363   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
150.364   Lands to which this subchapter applies
   
150.365   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
150.366   Establishment of development permit
   
150.367   Compliance
   
150.368   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
150.369   Interpretation
   
150.370   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
150.371   Development permit application form, development permit form and
development permit exemption certificate
   
150.372   Establishment of fees
   
150.373   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
   
150.374   Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator
   
150.375   Permit procedures
   
150.376   Variance procedures
   
150.377   General standards for flood hazard reduction
   
150.378   Specific standards
   
150.379   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
150.380   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones)
   
150.381   Floodways
   
150.382   Nuisance
   
150.383   Severability
   
150.384   Compliance required
Building and Construction
   
150.395   Purpose
   
150.396   Building and demolition permits required; application
   
150.397   Permit application
   
150.398   Permit issuance
   
150.399   Construction permits in newly annexed areas which have temporary
zoning
   
150.400   Exemptions
   
150.401   Validity of permits
   
150.402   Expiration and extension of permits
   
150.403   Suspension or revocation
   
150.404   Stop order
   
150.405   Temporary and permanent certificate of occupancy
   
150.406   Minimum fees
   
150.407   Additional fees
   
150.408   Building Official
   
150.409   Duties of Building Official
   
150.410   International Building Code
   
150.411   International Residential Code for One and Two-Family Dwellings
   
150.412   International Mechanical Code
   
150.413   Uniform Plumbing Code
   
150.414   International Fire Code
   
150.415   NFPA 70 National Electrical Code (NEC)
   
150.416   International Energy Conservation Code
   
150.417   International Swimming Pool and Spa Code
   
150.418   Vacation of streets and other public ways
   
150.419   Permit required for any alteration in any street or public way
   
150.420   Application for permit to alter street
   
150.421   Performance bond and public liability insurance required
   
150.422   Approval for closing of streets, barricades, warning lights and
watchmen
   
150.423   Duties upon completion of work
   
150.424   Certificate of final inspection
   
150.425   Trench safety systems
   
150.426   Application for consent by gas corporation, gas utility, electric
utility
   
150.427   Extending utilities under any street or public way
Underground Utility Lines
   
150.440   Authority
   
150.441   Purpose
   
150.442   Variances
   
150.443   Utility line placement
   
150.444   Intervening property or intervening right-of-way
   
150.445   Responsibility for payment of installation costs
   
150.446   Utility lines
Underground Storage Facilities
   
150.460   Authority and short title
   
150.461   Purpose and scope
   
150.462   Relationship to law and regulations
   
150.463   Compliance with zoning restrictions
   
150.464   Compliance with Code required
   
150.465   Construction permit required
   
150.466   Storage permit required
   
150.467   Utilities
   
150.468   Regulated liquids
   
150.469   Mixtures
   
150.470   Applicants
   
150.471   Contents of application
   
150.472   Permit approval
   
150.473   Renewal
   
150.474   Transfer
   
150.475   Fees
   
150.476   Amendment
   
150.477   Appeal
   
150.478   Materials management plan required
   
150.479   Maintenance plan
   
150.480   Monitoring plan
   
150.481   Closure plan
   
150.482   Contingency plan
   
150.483   Compliance required
   
150.484   Specifications for underground storage facilities
   
150.485   Replacement of tanks
   
150.486   New underground storage facilities
   
150.487   Existing underground storage facilities
   
150.488   Conduct of tests
   
150.489   Out of service facilities; general
   
150.490   Application for approval
   
150.491   Soil contamination
   
150.492   Observation wells
   
150.493   Tank removal standards
   
150.494   Prevention of leaks, releases, spills and overspills
   
150.495   Initial response to leaks or releases
   
150.496   Reporting of leaks or releases
   
150.497   Required testing and corrective action
   
150.498   Corrective action for unknown sources of pollution
   
150.499   Permit review
   
150.500   Corrective action by city
   
150.501   Repairs
   
150.502   Maintenance of records
   
150.503   Public records
   
150.504   Confidential information
   
150.505   Confidential information procedures
   
150.506   City inspection
   
150.507   Right of entry
   
150.508   Permit modification, suspension and revocation; general
   
150.509   Noncompliance
   
150.510   Modification, suspension and revocation of permit
   
150.511   Violation
   
150.512   Remedies
   
150.513   Recovery of costs
Outdoor Lighting
   
150.525   Purpose
   
150.526   Lighting zones
   
150.527   Applicability
   
150.528   General requirements
   
150.529   Non-residential lighting zone standards
   
150.530   Residential lighting zone standards
   
150.531   Open space lighting zone
   
150.532   Submission of plans and evidence of compliance
   
150.533   Variances and alternative compliance
   
150.534   Administrative guidance
   
150.535   Definitions
Water and Wastewater
   
150.545   Rules governing
   
150.546   Design
   
150.547   Inspection, certificate of occupancy and appeal
   
150.548   Permits
   
150.549   Fees
   
150.550   Review, permit and enforcement authority delegated to City
Administrative Assistant or other designee of the City Council
   
150.551   Connection requirement
   
150.552   Waiver
On-Site Sewage Facilities
   
150.565   Nuisances and abatement of nuisances
   
150.566   Applications for permits
   
150.567   Permit for construction or installation of new private on-site sewage
facilities
   
150.568   Authorized systems
   
150.569   Restrictive covenant and other conditions
   
150.570   Revocation of permit
   
150.571   Responding to alarms
   
150.572   Appeal
   
150.573   Notice
   
150.574   Repair of existing systems
   
150.575   Offenses
Parking
   
150.585   Parking regulations, in general
   
150.586   Basic regulations; vehicle parking
   
150.587   Schedule of off-street parking requirements
   
150.588   Parking for compact cars
   
150.589   Handicapped facilities
   
150.590   Bicycle parking
   
150.591   Basic regulations; off-street loading
   
150.592   Schedule of off-street loading requirements
   
150.593   Design standards
Fire Lanes
   
150.605   Purpose
   
150.606   Basic regulations
   
150.607   Variances
Blasting Permits
   
150.620   General
   
150.621   Application for permit
   
150.622   Approval by city
   
150.623   Denial of permit which endangers life, health or property
   
150.624   Comments from adjacent property owners and utilities
   
150.625   No smoking in vicinity of blasting
   
150.626   Blasting mat
   
150.627   Removal of blasting caps, etc.
   
150.628   License required
   
150.629   No blasting on holidays and weekends
   
150.630   Blasting
   
150.631   Blasting plan
   
150.632   Safety of persons and property
   
150.633   Blasting records and responsibility
   
150.634   Insurance
   
150.635   Policy
   
150.636   Permit issuance
   
150.637   Appeal
Diseased Trees and Oak Wilt Regulations
   
150.650   Short title
   
150.651   Purposes
   
150.652   Declaration of public nuisance
   
150.653   Duty of owner to remove or control nuisance
   
150.654   Right of entry by Urban Forester; inspection
   
150.655   Notice to owner to abate
   
150.656   Establishing an oak wilt management program
   
150.657   Cost sharing program
   
150.658   Tree trimming personnel
   
150.659   Time to trim and sealing of wounds
   
150.660   Disinfection equipment
   
150.661   Handling of firewood
Landscaping Regulations
   
150.670   Purpose
   
150.671   Application
   
150.672   Procedures
   
150.673   Inspections
   
150.674   Street yard landscape
   
150.675   Turf limitations
   
150.676   Vegetative buffer requirement
   
150.677   Landscaping in parking areas
   
150.678   Preservation of natural character
   
150.679   Water-efficient landscape design
   
150.680   Water-efficient irrigation design
   
150.681   Landscape water conservation standards
   
150.682   Buffering requirements
   
150.683   Buffering standards
   
150.684   Minimum requirements for single family residential development
   
150.685   Landscape material requirements
   
150.686   Installation and maintenance
   
150.687   Replacement requirements
   
150.688   Credit for innovative water management
   
150.689   Variances and alternative compliance
Sign Regulations
   
150.700   Purpose and goals
   
150.701   First Amendment rights
   
150.702   Enforcement
   
150.703   Permits, certificates and approval required
   
150.704   Sign maintenance, repair and removal
   
150.705   Liability
   
150.706   Visibility
   
150.707   Public property
   
150.708   Application procedures
   
150.709   Sign application requirements
   
150.710   Representations by applicant
   
150.711   Final inspection report
   
150.712   Permit fees
   
150.713   Review of signs by city staff
   
150.714   Approval and inspection required
   
150.715   Acts prohibited
   
150.716   Remedies for violations
   
150.717   Landscaping
   
150.718   Lighting
   
150.719   Sign area calculation
   
150.720   Sign height measurement
   
150.721   Exempted signs
   
150.722   Prohibited signs
   
150.723   Nonconforming signs
   
150.724   General criteria related to limited exemptions
   
150.725   Specific criteria related to limited exemptions
   
150.726   General criteria related to temporary signs requiring a permit
   
150.727   Specific criteria related to temporary signs requiring a permit
   
150.728   General requirements related to permanent signs requiring a permit
   
150.729   Specific requirements related to permanent signs requiring a permit
   
150.730   Purpose; limitations
   
150.731   Application
   
150.732   Fee
   
150.733   Hearing
   
150.734   Action on application
   
150.735   Criteria for approval
   
150.736   Variance approval time limitation
Moving of Buildings
   
150.750   Permit required
   
150.751   Application for permits, fees, deposits
   
150.752   Application processing
   
150.753   Issuance of the moving permit
   
150.754   Execution of move
   
150.755   Duties and responsibilities; violation; penalty
   
150.756   Damage to property
   
150.757   New buildings
Tree and Natural Area Protection
   
150.770   Purpose
   
150.771   Sizes and types of protected, heritage and ancestral trees
   
150.772   Prohibited activities
   
150.773   Tree removal permitting process
   
150.774   Action on tree removal permit application
   
150.775   Tree removal or relocation
   
150.776   Conflicts with other city policies and regulations
   
150.777   Critical root zone
   
150.778   Disturbance to critical root zone (CRZ)
   
150.779   Crown impacts
   
150.780   Hazardous activities
   
150.781   Tree protection plans
   
150.782   Tree replacement regulations
   
150.783   Tree fund and tree replacement fee
   
150.784   Preservation of natural vegetation
   
150.785   Indiscriminate clearing
   
150.786   Exceptions
   
150.787   Administration
   
150.788   Enforcement
Short-Term Rental Registration Process in Single Family Districts
   
150.800   Purpose and applicability of short-term rental registration
   
150.801   Definitions for short-term rentals
   
150.802   Short-term rental registration requirements
   
150.803   Inspection required for short-term rental registration
   
150.804   Restrictions on short-term rentals
   
150.805   Brochure and safety features for short-term rentals
   
150.806   Notification of approval of short-term rental
   
150.807   Registration term, fees, and renewal of short-term rentals
   
150.808   Inspections; re-inspections; suspension and revocation of short-term
rental registration
   
150.809   Revocation/appeal; violations and penalties
   
150.810   Fees for short-term rental registration
   
150.811   Presumption; presentation of documents or affidavit for short-term
rental registration
 
   
150.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Conceptual site plan requirements for zoning changes, amendments
and variances
   
Appendix B: Site plan requirements for zoning changes, amendments and variances
   
Appendix C: Hazardous material ratings
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter and all its respective subchapters shall collectively be known
and may be cited as the Land Development Code of the City of Sunset Valley, or
simply as the Land Development Code. The Land Development Code codifies all
ordinances regulating the development and use of real property subject to the
planning jurisdiction of the City of Sunset Valley.
§ 150.002 PURPOSES.
   The Land Development Code is adopted for the following reasons:
   (A)   To protect and promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare
of the community of the City of Sunset Valley;
   (B)   To ensure the safe, orderly, and healthful development and expansion
of the City of Sunset Valley, in accordance with and pursuant to the
Comprehensive Plan of the City of Sunset Valley;
   (C)   To maintain the environmental balance of the area;
   (D)   To conserve, develop, protect, and utilize natural resources, as
appropriate and consistent with the public welfare and interest;
   (E)   To prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentration of
population;
   (F)   To lessen congestion in the streets and provide convenient, safe, and
efficient circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and enable emergency
vehicles to safely and speedily reach their destinations;
   (G)   To facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation, water,
wastewater, schools, parks, and other public requirements;
   (H)   To secure safety from fire, flooding, panic, and other dangers;
   (I)   To provide adequate light and clean air;
   (J)   To promote tranquility and the preservation of the rustic character of
the flora and fauna within the city's jurisdiction.
   (K)   To promote economic development through an efficient and practical
means by which development can proceed in compliance with the provisions of the
Land Development Code and other applicable laws; and
   (L)   To protect the Edwards Aquifer and the city's drinking water supply
and prevent excessive pollutant loadings in creeks.
§ 150.003 AUTHORITY.
   The Land Development Code is adopted pursuant to the powers granted to the
city and subject to any limitations imposed by the Constitution and laws of the
state of Texas. No provision of this Land Development Code shall be construed
as relieving any party from any other provision of state or federal law or from
any provision, ordinance, rule, or regulation of the city requiring a license,
franchise, or permit to accomplish, engage in, carry on, or maintain a
particular business, enterprise, occupation, transaction or use.
§ 150.004 JURISDICTION.
   The provisions of this Land Development Code apply to all property located
within the incorporated city limits of the City of Sunset Valley as such limits
may increase or decrease from time to time through annexation or disannexation.
In addition, and to the extent permitted by state law, the provisions of this
Land Development Code apply to all property located within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City of Sunset Valley.
§ 150.005 RELATIONSHIP TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   It is the intention of the City Council of the City of Sunset Valley in
adopting this Land Development Code, and any amendments thereto, that the Land
Development Code implements the duly adopted planning policies of the
Comprehensive Plan. The City Council hereby expresses its intent that this Land
Development Code, and any amendments thereto, shall be construed in a manner to
give effect to its purpose and to the adopted Comprehensive Plan. It is further
the Council's intent that no provision of this Land Development Code shall be
declared void by any court except when the provision irreconcilably conflicts
with the adopted Comprehensive Plan. Any person who alleges the existence of an
irreconcilable conflict between the adopted Comprehensive Plan and a provision
of this Land Development Code shall first provide the City Council a reasonable
opportunity to act to resolve the alleged conflict.
§ 150.006 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General provisions.
      (1)   Words used in this Code and not defined herein shall have the
meaning established by Texas statutory or case law or, if not defined in Texas
law, their ordinarily accepted meaning.
      (2)   Any office referred to in this Land Development Code by title means
the person employed or appointed by the city in that position, or his duly
authorized representative.
      (3)   Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be construed in
accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering
practices.
   (B)   Terms defined. The following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning or where an alternative
definition is provided.
      ABANDONED. Out of service and not safeguarded in compliance with this
Land Development Code; provided, however, that an underground storage tank
shall not be deemed abandoned if it has been closed in accordance with this
Code or with any other applicable state, federal or local law or regulation.
      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure that is on the same parcel of property
as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure.
      ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT. The person employed under the title Deputy city
Administrator by the City of Sunset Valley, Texas. The terms "Deputy City
Administrator" and "City Administrative Assistant" shall be synonymous with
"Administrative Assistant". For purposes of any provision in this Code
providing that a permit may be approved, denied, or reviewed by the "City
Administrative Assistant", "Administrative Assistant", or "Deputy City
Administrator" such terms shall be construed to include any employee or agent
of the city that the City Council may from time to time designate, by ordinance
or resolution, to review permit applications.
      ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL. The department director appointed by the City
Administrator to administer this chapter, or the department director's
designee.
      ADMINISTRATOR. The official appointed by the City Council to carry out
the duties and responsibilities, contained in the flood loss control provisions
of this Code.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ACTIVITY. Any commercial activity, including live
performances, whether conducted intermittently or full time, which primarily
involves the sale, display, exhibition, or viewing of books, magazines, films,
photographs or other materials, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matter depicting, describing, or relating to sex acts, or by an emphasis on
male or female genitals, buttocks, or female breasts.
      ALCOHOL SAMPLE. An individual serving of wine not to exceed one and one-
half ounces of wine for the purpose of allowing a patron to sample a product.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. An alcoholic beverage as defined in the Alcoholic
Beverage Code of the State of Texas.
      ALLEY. Any minor public right-of-way, not intended to provide the primary
means of access to abutting lots, which is used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
      ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial
fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by
high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
      ALTER. When used in the sign regulation section of this Code the intended
definition is to change the size, shape or outline, or type of sign or to
change the electrical lighting, except for the replacement of lamps not
brighter than the original or the replacement of surface panel.
      AMUSEMENT, COMMERCIAL OPEN AIR. Any amusement enterprise offering
entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee or charge
wherein any portion of the activity takes place in the open, including but not
limited to, a golf driving range, archery range, miniature golf course, and
race track.
      AMUSEMENT CENTER OR PARLOR. Any establishment containing one or more pool
or billiard tables, pinball and electronic games offered for hire to the public
as primary purpose.
      ANCESTRAL TREE. Any tree listed on the heritage tree list that has
reached a diameter of 30 inches or more for the large tree category or 15
inches or more for the small tree category.
      ANTI-TRANSPIRANT. A protective coating generally applied to plant
material prior to or immediately after transplanting that reduces water loss
through the leaf surface.
      APEX. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow
path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial
fan flooding can occur.
      APPEAL. When used in the flood loss control sections of this Code,
"appeal" means a request for a review of the Administrator's interpretation of
any provision of the flood control sections or a request for a variance.
      APPURTENANT STRUCTURE. An accessory structure which is on the same parcel
of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to
the use of the principal structure.
      APPROVAL. Approval means written approval from the City of Sunset Valley
pursuant to a duly executed application for approval made on a form promulgated
by the city.
      APPROVED TREE PLANTING AND REPLACEMENT LIST. A list of approved trees
that are proven to thrive in this region with fewer problems and requiring less
care to remain healthy.
      AQUIFER-RELATED WATERSHED. All land area in a watershed that is within
the Edwards Aquifer Recharge Zone or that naturally drains to, or is otherwise
located upstream from, the recharge zone.
      ARCHITECTURAL DETAIL. Any projection, articulation, relief, cornice,
column, change of building material, window, awning or door opening on any
building.
      AREA OF FUTURE CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD. The land area that would be
inundated by the one-percent-annual chance (100-year) flood based on future
conditions hydrology.
      AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designed AO, AH, AR/AO or VO zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% change or greater annual
chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding
or sheet flow.
      AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The
area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After
detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the
FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, A99, AR, AR/
A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V, VE, or V1-30.
      ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION. The discharging from stacks, open storage,
chimneys, exhausts, vents, ducts, openings or open fires of such air
contaminants as visible emissions, sulfur dioxide, particulate matter,
hydrocarbons, fumes or similar material or gases. Compliance shall conform to
the procedures prescribed by the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission
for the control of air pollution.
      ATTACH. To stick, tack, nail or otherwise affix one object to another.
      AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. An establishment selling fuel for motor
vehicles or performing any repair or maintenance services on motor vehicles.
      AUTOMOBILE WASH SERVICE (COMMERCIAL). A building, or portion thereof,
containing facilities for washing automobiles.
      AVERAGE GRADE. The grade of the finished ground level at the midpoint of
each exterior surface of a sign, or a structure, in the event that the sign is
attached to the structure.
      AWNING. A shelter constructed of materials on a supporting framework that
projects from and is supported by the exterior wall of a building.
      BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.
      BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for
Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface
elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or
exceeding that level in any given year - also called the base flood.
      BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
      BAY. A parking facility unit, usually including one or two rows of
parking spaces and a central aisle.
      BERM. An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen
undesirable views, and/or decrease noise, but shall not be considered fill as
per definition in the watershed provisions of this Code.
      BILLBOARD. Any sign that is freestanding or attached to or part of a
building and is an off-premise sign.
      BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. Also, may be referred to as the Board. The function
is to hear applications for variances. The Board consists of citizens appointed
to it by the City Council for a period of time.
      BOARDING HOUSE. A building other than a hotel, motel, residential inn,
restaurant, or community home, where lodging or meals are provided for
compensation for two or more persons who do not constitute a "family" as that
term is defined herein.
      BODY PIERCING. A procedure to pierce the ear or other part of the human
body to permit the insertion of rings and other decorative items in accordance
with the provisions of Tex. Health and Safety Code Chapter 146.
      BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or supporting foundation system
      BUFFER, ARCHITECTURAL. A visual screen constructed of wood, masonry, or
other material used in such a manner that adjacent property will be screened
from the use contemplated so noise, solid waste, or other objectionable
influences will be avoided. Such buffer shall be 100% opaque and adequate in
height to accomplish the desired end.
      BUFFER, LANDSCAPE. A visual screen using landscaping (other than mere
grass on flat terrain), or the use of landscaping along with berms, walls or
decorative fences to partially and periodically obstruct the view from the
street, and/or adjacent structures or lots in a continuous manner, of vehicular
use areas, parking lots and their parked cars, detention ponds, service areas,
sedimentation ponds, filtration or utility appurtenances, and other areas that
may need such buffering.
      BUFFER, PERIMETER LANDSCAPE. A continuous area of land which is required
to be set aside along the perimeter of a lot in which landscaping is used to
provide a transition between lots and to reduce the environmental, aesthetic,
and other impacts of one type of land use upon another.
      BUILDING. Any structure, either temporary or permanent having a roof or
other covering, and designed or used for the shelter or enclosure of any
person, animal or property of any kind, including tents, awnings or vehicles
situated on private property and used for purposes of a building. The word
"building" includes the word "structure."
      BUILDING/ACCESSORY USE. A subordinate building or use, the use of which
is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with the main
building or principal use of the land.
      BUILDING/MAIN OR PRINCIPAL USE. A building in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot on which it is situated.
      BUILDING OFFICIAL. The City Administrator or designee, including
consultant(s) engaged pursuant to an agreement approved by the City Council.
The term can refer to more than one person as the various functions of the
Building Official may be divided and assigned by the City Administrator not
inconsistent with any City Council direction. Action by an authorized agent or
contractor of the city in performance of a duty or authority assigned by this
Code to the Building Official shall be the action of the Building Official.
When asked by any person, the City Administrator or designee shall promptly
identify the person(s) authorized to act as the Building Official in connection
with a permit application, an enforcement action, or any other action of the
Building Official authorized or required by this Code.
      BUILDING SETBACK LINE. The line within a property defining the minimum
horizontal distance between a building and/or property boundary line and the
adjacent street line or property boundary line.
      BUILDING STANDARDS COMMISSION. The Zoning Commission of the City of
Sunset Valley. In this regard the Zoning Commission shall act as the Building
Standards Commission.
      CAFÉ. See RESTAURANT.
      CALIPER. For installed trees under four inches the trunk is measured six
inches above the ground. Multi-trunked trees are measured as follows: Diameter
of largest trunk plus half the diameter(s) of each of the other trunks measured
six inches above the ground for trees under four inches in diameter. Installed
trees four inches and over are measured 12 inches above the ground.
      CENTER LINE OF WATERWAY. The center line of the waterway refers to
existing topographically defined channels. If not readily discernible, the
center line shall be determined by (first) the low flow line, or (second) the
center line of the two-year floodplain.
      CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY (C.O.). An official certificate issued by the
city which indicates conformance with building, zoning, and health and safety
regulations and authorizes legal use and occupancy of the premises for which it
is issued.
      CHILD DAY CARE FACILITY. Any facility that provides care, training,
education, custody, treatment, or supervision for six or more children who are
not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or operator of the
facility, for all or part of the 24-hour day whether or not the facility is
operated for profit or charges for the services it offers.
      CITY. The City of Sunset Valley, Texas, and includes an official, agent,
or employee of the city acting on behalf of the city.
      CITY COUNCIL. See COUNCIL.
      CITY INSPECTOR. A person or persons designated by the City Council to
perform inspections within the corporate limits of the City of Sunset Valley.
      CITY OF AUSTIN DRAINAGE CRITERIA MANUAL or CITY OF AUSTIN DRAINAGE
CRITERIA MANUAL, AS AMENDED or CITY OF AUSTIN DRAINAGE MANUAL. The edition of
the City of Austin Drainage Criteria Manual in effect on October 31, 2011. This
reference manual is promulgated by the City of Austin. This manual is to be
used by any person developing a tract of land within the jurisdiction of the
City of Sunset Valley. Requirements found within this or other City of Sunset
Valley ordinances and Codes override any inconsistencies that may occur between
this manual and City of Sunset Valley Codes or ordinances.
      CITY OF AUSTIN ENVIRONMENTAL CRITERIA MANUAL or CITY OF AUSTIN
ENVIRONMENTAL CRITERIA MANUAL, AS AMENDED. The edition of the City of Austin
Drainage Criteria Manual in effect on October 31, 2011. This reference manual
is promulgated by the City of Austin.
      CIVIC ORGANIZATION. An organization which offers community programs to
citizen, city or civic affairs groups.
      CLEARING. The act of cutting down, removal all or a substantial part of,
or damaging a tree or other vegetation that will cause the tree to decline and/
or die, which is not limited to chemical, physical, compaction, or grading
damage.
      CLINIC. A group of offices for one or more physicians, surgeons, or
dentists to treat sick or injured outpatients who do not remain overnight.
      COMMENCEMENT OF WORK. For construction of a sign, commencement of work
shall be the point in time when the sign has been delivered to the site and
attachment to a building has begun or holes are excavated for ground
installation.
      COMMERCIAL LOT. Any lot not to be used as single family residential,
recreational or open space.
      COMMERCIAL SIGN. A sign other than a real estate "for sale or for lease"
sign, political sign, residential nameplate sign, public information sign,
traffic control sign or exempted sign which directs the attention of the
general public to a business, product, service, or other commercial or business
activity.
      COMMERCIAL USE. Commercial use types include the sale, rental, servicing,
and distribution of goods and the provision of services other than those
normally classified as industrial or civic uses.
      COMMON AREA. An area held, designed and designated principally for the
common use of the occupants of a subdivision or development.
      COMMUNITY HOME. A home located in an area zoned as Single Family (SF)
Residential which is occupied by not more than six person with disabilities and
two supervisors living together by joint agreement and occupying a single
housekeeping unit with single kitchen facilities under an arrangement that
qualifies as a "community home" as that term is used in Title 8 of the Tex.
Human Resources Code Title 8, §§ 123.001, et seq., as amended.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The plan required by the Tex. Loc. Gov't Code §
211.004. The comprehensive plan is an independent, long-range plan for use and
development of land within the city and in the city's extraterritorial
jurisdiction.
      CONDITIONAL USE. A use that may be allowed if it meets certain specified
requirements or conditions and meets the approval of the local governing body.
      CONSERVATION AREA OR CONSERVATION EASEMENT. A reserved area over, on,
across or through a property that shall be exclusively managed and maintained
as a habitat to conserve and protect the native flora and fauna, and thus
protect, promote, improve and benefit the general welfare of the present and
future citizens of the City of Sunset Valley, Texas.
      CONTAINMENT SYSTEM. Tanks, walls and impermeable excavation liners, such
as reinforced concrete vaults, reinforced and unreinforced flexible membrane
liners and rigid fiberglass reinforced plastic liners, installed for the
purpose of detecting releases, leakage or spills of hazardous materials from
underground storage tanks or systems and preventing said releases, leakage or
spills from entering the environment.
      CONVENIENCE STORE. Establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of
food, beer and wine in unopened containers, or household products for home
consumption, in a convenient and limited nature.
      COUNCIL. The City Council of Sunset Valley, Texas.
      COVERAGE. The percentage of a lot or tract covered by the roof or first
floor of a building, or impervious cover.
      CRITICAL ENVIRONMENTAL FEATURES (CEFs). Features which have been
determined to be of critical importance to the protection of one or more
environmental resources. CEFs typically include such features as springs and
seeps, bluffs, rimrocks, caves and sinkholes.
      CRITICAL FEATURE. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
      CRITICAL ROOT ZONE (CRZ). A region measured outward from the trunk of a
tree representing the essential area of the roots that must be preserved for
the tree's livelihood. The CRZ is measured as one foot of radial distance
outward from the trunk for every inch of tree caliper or diameter at breast
height.
      CRITICAL WATER QUALITY ZONE. Lands and waters as defined in § 150.328.
      CROSSWALK WAY. A public right-of-way, four feet or more in width between
property lines, which provides pedestrian circulation.
      CROWN. All portion of the tree, excluding trunks and roots.
      CUL-DE-SAC. A street having but one outlet to another street, and
terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turn around.
      DAYS. Working days unless defined as calendar days.
      DBH (DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT). For the purpose of this Code, the diameter
of existing trees, which is measured four feet above the ground, except that
for purposes of the landscape regulations chapter of this Code, the DBH is
measured four and one-half feet above the ground.
      DEAD-END STREET. A street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet.
      DENSITY. The relationship of a structure(s) to the area of the lot or
tract upon which the structure(s) is/are located or erected.
      DETENTION POND. A structure designed to reduce the rate of runoff for a
short period in order to reduce peak flows by controlling the discharge through
an outlet structure thereby extending the runoff period.
      DEVELOPER. A person who improves land, primarily through the construction
of buildings, roads, or other structures; excavation, dredging, grading,
filling, clearing, or removing vegetation.
      DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, storage of
equipment or materials and clearing or removing vegetation. This term does not
include repairs, digging or repaving by a governmental authority of a public
street or public road that has already been paved before so long as such
activities do not increase impervious cover. For purposes of the landscaping
regulations in this Code, "development" means any proposed material change in
the use or character of the land, including, but not limited to, land clearing
or the placement of any structure or site improvements to the land.
      DEVELOPMENT FREE ZONE. Area of land which falls within the Critical Water
Quality Zone and the Critical Water Transition Zone as defined in § 150.329.
      DIAMETER -AT-BREAST-HEIGHT (DBH). A form of measurement of an existing
tree trunk. Diameter is measured at four and one-half feet above the ground
level. The diameter of multi trunk trees shall be measured by adding the
diameter of the largest trunk with one-half the diameter of each additional
trunk.
      DILAPIDATED OR DETERIORATED CONDITION. When used for sign regulation
purposes shall be defined as any sign which in the opinion of the
Administrative Official has any of the following characteristics:
         (a)   Where elements of the surface or background can be seen, as
viewed from the normal viewing distance, to have portions of the finished
material or paint flaked, broken off, or missing, or otherwise not in harmony
with the rest of the surface;
         (b)   Where the structural support or frame members are visibly bent,
broken, dented, or torn;
         (c)   Where the panel is visibly cracked, or in the case of wood and
similar products, splintered in such a way as to constitute an unsightly or
harmful condition;
         (d)   Where the sign or its elements are twisted or leaning or at
angles other than those at which it was originally erected (such as may result
from being blown or the failure of a structural support); or
         (e)   Where the message or wording can no longer be clearly read by a
person with normal eyesight under normal viewing conditions.
      DISTANCE BETWEEN SIGNS. The shortest straight-line horizontal distance
between the nearest elements of signs.
      DISTANCE FROM EDGE OF PAVEMENT. The shortest straight-line horizontal
distance from the edge of the street pavement to a vertical line to the ground
from the nearest element of the sign.
      DISTANCE FROM PROPERTY LINE (ALSO SETBACK FROM PROPERTY LINE). The
shortest horizontal distance from the nearest property line to a vertical line
to the ground from the nearest element of the sign.
      DISTANCE FROM R.O.W. Distance of signs from R.O.W. shall mean the
shortest horizontal distance from the nearest R.O.W. to a vertical line to the
ground from the nearest element of the sign.
      DISTRICT. A section of the City of Sunset Valley for which the
regulations governing the uses of and development standards for building or
lots are uniform.
      DONATION BIN. A bin or similar structure used for the collection of
clothes or non-perishable food items.
      DOUBLE-WALLED. Constructed with more than one containment layer, with
space between the layers sufficient to allow monitoring of any leakage into or
from the enclosed space; laminated coated or clad materials shall not be
considered double-walled.
      DRIPLINE. The periphery of the area underneath a tree that would be
encompassed by a perpendicular line dropped from the outermost edges of the
canopy of the tree. The term drip line also includes canopy and crown.
      DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT. An establishment serving food and non alcoholic
beverages to customers in their cars, or through drive-up windows.
      DRIVEWAY. An entrance roadway from a street to a parking facility.
      DWELLING. A dwelling is a building or portion thereof, but not a travel
trailer or recreational vehicle, designed and used exclusively for single-
family residential occupancy.
      EASEMENT. A reserved area over, on, across or through a property for
water, wastewater, gas, other utility lines, access, development-free areas,
etc.
      EDWARDS AQUIFER. The water-bearing substrata also known as the Edwards
and Associated Limestones Aquifer. It includes the following geographic
formations: Comanche Peak, Edwards, Kiamichi and Georgetown.
      EDWARDS AQUIFER RECHARGE ZONE. The interim boundaries of the recharge
zones shall encompass all land over the Edwards Aquifer recharging the same, as
determined by the outcrop of the geologic units comprising the Edwards Aquifer,
including such areas overlain with quaternary terrace deposits. Most of the
corporate limits of Sunset Valley and its extraterritorial jurisdiction are
contained within the Edwards Aquifer recharge zone.
      ELECTRICAL WIRES. Lines or wires with a capacity equal to or less than
12,500 volts.
      ELEVATED BUILDING. For insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which
has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls,
shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
      ENGINEER. A person duly authorized and registered under the provisions of
the Texas Engineering Registration Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to
practice the profession of engineering.
      ENHANCED PAVEMENT. Decorative pavement material intended for pedestrian
or vehicular use, e.g., brick or masonry pavers, stone, exposed aggregate,
stamped or stained concrete.
      ERECT. To build, construct, alter, reconstruct, pour, lay, move upon,
attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and also includes the painting of wall
signs, murals or super graphics, or any physical operation on the premises
which are required for the construction of a sign including excavation, site
clearance, landfill, and the like.
      EVAPOTRANSPIRATION SYSTEM. A subsurface sewage disposal system connected
to an authorized septic tank that relies upon soil capillarity and plant uptake
to dispose of treated effluent through surface evaporation and plant
transpiration.
      EVENT CENTER. A venue or complex of buildings for hire (not including
places of worship or public buildings) with the purpose of hosting a variety of
gatherings where food, beverages, music, and dancing may be offered for
purposes such as life cycle events (for example, birthdays, anniversaries,
weddings, reunions); corporate or professional functions (for example,
seminars, meetings, lectures, retreats); other special events (for example,
charitable events, fundraisers, art shows, holiday parties, photographic
shoots, and motion picture filming); and incidental facilities (for example,
kitchen, administrative office.
      EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of
the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date.
"Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures."
      EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION. The extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
City of Sunset Valley, Texas is that land not within the corporate limits of
the City of Sunset Valley, Texas, but land over which the city has jurisdiction
by virtue of the provisions of the Texas Local Government Code.
      FACADE. Any separate face of a building, including parapet walls and
omitted wall lines, or any part of a building which encloses or covers usable
space. Where separate faces are oriented in the same direction, or in the
directions within 45 degrees of one another, they are to be considered as part
of a single facade.
      FAMILY. An individual or two or more persons living together and
occupying a single housekeeping unit with a primary kitchen facility on a non-
profit, cost-sharing basis. For purposes of this definition, "cost-sharing"
includes the payment of rent by a reasonable number of persons, on a monthly or
longer-term basis, for the use of a room for living or sleeping purposes (where
such room is designed and constructed for living or sleeping purposes) within a
single family residence that is occupied by a family.
      FIBER CEMENT SIDING. From Portland cement mixed with ground sand,
cellulose fiber, and other additives. The product is also known as cement fiber
siding, concrete siding, and fiber cement cladding.
      FILL. Any deposit or stockpiling of earthen materials in their natural
state.
      FINAL PLAT. A plat prepared according to the provisions of this Code and
containing all of the engineering and legal data, dedications, and certificates
necessary to the recording of same in the maps and plats records of the county.
      FINE ART. Sculpture, fountains or similar objects.
      FIRE LANE. A lane with a minimum width of 24 feet along the curb of a
parking facility or off-loading roadway on private property nearest the
building or structure served by such parking facility or off-loading roadway.
Such lane shall be adequately accessible from the nearest public street for
firefighting vehicles and other emergency vehicles to enter and exit
efficiently while responding to an emergency.
      FIRM. See FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP.
      FLAT ROOF. Any pitch no less than a three-unit rise and a 12-unit run,
provided, however, in order to accommodate mechanical equipment located upon
the roof, an amount not to exceed 5% of the total square footage of the floor
area may be left flat.
      FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
         (a)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
         (b)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
      FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of
flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or
an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or
flood-related erosion hazards.
      FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of the city, on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of
special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
      FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). See FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY.
      FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which funds
have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent
of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized
flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound
engineering standards.
      FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
      FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source (see FLOOD or FLOODING).
      FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective
and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
      FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. Includes zoning, watershed,
subdivision and floodplain regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance
and erosion control ordinance) and other statutes, ordinances, laws and
administrative regulations adopted by federal state or local jurisdictions. The
term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof,
which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
      FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY). The channel of a river or other water
course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
      FLOOR AREA. The sum of the horizontal areas of each story of the building
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior structural walls for the
purpose of computing the minimum allowable floor area in a residential or
commercial building unit. The floor area measurement is exclusive of areas of
basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, and breezeways, provided such
areas are not heated or air conditioned.
      FREESTANDING SIGN. Any sign which is not attached to or on the walls,
face, or exterior of a building.
      FRONT. The property line fronting the street from one street frontage
except if there is more, the property line fronting the street which serves as
the primary entrance and identity for the lot.
      FUEL DELIVERY SYSTEM. Product or delivery piping and delivery system
associated with an underground storage tank system.
      FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for
the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship
repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
      FUND RAISER. An activity that takes place for the sole purpose of raising
funds to support community service organizations, public charities, or non-
profit organizations.
      GARAGE, ATTACHED. A garage which has one or more walls common with the
principal building on a lot; or which is attached to the principal building by
an enclosed porch, loggia or passageway, the roof of which is a part or
extension of the roof of the principal building; and for the purpose of the
height and area regulations of this Code such a garage is to be considered a
part of the principal building.
      GARAGE, DETACHED. A garage wholly separated and independent of the
principal building on a lot; or connected to the principal building by an
unenclosed or latticed passageway, pergola, arbor or covered walk.
      GARAGE SALES. Occasional sales (garage sales and yard sales only) at
retail, not to exceed two in number on the same premises in any one calendar
year, by a person who does not hold himself out as engaging in, or does not
habitually engage in, the business of selling such property at retail; provided
that 1) the sales shall be confined to the garage and/or yard of the premises;
2) no additional merchandise acquired solely for the purpose of resale on the
premises shall be sold at such occasional sale; 3) the duration of each such
sale shall not exceed two consecutive calendar days; 4) only one sign shall be
permitted upon the premises and when the sale is taking place.
      GLASS OF WINE. An individual serving of wine not less than five ounces
and not greater than seven ounces offered for on-premise consumption.
      GREENBELT. A continuous linear open space area often, but not
necessarily, in public ownership or in public easements for public outdoor
recreation.
      GROCERY STORE. A retail establishment primarily engaged in the retail
sale of food products, where revenue from the sale of groceries (other than
beer and wine) comprises at least 51% of the gross income of the establishment,
and at least 51% of the total display or shelf space is devoted to groceries
(other than beer and wine), delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries,
fruits or vegetables.
      GROWLER. A container for beverages, variously provided by a purchaser or
a seller of beverages, and used primarily for the purchase of beer from a keg
or wine from a barrel for the purpose of transporting the beverage off the
premises where purchased. The term does not include a beverage container pre-
filled with a beverage before delivery to the site of sale, or a container
filled with a beverage at the site of purchase at any time other than at the
time of purchase of the beverage by the consumer. The maximum size of a
container constituting a growler shall be the lesser of (i) a container that
will hold a maximum volume of one gallon of liquid; or (ii) the maximum size
allowed by applicable state or federal law.
      GUEST HOUSE. An accessory structure for human habitation detached from a
single family residence but located on the same lot or contiguous lots on which
is located one single family residence, containing one or more rooms with a
bathing facility and toilet, that would provide a single housekeeping unit.
Regulations applicable to accessory structures in §
150.106 are applicable to guest houses.
      HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substances or materials that, by reason of their
toxic, caustic, corrosive, abrasive, or otherwise injurious properties, may be
detrimental or deleterious to the health of any person handling or otherwise
coming into contact with such material or substance.
      HEAD-IN PARKING. Nose-in parking at an angle of 90 degrees to a curb,
edge of street, or defined parking area.
      HEIGHT, SIGN. As applied to a sign, height shall be measured as the
vertical distance between the highest part of the sign or its supporting
structure, whichever is higher, and finished grade at the center of the base of
the sign.
      HEIGHT, LETTER/LOGO. The height of each individual letter, logo, symbol,
and/or icon in a sign.
      HERITAGE TREE.
         (a)   Means a tree that has a diameter of 24 inches or more, measured
four and one-half feet above natural grade, and is one of the following species
(large tree category):
            1.   Texas Ash (Fraxinus texensis);
            2.   Bald Cypress (Taxodium distichum);
            3.   American Elm (Ulmus americana);
            4.   Cedar Elm (Ulmus crassifolia);
            5.   All Oaks (Quercus sp.);
            6.   Pecan (Carrya illinoinensis);
            7.   Arizona Walnut (Juglans major);
            8.   Eastern Black Walnut (Juglans nigra);
            9.   Honey Mesquite (Prosopsis gladulsis); and
            10.   Ashe Juniper (Juniperus asheii) with no more than two main
trunks.
         (b)   In addition, heritage tree means a tree that has a diameter of
ten inches or more, measured four and one-half feet above natural grade, and is
one of the following species (small tree category):
            1.   Texas Persimmon (Diospyrus texana);
            2.   Texas Mountain Laurel (Sophora secundiflora);
            3.   Eve's necklace (Sophora affinis);
            4.   Silk Tassel (Garrya ovata); and
            5.   Bigtooth Maple (Acer grandidentatum).
         (c)   This list of eligible heritage tree species may be supplemented.
      HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. Means the highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
      HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Means any structure that is:
         (a)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places
(a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
         (b)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
         (c)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
         (d)   Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
            1.   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior or;
            2.   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
      HOBBY. An accessory use carried on by the occupant of the premises in a
shop, studio or other workroom, purely for personal enjoyment, amusement or
recreation; provided that the articles produced or constructed in said shop,
studio, or workroom are not sold either on or off the premises, and provided
such use will not be obnoxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise,
odor, dust, smoke, fumes, electrical interference or hazards.
      HOLDING TANK SYSTEM. A system that consists of a watertight container or
containers used to receive and store sewage in an anaerobic environment pending
its delivery to, and treatment at, an approved treatment facility.
      HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation or activity which is clearly incidental
and secondary to the use of the premises for dwelling purposes and which is
carried on within the dwelling or within one accessory building and which must
comply with provisions of this Code.
      HOME OFFICE. The portion of a residential dwelling devoted to the
business of a home occupation.
      HORSE STABLES, PRIVATE. Any premises on which one or more horses are kept
for the sole use, and enjoyment of the owner or lessee of the premises and not
for any commercial purpose and are maintained in conformity and compliance with
all federal, state and local health and other city regulations.
      HOTEL. See MOTEL.
      ILLUMINATION. The enhancement of a sign utilizing electric lights,
luminous tubes or other similar means.
      IMPERVIOUS COVER. Roads, parking areas, buildings and other impermeable
construction covering the natural land surface; this shall include, but not be
limited to, all streets and pavement within a subdivision; See §
150.332 for inclusions, exclusions, and exemptions from impervious cover
calculations.
      INCIDENTAL USE. A secondary or minor use associated with a primary use.
      INCOMPATIBILITY OF LAND USES. Contradictory, incongruous, or discordant
land uses or activities, including the impacts of noise, vibration, smoke,
odors, toxic matter, radiation, and similar environmental conditions.
      INDIRECT LIGHTING. A light source separated from the surface and
illuminating the sign surface by means of spot lights or similar fixtures.
      INDISCRIMINATE CLEARING. The removal of natural vegetation without
consideration of habitat and ecosystem services understory plants provide.
Indiscriminate clearing refers to removal of all natural vegetation within a
given area.
      INDOOR FAMILY RECREATION CENTER. A family entertainment facility where
admission is charged and which caters to children from toddler to 12 years of
age accompanied and supervised by a parent(s) or adult(s) at all times;
provided that any food service does not include the serving of alcoholic
beverages and only token operated, motor skill-type games not listed under the
definition of amusement center are utilized with such use being subordinate in
nature to the primary purpose of the operation of the establishment.
      INSPECTOR. A person(s) designated by the City Council to enforce
provisions of the Land Development Code, city ordinances and regulations.
      INSTITUTION. A building occupied by a non-profit corporation or non-
profit establishment for public use.
      INTERMEDIATE WATERWAY. Any natural channel for surface water drainage
that drains an area greater than 320 acres but less than 640 acres.
      JUNK. The term is defined to mean and shall include scrap iron, scrap
tin, scrap brass, scrap copper, scrap lead or scrap zinc, and all other scrap
metals and their alloys, and bones, rags, used cloth, used rubber, used rope,
used tinfoil, used bottles, old cotton, or used machinery, used tools, used
appliances, used fixtures, used utensils, used boxes or crates, used pipe or
pipe fittings, used automobile or airplane tires, and other manufactured goods
that are so worn, deteriorated or obsolete as to make them unusable in their
existing condition; subject to being dismantled for junk.
      JUNK or SALVAGE YARD. A junk or salvage yard is a lot upon which waste or
scrap materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, packed, disassembled, or
handled, including but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper,
rags, rubber tires, and bottles. A junk yard includes an automobile wrecking
yard and automobile parts yard. A junk yard does not include such uses
conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
      KENNEL, COMMERCIAL. Any premises on which three dogs or three cats or
more over the age of four months or more are kept for sale or are boarded,
trained or bred for remuneration.
      KINDERGARTEN/PRESCHOOL. A school for children of pre-public school age in
which constructive endeavors, object lessons and helpful games are prominent
features of the curriculum.
      LAND OWNER. Shall mean the legal or beneficial owner or owners of the
land. The holder of an option or a contract to purchase or other persons having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land shall be deemed to be a land
owner for the purpose of this Code.
      LANDSCAPED AREA. That area within the boundaries of a given lot which is
devoted to and consists of planting area(s) containing plant material,
including but not limited to grass, trees, shrubs, flowers, vines and other
groundcover, and native plant materials.
      LANDSCAPING. Material such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers,
shrubs, vines, hedges, trees or palms; and non-living durable material commonly
used in landscaping, such as, but not limited to, rocks, pebbles, sand, walls
or fences, but excluding paving.
      LAUNDRY/COMMERCIAL. An establishment providing dry-cleaning, washing,
drying, or ironing services on the premises that are not self-service.
      LAUNDRY/SELF-SERVICE. An establishment providing dry-cleaning, washing,
drying, or ironing machines for use on the premises, usually coin-operated and
self-service.
      LEASE SPACE. An area of a building separated internally and intended for
use by an individual tenant.
      LEGAL HEIGHT. The maximum height of a building permitted by this Code
restricting the height of structures.
      LEGAL LOT. An undivided tract or parcel of land having access to a public
street and which is, or in the future may be offered for sale, conveyance,
transfer or improvement; which is designated and legally described in the deed
records as a distinct and separate tract, and which is:
         (a)   A part of a duly approved subdivision plat properly filed for
record identified by a tract or lot number or symbol;
         (b)   Was properly filed for record identified by metes and bounds
prior to July 8, 1975 and has not been divided into two or more parcels after
this date.
      LEVEE. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
      LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
      LIMITED EXEMPTION. The circumstance of an application that allows for
certain exemptions from the requirement to obtain a sign permit.
      LODGING HOUSE. A building with guest rooms, two or more of which share
communal bath and/or toilet facilities, where over-night, weekly, or similarly
short-term lodging is provided for compensation on a for-profit, non-cost
sharing basis, whether or not open to the public. A LODGING HOUSE does not
include a COMMUNITY HOME as that term is defined herein.
      LOGO. Any registered or recognized symbol, letter, or combination of
symbols and letters used by an organization, individual, company, or product
for advertising to identify that organization, individual, company, or product.
      LOT. Generally, a discrete tract of land, including a PLOT or a LEGAL
LOT.
      LOT AREA. The net area of the lot, expressed in square feet or acreage,
not including portions of any public street or alley.
      LOT COVERAGE. The percentage of the total area of a lot occupied by the
base (first story or floor) of buildings located on the lot.
      LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
line.
      LOT LINES. The legal boundaries of a lot as determined by a professional
surveyor registered to practice in Texas.
      LOT WIDTH. The distance between straight lines connecting front and rear
lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required
front yard, provided however the width between side lot lines at their foremost
points (where they intersect with the street line) shall not be less than 80%
of the required lot width. In case of lots on the turning circle of cul-de-sac
the width shall be a minimum of 60 feet.
      LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking or vehicles, building access considered a building's lowest floor;
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
      LOW PRESSURE DOSE SYSTEM. A system that utilities some form of pumping
device and a network of small diameter piping to distribute treated effluent
within a subsurface sewage disposal area.
      MAJOR WATERWAY. Any natural channel for surface water drainage that
drains 640 acres or more.
      MANUFACTURED HOME. For flood loss control provisions of this Code, means
a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term MANUFACTURED HOME
does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
      MASONRY. A building material on the exterior surfaces of the outside
walls constructed of solid brick, or stone, cement fiber board, or stucco.
      MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. Any building, room, place or establishment, where
manipulated massage or manipulated exercises are practiced for pay upon the
human body by anyone who is not a duly licensed physician; osteopath;
chiropractor; registered nurse or practical nurse operating under a physician's
directions; licensed or certified alternative health care practitioner such as
massage therapists, etc.; registered pathologists and physical or occupational
therapists who treat only patients referred by a licensed physician and operate
only under such physician's direction, whether with or without the use of
mechanical therapeutic, or bathing devices, and shall include Turkish
bathhouses. The term shall not include a regularly licensed hospital, medical
clinic or nursing home.
      MASTER COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The plan required by the Tex. Local Gov't Code
§ 211.004. The comprehensive plan is an independent, long-term plan for use and
development of land within the city and in the city's extraterritorial
jurisdiction.
      MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
      MICRO-BLADING (EYEBROWS ONLY). The practice of producing an indelible
mark or figure on the eyebrow by inserting pigments under the skin using
needles, scalpels, or other related equipment. Any business providing this
service must be licensed by the Department of State Health Services, or
successor.
      MINOR WATERWAY. Any natural channel for surface water drainage that
drains an area greater than 64 acres but less than 320 acres.
      MOBILE HOME. A mobile or portable dwelling which is constructed on a
chassis, and which is designed to be towed over Texas roads and highways under
special permit, designed for year-round occupancy, designed primarily to be
used without a permanent foundation, but which may sit on a permanent
foundation, and designed to be connected to utilities. It may consist of one or
more units that can be telescoped when transported and expanded later for
additional capacity or of two or more units, separately transportable, but
designed to be joined together into one integral unit. The following shall not
be included in this definition:
         (a)   Travel trailers, pickup coaches, motor homes, camping trailers,
or other recreational vehicles.
         (b)   Manufactured modular housing which is designed to be set on a
permanent foundation, and which uses standard sheathing, roofing, siding, and
electrical, plumbing, and heating systems which comply with city Codes.
      MOBILE HOME/RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. Any area or tract of land where
one or more mobile homes or recreational vehicle lots or spaces are rented or
held for hire.
      MOTEL/HOTEL. A building or group of buildings developed as an integral
unit in which there are: 1) guest rooms each of which has its own bath and
toilet facilities, in which living and sleeping areas are combined into one
room, and which may be rented on a daily basis; and 2) desk or lobby service
and telephone, maid, linen, room and similar services. Guest rooms may have
individual entrances.
      MULCH. Non-living organic and synthetic materials customarily used in
landscape design to retard erosion and retain moisture.
      MULTI-FAMILY. An attached housing unit development designed to provide
shelter to three or more individual persons or families, with each unit
containing separate kitchen, bath and bedroom facilities and sharing a common
wall. For the provisions of this Code only, multi-family includes but is not
limited to four-plexes, apartments, townhouses or condominiums.
      NATIVE. Plants which have locally adapted by natural selection to the
region's weather, soil, pests and disease conditions.
      NATURAL. Produced or existing in nature; not manufactured, artificial or
cultivated.
      NATURAL VEGETATION. Native or naturalized woody and herbaceous plants
that grow without human intervention. Natural vegetation excludes invasive,
exotic species including but not limited to Japanese Ligustrum (Ligustrum
japoinica), Chinaberry (Melia azaderach), Chinese Tallow (Sapium
sebiferum),Red-Tipped Photinia (Photinia x fraseri), Nandina (Nandina sp.),Tree
of Heaven (Ailanthus altissima).
      NEW CONSTRUCTION. For floodplain management purposes, structures for
which the START OF CONSTRUCTION commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community.
      NONCOMPLIANCE. Includes any one or more of the following:
         (a)   The failure of a permittee to comply with the provisions of the
City Code pursuant to which the permit was issued;
         (b)   The failure of a permittee to comply with the provisions of any
relevant city ordinance other than and in addition to the sections of the Code
pursuant to which the permit was issued;
         (c)   The failure of a permittee to comply with any term or condition
imposed by the city in connection with the issuance of the permit;
         (d)   The making of any material misrepresentation or false or
misleading statement by a permit applicant or one acting on his behalf in
connection with or on a permit application;
         (e)   The failure of a permittee to timely commence the work required
or authorized by a permit as approved by the city;
         (f)   The failure of a permittee to timely complete the work required
or authorized by a permit as approved by the city; or
         (g)   A failure to obtain any required permit prior to commencing an
activity for which a permit is required.
      NON-COMPLYING. A building, structure, or area, including off-street
parking or loading areas, that does not comply with currently applicable site
development regulations for the district in which it is located, but did comply
with applicable regulations at the time of its construction.
      NONCONFORMING. The use of any land, building, or structure which does not
conform with currently applicable use regulations, but which complied with use
regulations in effect at the time the use was established.
      NOTICE. Actual notice or written notice sent by registered or certified
mail.
      NUISANCE FACTOR. Any offensive or unpleasant thing which annoys or
disturbs one in free use, possession, or enjoyment of his property or which
endangers one's health or life or property, such as:
         (a)   Noise;
         (b)   Dust;
         (c)   Smoke;
         (d)   Fumes;
         (e)   Odor;
         (f)   Glare;
         (g)   Flashes;
         (h)   Heat;
         (i)   Electronic or atomic radiation;
         (j)   Effluent;
         (k)   Vibration;
         (l)   Shock waves;
         (m)   Gases;
         (n)   Vicious, mischievous, and barking dogs(s); and
         (o)   Unlawful diversion of drainage onto adjacent property.
      OBSOLETE. Any sign which:
         (a)   For at least 12 continuous months, does not identify or
advertise a bona fide business, lessee, service, owner, product or activity on
the premises on which the sign is located;
         (b)   If the premises is leased, relates to a tenant and at least two
years have elapsed since the date the most recent tenant ceased to operate on
the premises; or
         (c)   No legal owner can be found and relates to a use or purpose that
is no longer in existence.
      OFFICE. A room, studio, suite, or building or any part thereof in which a
person transacts his business or carries on his stated occupation. For the
purposes of the Code, an office shall not involve manufacturing, fabrication,
production, processing, assembling, cleaning, testing, repair, or storage of
materials, goods and products; or the sale and delivery of any materials, goods
or products which are physically located on the premises. An office shall not
be deemed to include a veterinary clinic.
      OFFICE COMPLEX. Two or more offices and/or office establishments, sharing
customer parking area, regardless of whether said offices or office
establishments occupy separate structures or are under separate ownership, or
on separate tracts or lots of land.
      OFFICIAL SIGN. Any sign erected by or at the direction of any
governmental body.
      OFF-PREMISE SIGN. Any sign other than an on-premise sign.
      OFF-STREET. Off the right-of-way of a public street or place.
      ON-PREMISE SIGN. A sign which advertises only goods, services,
facilities, events or attractions available on the premises where located, or
identifies the owner or occupant or directs traffic on the premises. All other
signs are off-premise signs.
      OPEN SPACE. Any unoccupied space on a lot that is open and unobstructed
to the sky and has no impervious cover.
      OPEN STORAGE. Open storage is the storage of any vehicles, equipment,
machinery, commodities, raw, semi-finished materials, and building materials,
not accessory to a residential use which is visible from any point on the
building lot line when viewed from ground level to six feet above ground level.
      OUTDOOR ADVERTISING. See SIGN.
      OUTDOOR SALES OR SERVICES. The offer or display for sale of any goods,
wares, merchandise or services on private property separate and apart from the
main building or at a location where there is no preexisting principal use. The
goods, wares, merchandise or services offered for sale as outdoor sales or
services are normally not offered for sale in the main building on the lot or
in association with the principal use.
      OVERLAND FLOW. Stormwater runoff that is not confined by any natural or
man-made channel such as a creek, drainage ditch, storm sewer, or the like.
      OWNER. For purposes of the chapter of this Code regulating tree and
natural area protection, owner means any person with a freehold interest in
land, or a lessee, agent, employee or other person acting on behalf of the
owner with the owner's authorization.
      PAD SITE. A tract, lot, or land lease intended for the single use of a
freestanding building typically adjacent to street R.O.W. and may also be a
portion of a tractor lot.
      PARKING BAY. A parking facility unit, usually including one or two rows
of parking spaces and a central aisle.
      PARKING MODULE. The clear width provided for the parking of vehicles,
including two rows of parking with an aisle between the rows.
      PARKING SPACE. An area on a lot or site or within a building not on a
public street and having an all-weather surface; enclosed or unenclosed,
together with an all-weather surface driveway which may be an easement,
connecting the parking space with a street permitting free ingress and egress;
used or intended to be used for parking of a motor vehicle.
      PARTIAL TREE SURVEY. A drawing of the proposed preliminary plat or site
plan including adjacent easements and rights-of-way showing size, locations,
species, and critical root zone of all trees having a DBH of four inches or
more.
      PAVEMENT WIDTH. The portion of a street available for vehicular traffic.
Where curbs are laid, PAVEMENT WIDTH is the portion between the face of curbs.
      PAVER. A masonry or concrete brick or tile suitable for paving streets,
sidewalks, driveways, or related surfaces.
      PAWN SHOP. A business which transacts business that conforms to the Texas
statutory definition for pawn shop.
      PERMANENT STORAGE. Storage for a period of more than 30 days.
      PERMIT. A permit or license issued by the city authorizing the holder
thereof, his agents or his employees to perform certain work or engage in
certain activities.
      PERMITTEE. The person to whom any permit or license has been issued by
the city, and any agent or employee of said person.
      PERSON. Any individual, association, firm, trust, partnership,
corporation, joint-stock company, joint venture, court appointed receiver or
conservator, consortium, or any other legal or commercial entity; any group of
the foregoing, organized or united for a business purpose; or any governmental
agency or entity, or political subdivision.
      PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. A place of business primarily engaged in
providing services of a personal nature associated with appearance, grooming,
or physical wellbeing. Uses include nail salons, tanning salons and day spas
that provide treatments such as massage (but not a massage establishment),
facials, unwanted hair removal, and body treatment and microblading (eyebrows
only) but shall exclude body piercing and tattooing.
      PERVIOUS CONCRETE. Pervious concrete (also called porous concrete,
permeable concrete, no fines concrete and porous pavement) is a special type of
concrete using large aggregates with little to no fine particles. Pervious
concrete has high porosity and is used for concrete flatwork applications that
allows water prom precipitation and other sources to pass directly through,
thereby reducing the runoff from a site and allowing groundwater recharge.
      PET SERVICES.
         (a)   Is the use of a site for the provision of grooming, or boarding
services, performed within an enclosed building or structure. The use of any
structure or building for the purpose of boarding or intending to board animals
must meet all of the following requirements:
            1.   The structure or building must be capable of controlling the
temperature within the building or structure within limits generally accepted
to maintain the health of those species of animals present, of maintaining
humidity levels of 30% to 70% and of rapidly eliminating odors from within the
building;
            2.   The structure or building must be an enclosure created by the
continuous connection of a roof, floor and walls (a shed or barn set on top of
the ground does not have a continuous connection between the walls and the
ground unless a foundation and floor are provided);
            3.   The structure or building must have at least one door for
entry and exit that can be opened and closed (any windows or openings which
provide natural light must be covered with a transparent material such as glass
or hard plastic);
            4.   The structure or building must be designed to be acoustically
sound so as to eliminate animal noise from reaching neighboring tenants or
adjacent property and designed to adequately contain and restrain the animals
present;
            5.   The pet service must be operated in compliance with all
applicable ordinances, laws and regulations including but not limited to
licensing requirements; and
            6.   A sign is prominently displayed stating that any unresolved
complaints regarding the care of animals or the condition of the premises can
be directed to the City of Sunset Valley at 512-892-1383.
         (b)   Pet services excludes boarding of equine, primates, livestock
and large animals as well as the sale of dogs and cats from the premises.
      PIPING. All pipes, including valves, elbows, joints, flanges, flexible
connectors and other fittings attached to and constituting a part of an
underground storage tank system through which hazardous materials regulated by
this Code flow.
      PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the city is the City
Council.
      PLANT COMMUNITIES. A formation of vegetation that differs from each other
by the dominant or characteristic species that are found in it. Geography and
climate are the primary influences on the establishment and survival of plant
communities.
      PLANTING AREA. Any area designed for landscape planting having a minimum
of 180 square feet of actual plantable area and a minimum inside dimension of
any side of ten feet.
      PLAT. A map, drawing, or chart of a single tract or a subdivision of land
creating building lots or tracts and showing all essential dimensions and other
information essential to comply with the subdivision standards of this Code.
      PLOT. See LOT.
      POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES AND ASSOCIATED STRUCTURES. All poles, towers,
supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces,
transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communications circuits,
appliances, attachments, and appurtenances used or useful in supplying
electric, communications or similar associated service.
      POLITICAL SIGN. Any sign which is designed to influence the action of the
voters for the passage or defeat of a measure appearing on the ballot at any
national, state, or local election or which is designed to influence the voters
for the election or defeat of a candidate for nomination or election to any
public office at any national, state or local election, but the sign shall not
include the name of the sponsor or business promoting the activity or
advertising the business.
      PRELIMINARY PLAT. A plat of the proposed arrangement of streets, lots,
easements, and other public spaces in a subdivision in preparation for review
by the City Council.
      PREMISES. A lot or tract within the City of Sunset Valley, Texas, and
contiguous land(s) in the same ownership which is not divided by a public
highway, street or alley, or right-of-way therefor.
      PRIMARY CONTAINMENT. The first level of containment, or the inside
portion of an underground storage tank or of fuel delivery piping, which comes
into immediate contact on its inner surface with the hazardous material being
contained.
      PRIVATE ON-SITE SEWAGE FACILITY. A sewage disposal facility, including
facilities consisting of evapotranspiration systems, pressure dosing systems
and holding tanks designed and intended to serve only an individual household,
multiple unit residential structures or commercial establishments whose
operation and maintenance is the sole responsibility of the householder or
owner of the establishment's facilities. Such facilities are not subject to the
issuance of wastewater discharge orders by the Texas Natural Resources and
Conservation Commission.
      PROJECT. A specific development or property improvement endeavor
undertaken by a property owner and documented in one or more permit
applications filed by the owner. Once a permit or approval has expired, the
project has terminated. Once construction has begun and been completed,
approvals or permits for new construction on the same property are not
considered part of the same project unless expressly contemplated, documented
or applied for in the original permit application, or unless the approvals or
permits involve minor modifications to the original project. If an application
seeks or would require a change in a zoning category, for example, the
application initiates a new project. A new project is not initiated by minor
modifications in the original plan or by alterations specifically required by
the city or that are occasioned merely by attempts to decrease impervious cover
or by dedication of property to public use.
         (a)   If the initial application references a building or buildings,
additional or different buildings would constitute a new project. Once all the
buildings referenced in the initial application have been built according to
approved plans and regulations, the project has ended with respect to those
buildings or building permits.
         (b)   If a project has several component parts, completion or
termination of the project as to one part does not constitute completion or
termination of the entire project.
      PROJECTING OR HANGING SIGN. Any sign attached to a building and extending
in whole or in part more than nine inches beyond the building line. Allowable
size does not include supporting structure.
      PROTECTED TREE.
         (a)   A tree with a diameter of ten inches or more, measured four and
one-half feet above natural grade for the majority of species. A tree with a
diameter of greater than five inches of the following tree species shall be
considered protected:
            1.   Texas Persimmon (Diospyrus texana);
            2.   Texas Mountain Laurel (Sophora secundiflora);
            3.   Eve's necklace (Sophora affinis);
            4.   Silk Tassel (Garrya ovata); and
            5.   Bigtooth Maple (Acer grandentatum).
         (b)   The following species of trees are not included in the
definition of protected tree:
            1.   Chinaberry (Melia azederach);
            2.   Chinese Tallow (Sapium sebiferum);
            3.   Japanese Ligustrum (Ligustrum japonica);
            4.   Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus altissima); and
            5.   Callery Pear (Pyrus calleryana).
      PUBLIC BUILDING OF LOCAL, STATE OR FEDERAL GOVERNMENT. Facilities such as
office buildings required by branches of local, state or federal government.
Maintenance yards or shops in association with public buildings are not
included in this definition.
      PUBLIC GARAGE. Any building, except those described as a private garage,
in which motor vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired or kept for
remuneration, hire or sale, and where a filling station may be maintained.
      PUBLIC INFORMATION SIGN. Any sign which is intended to identify
community, civic and social events, and is not a commercial sign, official
sign, political sign, or real estate sign as defined herein.
      PUBLIC PARKS. A public park is any publicly owned park, playground,
greenbelt, parkway, or roadway within the jurisdiction and control of the city.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any property which is owned by a governmental entity. It
shall also include property for which the primary use is for the operations of
a governmental entity.
      QUARRYING. The removal from the earth of stone, sand, gravel, caliche,
minerals, topsoil or other natural material for the purpose of sale or any
other commercial purpose, other than such as may be incidental to excavating or
regrading in connection with or in anticipation of building development or
landscaping on the site.
      RAINWATER HARVESTING SYSTEM. Shall mean one or more receptacle(s) for the
collection and storage of rainwater from a roof or from runoff flowing across
the ground, together with any pumps and mechanical equipment and slab therefor,
whether located above or below ground.
      REAL ESTATE 'FOR SALE' OR 'FOR LEASE' SIGN. A temporary sign designating
that the premises upon which it is erected is for sale, rent, or lease.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is (1) built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projections; (3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use. Recreational vehicles shall include a motor home, travel trailer,
truck camper and camping trailer, but shall not include a mobile home.
      REFLECTIVE SURFACE. Any material or device which has the effect of
intensifying reflected light, such as scotch light, day glow, glass beads and
luminous paint.
      REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
      RELEASE. Any spilling, including overfills, leaking, emitting,
discharging, escaping, leaching or disposing from an underground storage tank
or tank system into groundwater, surface water or subsurface soils.
      RELEASE DETECTION SYSTEM. A system to detect releases, which system
includes equipment or testing procedures designed to effectively monitor or
measure for the presence of regulated substances in the secondary containment,
tertiary containment, tank excavation, soil or other media outside of the
underground storage tank system.
      REMOVAL. For purposes of this chapter regulating tree and natural area
protection, removal means an act that causes or may be reasonably expected to
cause a tree to die, including:
         (a)   Uprooting;
         (b)   Severing the main trunk;
         (c)   Damaging the root system; and
         (d)   Excessive pruning.
      REPAIR. The restoration, renovation or mending of a malfunctioning or
damaged underground storage tank system or component thereof.
      RESIDENCE TIME. The average residence time of a basin equal to the volume
of the basin divided by the average rate of the outflow.
      RESIDENTIAL INN. A building or group of buildings developed as an
integral unit, which there are (1) guest rooms each of which has its own bath
and toilet facilities; (2) where over-night, weekly, or similarly short-term
lodging is provided for compensation; and (3) where desk or lobby service and
telephone, maid, linen and similar services are provided.
      RESIDENTIAL NAMEPLATE SIGN. A sign permitted for the sole purpose of
identifying the inhabitant residing therein, the house name, or identifying the
address of the house. The sign may contain no advertising of any kind.
      RESTAURANT. An establishment whose primary business is selling food for
consumption at tables on the premises or for takeout, as determined by at least
51% of gross sales.
      RESTORATION. The routine maintenance and painting of existing, approved
signs, that do not change the approved design and color in any way.
      RETAIL (GENERAL). Establishments serving a local district market area,
and engaged primarily in the rental or sale of retail goods and services
commonly purchased by the general public, including those listed in retail,
limited.
      RETAIL (LIMITED). Establishments engaged primarily in the rental or
retail sale of goods and services for personal consumption or improvement or
household use, except those items specifically defined under RETAIL (GENERAL),
generally serving a neighborhood area.
      REZONING. A change in the zoning map; an amendment to the map.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any travel-way open to the general public for travel or
land dedicated for eventual travel by the public. Dedicated right-of-way may in
addition to travel by the public be used for installation of utilities or other
public purposes.
      RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
      SCHOOL, PUBLIC OR DENOMINATIONAL. A school having a curriculum generally
equivalent to public elementary or secondary schools, but not including trade
or commercial schools.
      SCULPTURED ALUMINUM PANEL. An aluminum sign panel with text or graphic
depictions cut out from the panel, typically with a translucent material
covering the cut-out from the inner side of the panel.
      SECONDARY CONTAINMENT. The level of containment external to and separate
from the primary containment, consisting of an impervious layer of materials
which are installed so that any release of hazardous materials from the primary
containment of an underground storage tank, fuel delivery piping or tank system
is prevented from contacting the environment outside said impervious layer.
      SECONDARY USE. A collateral use of land or buildings, which is
customarily done or performed in conjunction with a permitted principal use,
but not constituting a majority of either the employment, area or revenue of
the combined uses.
      SETBACK. As applied to a sign, the distance from the closest portion,
whether the support or edge of the sign, to the property line.
      SEWAGE. Water which contains, or which has been in contact with, organic
and inorganic contaminants such as human or animal wastes, vegetable matter,
cooking fats and greases, laundry and dishwashing detergents and other chemical
compounds and waste products. The term "sewage" is interchangeable with the
term "wastewater."
      SHADE TREE - SMALL. A self-supporting woody plant or species normally
growing to a mature height of at least 20 feet and a mature spread of at least
15 feet in Sunset Valley. Clusters of more than one tree may be used when it is
demonstrated that the grouping of trees will, at maturity, surpass the 15-foot
diameter requirement and that the grouping of trees is suitable for the
proposed location.
      SHOPPING CENTER. A group of four or more retail establishments, planned,
developed and managed as a unit, except that for the purposes of the subchapter
regulating signs, SHOPPING CENTER means two or more retail stores and/or
service establishments, or one retail store and one service establishment,
sharing customer parking area, regardless of whether said stores and/or
establishments occupy separate structures or are under separate ownership or on
separate lots or tracts of land.
      SHRUB. A shrub shall be defined and will qualify if either of the
following are met:
         (a)   A bushy, woody plant with several permanent stems instead of a
single trunk usually not more than ten feet in height at maturity; a bush.
         (b)   A plant listed as a shrub in any of the following:
            1.   A list of shrubs prepared by the City of Austin Parks
Department entitled "Landscape Supplement-Plant Materials for the Austin Area."
            2.   Trees, Shrubs and Woody Vines of the Southwest by Robert A.
Vines.
            3.   Shrubs, Vines and Trees for the Austin Area, compiled by Ted
Fisher, Travis County Extension Agent.
      SIDEWALK. A pedestrian walkway that is grade-separated from the adjacent
street or drive when located adjacent to a street or drive.
      SIGN. Any device or surface on which letters, illustrations, designs,
figures or symbols are painted, printed, stamped, raised, projected or in any
manner outlined or attached and used for advertising purposes. Also, a name,
identification, image, light device, figure, painting, drawing, message,
plaque, poster, billboard, description, display or illustration which is
affixed to, painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building,
picture, window, or piece of land, and which directs attention to an object,
product, place, activity, facility, service, event, attraction, person,
institution, organization or business which is visible from any street, right-
of-way, sidewalk, alley, park or other public property. Customary displays of
merchandise or objects and material without lettering which are placed behind a
store window are not signs or parts of signs. The term SIGN includes the term
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING.
      SIGN AREA. A two-dimensional area on a building or other permitted sign
structure that is free of architectural details and is the area that
encompasses the proposed sign in its entirety.
      SIGN AREA, AGGREGATE. The sum total of all the window and interior sign
area on the aggregate window area available per tenant.
      SIGN, ATTACHED. Any sign attached to, applied on, or supported by any
part of a building (including canopy fascia, walls and awnings) which encloses
or covers usable space.
      SIGN, ATTACHED BUSINESS. A permanent attached onsite sign that is used to
identify a business, profession, organization, institution, service, activity
or other nonresidential use conducted, sold or offered on the site where such
sign is located. This sign may also identify the name of the site or
development or may identify the occupants within the site or development. A
primary business sign is attached to a facade facing a street or vehicular
driveway access.
      SIGN, BANNER. A temporary on-premise sign made of cloth, flexible
plastic, canvas or other non-rigid material.
      SIGN BASE. See SIGN, MONUMENT.
      SIGN, BILLBOARD. Any sign that is freestanding or attached to or part of
a building and is an off-premise sign. A sign advertising products not made,
sold, used or served on the premises displaying such sign, or a sign having a
height greater than 14 feet and a surface area greater than 100 square feet.
      SIGN, BULLETIN BOARD. A permanent ground sign or monument sign within a
residential subdivision for displaying news and information for subdivision
residents.
      SIGN, BUSINESS MONUMENT. A permanent on-premise monument sign that is
used to identify a business, profession, organization, institution, service,
activity or other nonresidential use conducted, sold or offered on the site
where such sign is located. This sign may also identify the name of the site or
development or may identify the occupants within the site or development.
      SIGN, CANOPY. A sign on a freestanding structure with a roof but not
walls.
      SIGN, CHANGEABLE ELECTRONIC VARIABLE MESSAGE. A sign which permits
alteration of the sign's message or images by electronic means. This includes a
sign using light-emitting diodes (LEDs) or other means of digital display to
present a message or images.
      SIGN, COMMERCIAL. A sign other than a real estate "for sale or for lease"
sign, political sign, residential nameplate sign, public information sign,
traffic control sign or exempted sign which directs the attention of the
general public to a business, product, service, or other commercial or business
activity.
      SIGN, COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE. An on-premise sign intended to advertise
building(s), buildings or space(s) for sale or lease after the building(s) and
or space(s) have been occupied for a year or more.
      SIGN, DEVELOPMENT/CONSTRUCTION. A temporary on-premise ground sign that
pertains to a new development that is approved or under construction.
      SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. A permanent on-premise attached sign intended to aid
in vehicular movement on the site.
      SIGN, DIRECTORY. A permanent on-premise attached or monument sign
providing direction to or identifying the buildings in the development.
      SIGN, DRIVE THROUGH. A permanent on-premise attached or monument sign
located immediately adjacent to, within, or over a drive through lane that is
associated with sales conducted from an automobile.
      SIGN, DRIVE THROUGH NON-FOOD SERVICE. A drive through sign associated
with sales from an automobile that are not related to food service sales.
      SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE. A sign that includes provisions for
programmable electronic message changes.
      SIGN FACE. The surface of one side of a sign.
      SIGN, FREESTANDING. Any sign which is not attached to or on the walls,
face, or exterior of a building.
      SIGN, GARAGE/YARD SALE. A temporary ground or banner sign intended to
advertise garage sales or yard sales.
      SIGN, GASOLINE PRICING. A permanent on-premise monument sign which
displays the price per gallon of fuel sold by that business, and which may be
periodically changed to reflect changes in fuel prices.
      SIGN, GOVERNMENT. A sign erected by or on behalf of a federal, state or
local government or an agency thereof.
      SIGN, GRAND OPENING BANNER. A banner permitted within one year of the
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy (C.O.) for a business.
      SIGN, GROUND. Any sign connected to the ground by legs, poles, or other
supports and which is not an attached, portable, monument, or vehicular sign.
      SIGN, HOLIDAY. Any sign that is associated with the celebration of a
recognized holiday or celebration.
      SIGN, HOME OCCUPATION. An attached on-premise sign at the entrance of a
home occupation.
      SIGN, HUMAN. A sign held by or attached to a human for the purpose of
advertising or providing information about a business, commodity, service,
product, or other commercial activity. A person dressed in a costume for the
purpose of advertising or providing information about a business, commodity,
service, product, or other commercial activity shall constitute a human sign.
Human signs do not include T-shirts, hats, or other similar clothing.
      SIGN, INFLATABLE. Any balloon or other device which is inflated by air or
other gas and displayed outdoors. Inflatable structures primarily designed for
recreational use shall not be considered to be a sign as, for example: slides,
swimming pools or space walks.
      SIGN, LAND. A temporary on-premise ground sign on vacant land intended to
advertise land for sale including un-platted tracts of land.
      SIGN, LIGHT POLE BANNER. A banner sign attached to a light pole along a
public street or within a public park.
      SIGN, MENU-BOARD. A drive through sign associated with menu and pricing
for food services and may include an audible speaker and microphone integral to
the sign.
      SIGN, MODEL HOME. A temporary on-premise real estate sign identifying a
homebuilder's model home open for inspection.
      SIGN, MONUMENT. Any sign which is connected to the ground and which has
no clear space for the full width of the sign between the bottom of the sign
and the surface of the ground. A monument sign includes a sign face and sign
structure, and may also include a sign base and sign cap as described below:
         (a)   Sign base: The above-ground foundation of the sign, which
includes the exposed concrete footing for the sign.
         (b)   Sign face: The surface of the sign in which the sign message is
located.
         (c)   Sign structure: The structure surrounding the sign face.
         (d)   Sign cap: A part of the sign structure located above the sign
face that is constructed of a different masonry.
      SIGN, NEW CONSTRUCTION FOR SALE/LEASING. A temporary on-premise sign
intended to advertise a newly constructed building(s) that is/are for sale or
lease.
      SIGN OFF-SITE. A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, good, product, or entertainment not related to the site upon which
such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
      SIGN, OFFICIAL. Any sign erected by or at the direction of any
governmental body.
      SIGN, OFF-PREMISE. Any sign other than an on-premise sign.
      SIGN, ON-PREMISE. Any sign, the content of which relates to the site on
which it is located, referring exclusively to businesses, commodities,
services, products, goods, or entertainment on the site, or the sale, lease, or
construction of those sites. A sign which advertises only goods, services,
facilities, events or attractions available on the premises where located, or
identifies the owner or occupant or directs traffic on the premises. All other
signs are off-premise signs.
      SIGN PANEL. Any separate, single panel or piece of material containing a
word or symbol legend or individual message that is affixed to the face of a
sign.
      SIGN, PANEL REPLACEMENT. The replacement of a panel on an existing sign
that does not alter the sign.
      SIGN, PARKS AND RECREATION BANNER. A banner displayed on public park
property.
      SIGN PERMIT. The official authorization by the city to alter, erect, or
display any sign not exempted by this chapter.
      SIGN, POLITICAL. Any sign which is designed to influence the action of
the voters for the passage or defeat of a measure appearing on the ballot at
any national, state, or local election or which is designed to influence the
voters for the election or defeat of a candidate for nomination or election to
any public office at any national, state or local election, but the sign shall
not include the name of the sponsor or business promoting the activity or
advertising the business.
      SIGN, PORTABLE. Any sign which is not attached or affixed to the ground,
a building, vehicle, or other fixed structure or object. Portable signs include
those signs installed on wheels, trailers, skids, and similar mobile
structures.
      SIGN, PROJECTING. An attached sign oriented perpendicular to the face of
the building which projects more than 12 inches beyond the surface of the
building to which it is affixed or supported.
      SIGN, PUBLIC INFORMATION. Any sign which is intended to identify
community, civic and social events, and is not a commercial sign, official
sign, political sign, or real estate sign as defined herein.
      SIGN, READER BOARD. A sign that utilizes alternating electronic data
control components or a sign comprised of non-permanent letters, numerals or
symbols, which allows a change of sign copy by adding, removing or rearranging
said letters, symbols or numerals.
      SIGN, RESIDENTIAL BUILDER. A temporary on-premise sign identifying the
builder or general contractor of a residential construction site.
      SIGN, RESIDENTIAL NAMEPLATE. A sign permitted for the sole purpose of
identifying the inhabitant residing therein, the house name, or identifying the
address of the house. The sign may contain no advertising of any kind.
      SIGN, RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE. A temporary on-premise sign identifying
existing residential buildings and/or lots for sale or lease on all
residentially zoned and platted lots.
      SIGN, RESTRICTED PARKING. A temporary or permanent sign in a parking lot
that restricts parking for any reason.
      SIGN, ROOF. Any sign that is:
         (a)   Erected on a vertical framework supported by and located
immediately and entirely over the roof of a building;
         (b)   Attached to a fascia extending above or below the projection of
the fascia;
         (c)   Painted or otherwise affixed on a roof; or
         (d)   Displayed above the eave line of a sloped roof or parapet of a
flat roof.
      SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD. A portable sign consisting of two panels of equal
size, which are hinged at the top and placed on the ground or pavement so as to
be self-supporting.
      SIGN, SPECIAL PURPOSE. A temporary sign that is either on-premise or off-
premise that provides identification or information pertaining to a special
event or occurrence sponsored by a non-profit or civic organization.
      SIGN STRUCTURE. See SIGN, MONUMENT.
      SIGN, SUBDIVISION ENTRY. Any permanent on-premise sign identifying a
residential subdivision.
      SIGN, SUBDIVISION MARKETING/OPEN HOUSE. A temporary sign used to market
or advertise residential subdivisions/open houses within the city and to direct
interested persons to the subdivision/open house location.
      SIGN, TEMPORARY. Any sign constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric,
cardboard, wallboard, or other like materials, with or without frames, and any
type sign not permanently attached to the ground, wall, or building, intended
to be displayed for a short period of time only.
      SIGN, TEMPORARY SITE DEVELOPMENT. A sign permitted to identify a project
under construction including the project name, project address, general
contractor, and architect.
      SIGN, TRAFFIC CONTROL. A permitted sign for the purpose of identifying
parking areas and directing the flow of traffic on private property.
      SIGN, VEHICULAR. Any sign which is attached to or supported by a vehicle
or trailer, or is located within a vehicle and is yet visible.
      SIGN WALKER (HUMAN SIGN). A sign held by or attached to a human for the
purpose of advertising or providing information about a business, commodity,
service, product, or other commercial activity. A person dressed in a costume
for the purpose of advertising or providing information about a business,
commodity, service, product, or other commercial activity shall constitute a
human sign. Human signs do not include T-shirts, hats, or other similar
clothing.
      SIGN, WALL. A sign attached to, painted on, or erected against the wall
of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane
parallel to the face of the wall and not projecting more than nine inches from
the face of the wall at any point.
      SIGN, WAYFINDING. A government sign that provides direction to locations
and facilities.
      SIGN, WINDOW. Any sign affixed to, or painted on, any internal and/or
external surface of a window, or is located less than ten feet from the window
of any establishment.
      SIGNIFICANT RECHARGE FEATURE. A feature that, based on a surface exposure
of solutioned or factured limestone or on the presence of topography indicative
of a karst sink, is likely to provide a conduit for infiltrating surface water
to the Edwards Aquifer and the City of Sunset Valley drinking water supply.
      SINGLE FAMILY. A detached building unit designed to provide shelter and
contain one family unit. For the provisions of the watershed development
regulations of this Code only, single family shall include two family units.
      SITE. A space of ground occupied or to be occupied by a structure.
      SITE PLAN. A map showing and describing a proposed development including
the existing conditions and proposed changes to the subject property in
accordance with the site plan requirements in this Code.
      SITE SPECIFIC PLANTING. The selection of plant material that is
particularly well suited to withstand the physical growing conditions which are
normal for that location.
      SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. See AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
      SPECIAL USE. A use that may be authorized by the City Council if the
applicant can show, to the satisfaction of the City Council after a public
hearing, that the use requested meets all applicable conditions and standards
contained in §§ 150.030 through 150.252.
      START OF CONSTRUCTION. Commencing any site clearing, excavation or
grading. For purposes of the flood loss control provisions of this Code, "Start
of Construction" (fmr other than new construction or substantial improvements
under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)) includes substantial
improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the state of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations of the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory building, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
      STORAGE PERMIT. A permit issued by the city pursuant to this Code for the
storage of hazardous materials in underground storage tanks.
      STORAGE WAREHOUSE. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged
in wholesaling, storage, distribution and handling of materials and equipment
within enclosed structures.
      STORY. The height between the successive floors of a building or from the
top floor to the roof. The standard height for a story is 11 feet, six inches.
      STREET. A public right-of-way, however designated, which provides
vehicular access to adjacent land.
      STREET, COLLECTOR STREET. An undivided roadway generally providing access
to minor arterials from local streets but generally without direct access from
adjacent properties except for elementary schools, small apartment complexes,
and neighborhood commercial centers.
      STREET, LOCAL STREET. A roadway providing access to individual adjacent
properties.
      STREET, MAJOR ARTERIAL STREET. A divided or undivided limited-access
roadway designed to provide vehicular circulation between major traffic
generators, such as large high-density residential neighborhoods, commercial
centers, and other municipalities.
      STREET, MINOR ARTERIAL STREET. A divided or undivided, limited-access
roadway designed to provide vehicular circulation between secondary traffic
generators, such as a neighborhood/community shopping centers, office
complexes, high schools, and municipal or regional parks/recreation areas, and
between major arterial streets and streets of lower classification.
      STREET, PRIVATE STREET. A "private street" is a driveway or alley which
serves only to give secondary vehicular access to a building lot or to an
accessory parking or loading facility, or to allow vehicles to take or
discharge passengers at the entrance to a building.
      STREET, THROUGH STREET. A roadway with two or more outlets.
      STREET YARD.
         (a)   The street yard is the area of a lot which lies between the
street right-of-way line and the actual front wall line of the building, as
such building wall line extends from the outward corners of the building,
parallel to the street, until such imaginary extensions of such front building
wall line intersects the side property lines. In determining the actual
building wall of the building for the purposes of this Code, steps and
unenclosed porches shall be excluded, but such building wall line shall follow
and include the irregular indentions of the building. A front building wall is
a building wall fronting on a street.
         (b)   On corner lots, the street yard shall consist of all the area of
such lot between all abutting street rights-of-way lines and their
corresponding actual front building wall lines, as such lines are imaginarily
extended in the manner provided above.
         (c)   When there are multiple buildings on a lot, the street yard
shall consist of all the area of the lot between the street right-of-way line
(s) and an imaginary line beginning at one side of the property line, running
parallel to the street, connecting to the frontmost corner of the building wall
fronting the street and nearest such side property line, then following and
connecting the frontmost walls of all buildings fronting on the street, and
then extending to the other side property line, running parallel to the street.
If a building has a rounded front, the front building wall corners shall be the
points closest to the side boundaries. Provided, that isolated buildings (e.g.,
photo processing drop-offs, bank drive-throughs, etc.) shall not be considered
in delineating the street yard.
         (d)   Notwithstanding all of the foregoing, on land used only for
parking purposes or only as a commercial or private parking lot, the street
yard shall consist of the area between the street right-of-way line and the
back property line.
      STRUCTURE. Anything, constructed or erected, which requires location on
the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground, but not
including, advertising signs, billboards, and poster boards. The word
"building" includes the word "structure." For purposes of the flood loss
control provisions of this Code, "structure" means a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
      STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls, columns, girders or beams over eight feet
long.
      STUCCO. Portland cement stucco (traditional) only. Stucco does not
include synthetic stucco or Exterior Insulation and Finish System (EFIS).
      SUBDIVIDER. Any person or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to
divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as that term is defined herein.
In any event, the term "subdivider" shall be restricted to include only the
owner, equitable owner or authorized agent of such owner or equitable owner, or
land sought to be subdivided.
      SUBDIVISION. A division of any tract, lot, piece, or parcel of land, or
any portion or fraction thereof (whether by block or lot numbers, or by metes
and bounds descriptions), situated within the corporate limits, or within the
city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, in two or more parts for the purpose of
transfer of ownership, or building development, whether immediate or future, or
for laying out suburban lots or building lots, or any lots, whether all or any
portion thereof be intended for public use, or only for the use of purchasers,
short or long-term lessees, guests and/or agents. Subdivision also includes
resubdivision of any tract, lot, piece, or parcel of land.
      SUBSEQUENT PERMIT. All permits needed for a project except for the first
permit needed for a project.
      SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
      SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to
comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
      SUBSTANTIAL MODIFICATION AND REPAIR. Repairs, additions, upgrading or
alterations to, or the replacement of, an underground storage tank system or
any component part thereof, except routine maintenance activity performed on
the tank and fuel delivery system. The term shall include, but not be limited
to, tank repairs, such as interior and exterior relining or recoating, and the
installation of new or replacement piping.
      SUMPAGE. Liquids that enter a primary, secondary or tertiary containment
system other than by direct precipitation or runoff.
      SURFACE AREA OF A SIGN. The total surface including frame and mounting,
but shall include only one-half of a freestanding back-to-back sign, provided
the freestanding sign's sides are back to back or angled with no greater
separation between sides at its widest point than four feet and provided that
both sides have the identical sign.
      SURVEYOR. A licensed State Land Surveyor or a Registered Public Surveyor,
as authorized by state statute to practice the profession of surveying.
      TABC. Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission
      TASTING. Proving one or more individual alcohol sample(s), or a glass of
wine, to a patron or patrons for on premise consumption the purpose of allowing
the patron or patrons to taste wine products. Tastings are permitted as an
accessory use only to the retail sale of wine products produced on premise.
      TAVERN, BAR, LOUNGE OR PRIVATE CLUB, DANCE HALL, NIGHT CLUB. A tavern,
bar, lounge, dance hall or nightclub shall mean an establishment, the primary
activity of which is the sale and consumption on the premises of beer, wine or
other liquors, as determined by at least 51% of gross sales. Private club shall
mean any organization or association of persons, whether unincorporated or
incorporated, including fraternal and veteran organizations and all
organizations required to be licensed by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Commission, which sells, stores, possesses or regularly provides and dispenses
or makes available alcoholic beverages at its meeting place or on the premises
thereof to its members and their guests regardless of whether or not a fee is
charged therefore and regardless of whether or not the dispensation of
alcoholic beverages is incidental to or the primary function of the operation
of such organization or association.
      TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION STORAGE. A temporary, enclosed, lockable structure
or shelter subject to removal by order of the City Council used to store small
tools and small materials connected to the construction on the lot where the
temporary construction storage is located.
      TEMPORARY FIELD OR CONSTRUCTION OFFICE. A structure or shelter, subject
to removal by order of the City Council, used in connection with a development
or building project for housing on the site of temporary administrative and
supervisory functions and for sheltering employees and equipment. Not to be
used for human habitation.
      TEMPORARY SITE DEVELOPMENT SIGN. A sign permitted to identify a project
under construction including the project name, project address, general
contractor, and architect.
      TEMPORARY SPECIAL USE. An event or activity with duration of less than 30
days in a Zoning District other than SF Single Family, that involves an
activity not normally associated with the Certificate of Occupancy or Zoning
Use of the proposed location. This includes outdoor sales events, festivals and
carnivals. For the Toney Burger Center, this will include any use of the
facilities or grounds for an event not sponsored by the Austin Independent
School District.
      TEMPORARY TREE PROTECTION DEVICE. Physical barriers, at least four feet
in height, installed prior to construction for the purpose of preventing damage
to trees. Such devices include chain-link fence, vinyl construction fencing or
other similar temporary barriers that is nonintrusive to the tree canopy and
critical root zone.
      TERTIARY CONTAINMENT. The level of containment external to and separate
from the secondary containment, consisting of an impervious layer of materials
which are installed so that any release of hazardous materials from the
secondary containment of an underground storage facility is prevented from
contacting the environment outside said impervious layer.
      TRACT. A defined area of land.
      TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGN. A permitted sign for the purpose of identifying
parking areas and directing the flow of traffic on private property.
      TRAIL. A path through a grassland or woodland area for the passage of
people and animals. In commercial areas a path, not composed of concrete and
used to connect pedestrians to destinations within the development will also be
considered trails.
      TREE. Any woody plant having one or more well defined stems or trunks
with a more or less definitely formed crown and usually attaining a mature
height of at least eight feet.
      TREE INVENTORY. A drawing showing the tag number, species, size, and
approximate location of all existing protected, heritage and ancestral trees.
      TREE PROTECTION PLAN. A plan providing the method of protecting trees
during construction that may include protection details, standards, notes and
construction plans in accordance with generally accepted methods and may be
detailed in the Urban Forest Management Plan.
      TREE REPLACEMENT PLAN. A plan providing the method of replacement for
protected, heritage or ancestral trees proposed to be removed. The plan may
include the location, size and species of all new trees proposed as
replacements for protected, heritage or ancestral trees being removed and/or
fees in lieu of replacement trees.
      TREE SURVEY. A drawing of the proposed preliminary plat or site plan
showing the size, location, species and critical root zone of existing trees,
protected, heritage or ancestral trees proposed to be removed or transplanted,
and a table summarizing all protected, heritage and ancestral trees. All trees
having a DBH of four inches or more must be shown on the tree survey.
      TREE TOPPING. The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three
inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree that removal of the
top canopy disfigures and invites disease to the tree.
      TWO-FAMILY. An attached housing unit designed to provide shelter and
contain two separate family units with each unit separated by a common wall.
      UNDERGROUND STORAGE CONSTRUCTION PERMIT. A permit issued by the city
pursuant to this Code for the construction, replacement or substantial
modification or repair of any underground storage tank, tank system or
component thereof in which hazardous materials will or may be stored.
      UNDERGROUND STORAGE FACILITY. A single location or site, including but
not limited to retail service stations and retail fuel outlets with one or more
underground tank systems, including any building or buildings, appurtenant
structures, and surrounding land area.
      UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK. Any one or combination of underground tanks and
any connecting underground pipes used to contain an accumulation of regulated
substances, the volume of which, including the volume of the connecting
underground pipes, is 10% or more beneath the surface of the ground.
      UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK SYSTEM. An underground storage tank, all
associated piping and ancillary equipment, spill and overfill protection
equipment, release detection equipment, corrosion protection system, secondary
and tertiary containment systems (as applicable) and all other related systems
and equipment used for or in connection with the storage, transfer or
containment of hazardous materials at an underground storage facility.
      UPLANDS ZONE. All lands and waters that are not included within the
critical water quality zone or the water quality transition zone.
      URBAN FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN. The standards and specifications based on
generally accepted practices developed by the City Arborist for sound
arboricultural practices, techniques and procedure, which shall serve as
guidelines for trees throughout the city. This plan includes but is not limited
to tree selection, planting, pruning, alteration, treatment, protection and
removal.
      UTILITY EASEMENT. An interest in land granted to the city, to the public
generally, and/or to a private utility corporation, over or under private land,
together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and vehicles necessary
for the maintenance of said utilities.
      UTILITY LINES. All wires and lines used to provide telephone, cable
television, and electricity to any structure, including guy wires and other
supporting devices.
      VARIANCE. An adjustment in the application of the specific requirements
of this Land Development Code to a particular parcel of property under the
procedures set forth in this Code.
      VEGETATION, NATIVE. Any plant species with a geographic distribution
indigenous to all or part of the State of Texas. Plant species which have been
introduced by man are not native vegetation.
      VEGETATIVE FILTER STRIP. A strip of permanent vegetation above ponds,
diversions and other structures to retard flow of runoff water, causing
deposition of transported material, thereby reducing sediment flow.
      VETERINARY CLINIC. An establishment for the diagnosis and treatment of
disease and injuries of animals, by a person trained and authorized to treat
animals medically. Animals may be kept on the premises for treatment measures.
      VIOLATION. For purposes of the flood loss control provisions of this
Code, means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or  other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (3)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
      VISUAL SCREEN. A device designed to divide, conceal or protect from view.
A screen may be a structure or vegetation.
      WALL. A wall shall be defined as an opaque structure constructed of
masonry, concrete, stone, brick or other materials which either screens a
portion of the site from view or retains earth. Such walls shall include but
not be limited to architectural buffers, water quality pond walls and retaining
walls.
      WALL SIGN. A sign attached to, painted on, or erected against the wall of
a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel
to the face of the wall and not projecting more than nine inches from the face
of the wall at any point.
      WASTEWATER. See SEWAGE.
      WATER QUALITY CONTROLS. Detention/sedimentation basins, sedimentation/
filtration basins, filtration basins and retention/irrigation, retention, wet
ponds, irrigation, vegetative filter strips or other water quality control
structures or systems designed to provide water quality benefits through the
treatment of stormwater run-off.
      WATER QUALITY TRANSITION ZONE. Lands and waters as defined § 150.329.
      WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
      WINE or VINOUS LIQUOR. The product obtained from the alcoholic
fermentation of juice of sound, ripe grapes, fruits, berries, or honey, and
includes wine coolers.
      WINERY. A retail establishment, in possession of the "G" license as
issued by TABC, where wine or vinous liquor is produced on premises for on-
premise consumption and sale as well as for off-premise consumption. Additional
accessory uses may include a tasting room to dispense wine for on-premise
consumption, meeting facilities, prepared food sales, and a retail sales area.
      XERISCAPE. Landscape methods which conserve water through the use of
drought tolerant plants and planting techniques.
      ZONE. A zoning district as shown on the official zoning map of the city.
      ZONING. Control of the use and development of land, whether improved or
not, for the benefit of citizens in the community and the public welfare.
      ZONING COMMISSION. The agency appointed by the City Council as an
advisory body to it and which is authorized to recommend changes in the zoning.
      ZOO (PRIVATE). A facility housing and displaying live animals, reptiles
or birds, privately owned and operated for a fee or for the promotion of some
other enterprise.
§ 150.007 GENERAL RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The following general rules of construction apply to the textual provisions
of this chapter:
   (A)   Computation of time. In computing a period of days, the day of the act
or event from which the designated period of days begins to run is excluded,
and the last day of the period of days is included, unless the last day is not
a working day. If the last day of the period is not a working day, the period
runs until the end of the next day which is a working day. In computing a
period of less than seven days, Saturdays, Sundays, and city holidays are
excluded.
   (B)   Internal reference. A reference without further identification to a
chapter, division, part, or section is a reference to a chapter, division,
part, or section of this Land Development Code. A reference within a particular
chapter, division, section, or subsection to an division, section, subsection,
or other numbered or lettered divisional unit without further identification is
a reference to a unit of the next larger unit of this Land Development Code in
which a reference appears. For example, a reference in this division to
division (A) is a reference to §
150.007(A).
   (C)   Headings. Section and division headings contained herein are for
convenience only and do not govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the
scope, meaning, or intent of any provision of the Land Development Code.
   (D)   Illustration. In case of any difference of meaning or implication
between the text of any provision and any illustration, or table, the text
shall control.
   (E)   "Shall", "must", "will", and "may". "Shall", "must", and "will" are
always mandatory and not discretionary. "May" is discretionary.
   (F)   Tenses and numbers. Words used in the present tense include the
future, and words used in singular include the plural, and the plural the
singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
   (G)   Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary,
conjunctions are interpreted as follows:
      (1)   "And" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply.
      (2)   "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply
singly or in any combination.
      (3)   "Either...or" indicates that the connected items or provisions
shall apply singly but not in combination.
§ 150.008 CONFLICT WITH PRIVATE RESTRICTIONS.
   The provisions of this Land Development Code are minimum requirements for
the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general
welfare. It is not the intent of these regulations to interfere with, abrogate,
or annul any private easement, covenant, restriction, or other agreement
between private parties. When regulations imposed by this Land Development Code
require a greater restriction upon the use of a building or land, or upon the
height of buildings, require larger open spaces, or otherwise impose greater
restrictions than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules,
regulations, or by private easements, covenants, restrictions, or agreements,
the provisions of the Land Development Code shall control.
§ 150.009 INCONSISTENT PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this Land Development Code establish procedures to
be followed in connection with regulations governing the use and development of
land. The requirements of this Land Development Code shall control over any
previously enacted and inconsistent provision of an ordinance of the City of
Sunset Valley.
   (B)   Provisions of this Land Development Code shall be held to be minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety and general
welfare. Wherever a requirement of this Land Development Code is at variance
with another requirement of this Land Development Code, any statute or city
ordinance, the most restrictive, or that imposing the higher standard shall
apply.
§ 150.010 EXTENSION OF DEADLINES.
   To the extent otherwise permitted by state statute or federal law, an
applicant and the City Council may extend by agreement any deadline set forth
in the Land Development Code.
§ 150.011 APPLICABILITY OF LAND DEVELOPMENT TO CITY OF SUNSET VALLEY.
   In those circumstances in which the City of Sunset Valley as a property
owner is engaged in development, the Land Development Code applies to these
development activities unless the city is otherwise exempted by provisions of
this Code or by another ordinance and except as set forth below.
   (A)   The city does not have to pay itself any fees or post any fiscal
security or bond.
   (B)   None of the timetables and deadlines established herein apply to the
city when the city is an applicant under this Land Development Code.
   (C)   When the city is required to prepare a development application, the
City Administrator on a case-by-case basis may waive specific elements or
contents of the application when such elements or contents are not required by
this Code and are unnecessary or wasteful.
   (D)   The following Land Development Code provisions are inapplicable to the
city when the city is an applicant or seeks to take action with regard to its
own property or rights of way: §
150.064(B), §
150.066(B)(1) and (C), §
150.086, §
150.104(B) and (C), §
150.113, §
150.267(G) and (H), §
150.268, §
150.269, §
150.280(E), §
150.281(B), (C), (D), (F)(5) and (F)(6), §
150.282(B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(11) and (B)(12), §
150.283(B), §
150.284(D), §
150.304, §
150.306, §
150.307(L), §
150.309, §
150.326(C), (F), (G) and (H), §
150.336(C) and (E), §
150.376, §
150.549, §
150.569, §
150.570, §
150.572, §
150.573, §
150.575, §
150.628, §
150.634, §
150.635, §
150.657, §
150.672(C) and (D), §
150.673, §
150.674, §§
150.700 through
150.736, §§
150.750 through
150.757, §§
150.777 through
150.781, §
150.021, and §
150.999
   (E)   (1)   Except as to matters of zoning, the City Council may grant the
city a variance from any provision in this Code for any of the reasons
identified in §
150.002 upon notice and hearing. No other substantive or procedural variance
requirements apply to the City of Sunset Valley when it is an applicant on non-
zoning matters.
      (2)   The Board of Adjustment decision on any variance requested when the
city is an applicant shall be governed by the standards set forth in §
150.002.
   (F)   Nothing in §
150.011 shall prohibit the city from amending zoning law and reclassifying the
zoning categories of particular property as otherwise provided for in this Land
Development Code.
   (G)   The imposition of any duty on the City of Sunset Valley in its role as
developer or applicant under this Code does not bestow on any person any rights
as against the city.
§ 150.012 GRANDFATHERING ESTABLISHED BY DATE OF INITIAL APPLICATION.
   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, an applicant must comply
with current ordinances, rules and regulations in effect on the date the first
application for a project is filed with the city. Those ordinances, rules and
regulations govern subsequent permits for the project filed within two years
from the date the first application is filed. Subsequent permit applications
filed more than two years after the date the first application is filed with
the city shall be governed by the ordinances, rules and regulations in effect
on the date the subsequent application is filed.
§ 150.013 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   An applicant to whom §
150.012 applies shall have the right, without otherwise forfeiting any rights
under this section, to take advantage of changes to the Sunset Valley Land
Development Code if such new version of the Land Development Code would enhance
or protect the project.
   (B)   The most current versions of each of the following Land Development
Code provisions and ordinances are applicable to any project and these
provisions and ordinances are exempted from §
150.012:
      (1)   Ordinances or those portions of the Land Development Code adopting
updated versions of the uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical codes promulgated by a recognized national code organization; or
      (2)   Fees imposed in conjunction with permits or applications;
      (3)   Regulations for utility connections;
      (4)   Public works projects undertaken by governmental entities other
than the city;
      (5)   New amendments to the Land Development Code or new ordinances to
the extent they are expressly exempted from this Division (or its predecessor
ordinance) or specific sections of this Division (or the predecessor
ordinance);
      (6)   Ordinances or Code amendments the city is required to enact
pursuant to federal or state law; or
      (7)   Regulations that are exempt under state or federal law from the
Uniformity of Requirements section of Tex. Loc. Gov't Code Chapter 245.
§ 150.014 PROCEDURE; APPLICABLE TO ALL APPLICATIONS AND REQUESTS FOR APPROVAL.
   (A)   The filing of an application or request for approval shall include all
information required by this Code for the application or approval, as well as
the appropriate fees prior to review. Where forms have been promulgated by the
city, information shall be provided on such forms.
   (B)   City of Sunset Valley staff shall review the completed form referred
to in division (A) as well as the application and all supporting documentation
to determine whether the application filed includes all documents or
information necessary to comply with this Code’s requirements relating to the
form and content of the application.
   (C)   If the application fails to include the necessary documents or
information, within three business days of filing the City Administrator or
other Sunset Valley staff shall make a determination on the administrative
completeness of the application and provide the applicant with written notice
that specifies the deficiencies of the application. This does not preclude the
city from finding that the information is not sufficient to support the
application after the three business days.
   (D)   If the notice provisions of §
150.014(C) are invalidated for any reason, the notice provisions permitted by
Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 245.002 shall apply to the filing of any application or
request for approval.
(Ord. 220906-B, passed 9-6-2022)
§ 150.015 DEADLINES AND EXPIRATION DATES NOT EXTENDED.
   This subchapter does not extend a deadline for, or expiration date of, an
application or approval under City of Sunset Valley ordinances.
§ 150.016 UPDATING SUBMITTALS; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   This subchapter does not prohibit the city from requiring updated tree
surveys, engineering reports, or other submittals required under the City’s
Codes or ordinances when an application is not granted or denied before such
surveys, reports or other submittals become outdated or inaccurate.
   (B)   The city may require compliance with requirements relating to the form
and content of an application in effect at the time the application was filed
even though the application is filed after the date an applicant accrues rights
under §
150.014.
§ 150.017 NO VESTED RIGHTS.
   This subchapter does not create any property rights or vested rights in any
applicant or other individual or entity. The City Council may amend or repeal
all or part of this subchapter, making such repeal or amendment effective
immediately upon all pending and future applications.
§ 150.018 STATE LAW PRIMACY.
   As applied to those sections of this Land Development Code other than §§
150.320 through 1500.349, this chapter may be preempted by state statute.
§ 150.019 APPLICATION DEFINED.
   As used in §§
150.012 through
150.020, “application” means an application submitted to the City of Sunset
Valley in conformance with city ordinances for approval of site development
plans, site plans, subdivisions, construction plans, resubdivisions,
replatting, building permits, landscaping permits, watershed permits,
construction permits, or any other endeavor for which an approval or permit is
required by this Code. The application shall include the items listed in
Appendix A or
Appendix B as appropriate.
(Ord. 220906-B, passed 9-6-2022)
§ 150.020 FAIR NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   Applicants are required to provide the City of Sunset Valley fair notice of
each application.
   (A)   To provide fair notice of any first application for a project, an
applicant must provide the following:
      (1)   Proposed project name, address, legal description, and
jurisdiction;
      (2)   The rules under which the applicant requests review;
      (3)   The basis of any request for review under rules other than those in
effect on the date of the application;
      (4)   Project application history;
      (5)   Project land use(s), the configuration of such uses, and the layout
of proposed infrastructure and public lands and facilities to be dedicated to
the public;
      (6)   Existing and proposed zoning categories;
      (7)   Acreage of project property;
      (8)   Identify existing contiguous roadways;
      (9)   Watershed status and classification;
      (10)   Proposed provider and location of all utilities; and
      (11)   Summary of the project.
   (B)   To provide fair notice of a subdivision application, an applicant must
provide the following:
      (1)   The information required in division (A) above;
      (2)   Zoning approvals, if any;
      (3)   Zoning ordinance numbers, if any;
      (4)   Site plan approvals, if any; and
      (5)   Subdivision approvals; if any.
   (C)   To provide fair notice of a watershed or site plan application, an
applicant must additionally provide the following:
      (1)   The information required in division (A) above;
      (2)   The information required in division (B) above, if applicable; and
      (3)   Utility or storm sewer length.
§ 150.021 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT OR LICENSE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish uniform
procedures to govern the revocation of permits and the city's recovery of its
reasonable costs incurred in connection therewith.
   (B)   Revocation of permit. A permit may be revoked for:
      (1)   The failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions of the
City Code pursuant to which said permit was issued;
      (2)   The failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions of any
relevant city ordinance other than and in addition to the sections of the Code
pursuant to which the permit was issued;
      (3)   The failure of the permittee to comply with any term or requirement
imposed by the city as a condition of the issuance of the permit, including but
not limited to timely payment of all permit fees and third-party review costs;
      (4)   The making of any material misrepresentation or false or misleading
statement by the permit applicant or one acting on his behalf in connection
with or on the permit application;
      (5)   The failure of the permittee to timely commence the work as
required or authorized by the permit as approved by the city; or
      (6)   The failure of the permittee to timely complete the work as
required or authorized by the permit as approved by the city;
      (7)   Any other reason allowed by law.
   (C)   If the city determines that a permittee is in noncompliance, as that
term is defined herein, or that a permit should be revoked for any other reason
allowed by law, the city shall give written notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the permittee and, if not the same person, the property
owner, which notice shall:
      (1)   State the nature of the noncompliance or other condition warranting
revocation;
      (2)   Direct the specific action be taken to correct the noncompliance or
other condition warranting revocation within 30 days of the receipt of the
notice, which action may include the requirement that the permittee provide
such additional information as the city deems necessary;
      (3)   Advise that a hearing may be requested before the City Council to
determine whether or not the permittee is in noncompliance, and whether or not
the permit should be revoked;
      (4)   Advise that to request a hearing, a written application therefor
must be filed with the City Secretary within ten days of receipt of the notice
provided for herein; and
      (5)   Advise that if no hearing is requested within said ten days, and if
the required corrective work is not completed within the 30-day period
specified in the notice, the permit shall be revoked.
   (D)   If no hearing is requested and if the required corrective action is
not completed within the time specified by the city, the permit shall be
revoked and shall be void and of no effect as if it had never been issued. No
work shall be done in connection with the project for which the permit was
issued except as thereafter expressly directed or authorized by the city.
   (E)   Hearing before the City Council.
      (1)   If a hearing has been requested within ten days of receipt of the
notice by the filing of a written application therefor with the City Secretary,
the City Council shall, no later than 30 days after receipt of said request,
hold a hearing to determine whether the permittee is in noncompliance or if
some other reason recognized by law exists which would warrant the revocation
of the permit and whether the permit should be revoked. Written notice of the
date, time and place of the hearing shall be given to the permittee and, if not
the same person, the owner of the property.
      (2)   If, after hearing, the City Council determines that the permittee
is in noncompliance or that such other condition exists that would warrant
revocation of the permit, and that the permit should be revoked, it shall order
that the necessary corrective action be completed within such time as the
Council directs. If the work is not so completed, the permit shall be revoked,
and shall be void and of no effect as if it had never been issued. No further
work shall be done in connection with the project for which the permit was
issued except as thereafter expressly directed or authorized by the city.
   (F)   Inspections.
      (1)   In addition to any inspection authorized or required pursuant to
any city ordinance or sections of this Code in connection with the issuance of
a permit, the city is authorized to enter upon any property to which a permit
relates at any reasonable hour to inspect the work for which the permit was
issued. If the property is occupied, the city's representative shall first
present credentials and request entry. If the property is vacant, the city's
representative shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or
other persons who have charge or control of the property and request that entry
be granted.
      (2)   If the owner, occupant or person in control refuses to grant the
city's representative entry, and the city has reasonable cause to believe that
the permittee is in non-compliance as that term is defined in this section of
the Code, the city's representative shall seek and obtain a search warrant from
the Municipal Court Judge, the purpose of which is to determine whether or not
the permittee is in non-compliance, before entering upon the property.
   (G)   Extensions. The city may grant such extensions of time as it deems
appropriate to those permittees who have made a reasonable effort to comply
with the city's directives.
   (H)   Application. The provisions of this section shall apply to the
revocation of permits issued by the city pursuant to ordinances which do not
include therein any specific procedure for permit revocation.
   (I)   Recovery of costs.
      (1)   The city may, upon notice to the permittee, retain such experts,
including but not limited to engineers, sanitarians, hydrologists and
attorneys, to advise and represent the city in connection with its
determination that a permittee is in non-compliance, as that term is defined
herein and/or, that a permit should be revoked. In the event that the city does
determine that a permittee is in non-compliance and the permit is finally
revoked, the permittee shall reimburse the city for the reasonable costs
incurred in connection with the retention of such experts.
      (2)   In addition to any other method allowed by law pursuant to which
the city can recover the costs it incurs in connection with the permit
revocation proceedings, including those authorized by division (I)(1) above,
the city may, at its discretion, collect on any bond or letter of credit
required of the permittee.
      (3)   Nothing in this section is intended to limit the remedies available
to the city.
ZONING COMMISSION
§ 150.030 ZONING COMMISSION CREATED.
   (A)   There shall be and is hereby created a Zoning Commission for the city,
which shall consist of five members including a chairperson, and up to five
alternate members to serve in the absence of a member. The members and
alternate members shall be resident citizens and qualified voters of the city,
all of whom shall be appointed by the City Council.
   (B)   All vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as provided for the
original appointments.
   (C)   Members and alternate members of the Commission may be removed by the
Council, after public hearing and for cause assigned in writing or upon the
completion of their assigned term.
   (D)   Members of the Zoning Commission shall not receive compensation for
their services.
   (E)   Up to two alternate member(s) of the Zoning Commission shall be
assigned to participate in a meeting or hearing of the Zoning Commission to
substitute for member(s) of the Zoning Commission who are unable to attend and
participate in such meeting or hearing. Alternate members assigned to
participate in meetings or hearings shall have all the authority of a regular
member of the Zoning Commission while so assigned. The chairperson of the
Zoning Commission shall arrange for the assignment of alternate members, as
necessary, and the City Administrator shall assist the chairperson in making
such assignments. When needed, and as practicable, alternate members shall be
assigned to Zoning Commission meetings or hearings by alphabetical order by
last name on a rotating basis. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that
an alternate member is assigned to a hearing that is continued or resumed at a
later meeting of the Zoning Commission, such alternate member may continue the
assignment in connection with such continued or resumed hearing.
§ 150.031 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The terms for the members and alternate members of the Zoning Commission
shall be concurrent with the term of office of the elected Mayor.
§ 150.032 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Zoning Commission shall study the zoning questions of the city and make
to the City Council preliminary reports and an annual report, and any suggested
amendments of the zoning provisions contained in this Code, for the regulation
of the height of buildings and structures, setback lines or building lines, the
intensity of the use of lot areas, the location of trades and industries, and
buildings designed for industrial, business, residential, or other use, and
dividing the city into various use, height, and other districts for the
purposes of establishing and enforcing adequate and proper zoning regulations.
The governing body shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the
City Council or state law.
§ 150.033 ORGANIZATION AND RULES.
   (A)   The Zoning Commission shall meet at such times as may be determined by
it, and special meetings of the Commission may be held upon call of the
chairman or of any three members thereof. The city secretary shall act as
secretary of the Zoning Commission, unless provision to the contrary is made by
the City Council.
   (B)   The Zoning Commission shall have the power to make rules, regulations,
and bylaws for its own government, which shall conform as nearly as possible
with those governing the City Council and same shall be subject to approval by
the City Council. Such bylaws shall include among other items, provisions for:
      (1)   Regular and special meetings shall be open to the public, and
subjects of the meeting shall be posted at least 72 hours before each meeting
except for emergencies.
      (2)   Records of all proceedings to be open for inspection by the public.
      (3)   The Commission shall report to the governing body and public from
time to time and annually.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 150.045 TERM OF OFFICE OF PRIOR MEMBERS OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   The Members of the Board of Adjustment duly appointed pursuant to Ordinance
No. 850212A and holding office on the effective date of Ordinance No. 951107
shall have the authority and shall serve the functions and purposes provided in
this subchapter of the Land Development Code. The term of office of each member
of the Board of Adjustment holding office on the effective date of Ordinance
No. 951107 shall continue for the duration of the original term unless earlier
terminated in accordance with this Division of the Land Development Code or
applicable law. The Board of Adjustment shall exercise such functions and
duties and shall have such authority as is provided in Tex. Loc. Gov't Code
Chapter 211, as amended from time to time.
§ 150.046 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   Membership.
      (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five regular members and
up to five alternate members, each to be appointed by the City Council for a
term of two years.
      (2)   Alternate members shall serve in the absence of one or more regular
members when requested to do so by the presiding officer of the Board of
Adjustment. Up to two alternate member(s) shall be assigned to participate in a
meeting or hearing of the Board to substitute for member(s) of the Board who
are unable to attend and participate in such meeting or hearing. Alternate
members assigned to participate in meetings or hearings shall have all the
authority of a regular member of the Board while so assigned. The chairperson
of the Board shall arrange for the assignment of alternate members, as
necessary, and the City Administrator shall assist the chairperson in making
such assignments. When needed, and as practicable, alternate members shall be
assigned to Board meetings or hearings by alphabetical order by last name on a
rotating basis. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that an alternate
member is assigned to a hearing that is continued or resumed at a later meeting
of the Board, such alternate member may continue the assignment in connection
with such continued or resumed hearing.
      (3)   The regular members of the Board of Adjustment shall elect from
among themselves a chairperson, who shall serve as the presiding officer, and a
vice-chairperson who shall serve as the presiding officer in the chairperson's
absence.
      (4)   In the event that a regular or alternate member leaves or is
removed from office before expiration of the term of office, the resulting
vacancy shall be filled by the City Council for the unexpired term of such
member or alternate member. In the event that a chairperson, vice chairperson,
or second vice chairperson leaves or is removed from office, a successor shall
be elected in accordance with the provisions of §
150.046(A)(4).
   (B)   Meetings. Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the
call of the presiding officer and at such other times as the Board may
determine. Each case before the Board must be heard by at least four members.
   (C)   Rules. The Board shall by majority vote adopt rules for the conduct of
its duties, consistent with this Division and Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code Chapter 211
as amended from time to time. Any such rules adopted after September 1, 2019
shall be subject to the approval of the City Council.
   (D)   Removal. The City Council may remove a Board member for cause, as
found by the City Council, on a written charge after a public hearing.
§ 150.047 PROCEDURES.
   Each case before the Board of Adjustment must be heard by at least 75% of
the members. The concurring votes of 75% of the members of the Board is
necessary to:
   (A)   Reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of an
administrative official;
   (B)   Decide in favor of an application on a matter on which the Board is
required to pass under a zoning ordinance; or
   (C)   Authorize a variance from the terms of a zoning ordinance.
§ 150.048 QUALIFICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP.
   No member of the Board shall be an employee of the city or hold any other
appointed or elected office in the city or serve on any other committee, board,
or commission, the members of which are appointed by elected officials of the
city.
ZONING PROCEDURES
§ 150.060 PUBLIC HEARINGS OF APPLICATIONS FOR SPECIAL USE PERMIT, ZONING
VARIANCES, ZONING CHANGES AND ZONING AMENDMENTS AND APPEALS FROM ADMINISTRATIVE
ACTION.
   (A)   Special use permit/zoning classification change/amendment of zoning
regulation.
      (1)   Except as specifically otherwise provided in this Code with regard
to special use permits, the Zoning Commission and City Council shall hold a
public hearing on an application for a special use permit, zoning
classification change, and on proposed general amendments to the zoning
provisions of this Code initiated by the City Council before acting thereon.
The Zoning Commission shall hold a hearing on an application for a special use
permit or zoning classification change within 45 days of the date of the filing
of an administratively complete application that requires action for
recommendation by the Zoning Commission. The City Council shall hold a hearing
on an application for a special use permit or a zoning classification change
within 45 days after the Zoning Commission has issued a recommendation on the
matter or has issued a report of no recommendation.
      (2)   Notice.
         (a)   By publication. The city shall cause notice of each public
hearing to be published once in an official newspaper or in a newspaper of
general circulation in Sunset Valley at least 15 days prior to the date set for
such hearing. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and
contain a description of the matter to be considered, including its nature,
scope and location. The notice shall also describe any other concurrent actions
the applicant has requested and shall state the location and times of which the
application and supporting documents are available for public inspection.
         (b)   Written notice to property owners. When the public hearing is to
consider a proposed special use permit, or zoning classification change
affecting a specific property, written notice of such hearing shall be given to
the owners of all real property located within 500 feet of the property on
which the action is proposed. However, if the proposed amendment does not
include a proposed change in zoning classification (including changes in
applicable conditional overlays) or a special use permit applicable to a
specific property, no notice is required to be mailed to specific property
owners. Where the subject property requesting the action constitutes a unit of
a larger tract owned by the applicant, written notice of such hearing shall be
given to the owners of all real property located within 500 feet of the
property line of the larger tract. Notice shall be given not less than 15 days
before the date set for the hearing either by personal service or by depositing
a copy of the notice in the mail addressed to each owner at the address shown
on the last approved city tax roll. Such written notice shall be in addition to
notice by publication and shall contain the same information.
         (c)   Sign on property being considered for a special use permit or
zoning classification change amendment. The city shall cause one or more signs
to be erected in conspicuous locations on property for which a special use
permit, or change of zoning classification has been requested. Such signs shall
be erected no later than ten days before the request is to be considered at the
public hearings before the Zoning Commission and City Council and shall remain
until final disposition of the request by the city. Each sign shall describe
the nature of the proposed action, and indicate the time, date, and place of
the public hearing before the Zoning Commission or City Council and the time
and place for public inspection of the application or proposal. No action taken
by the Zoning Commission or the City Council shall be affected by any failure
to comply with this section. The city may require the applicant to arrange the
placement of required signage or may place the required signage on the affected
property and charge the applicant the reasonable cost of such signage. If the
city places the required signage on the property, the applicant's cooperation
in placement of such signage on the affected property shall be a condition to
review and action on the application.
      (3)   Joint hearing on multiple applications. Applications for special
use permits, site plan zoning changes, zoning amendments and zoning approvals
which involve the same development may be considered together, before either
the Zoning Commission, the City Council, or both, at a single hearing, rather
than at a separate hearing for each related application.
      (4)   Concurrent applications. An application for a zoning classification
change may be filed concurrently with an application for a conceptual site
plan, but shall be approved only after the latter applications have been
approved. Tentative maps may be processed concurrently with a zoning
classification amendment. Special use permits may be processed concurrently
with a zoning classification change, but may not be approved until after the
zoning classification change has been approved.
   (B)   Public hearings of applications for zoning variance.
      (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing on an
application for a variance from applicable zoning regulations. The Board of
Adjustment shall hold a hearing within 45 days of the date of the filing of an
administratively complete application or appeal.
      (2)   Notice of a public hearing conducted by the Board of Adjustment
regarding a variance request shall, in addition to the requirements of the
Texas Open Meetings Act, be by written notice to property owners in the manner
provided in division (A)(2)(b) of this section regarding an application for a
special use permit or zoning classification change.
   (C)   Public hearings and decision from administrative action.
      (1)   (a)   An appeal of a decision made by an administrative official
may be made by any of the persons or agencies and in the circumstances provided
in Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 211.008.
         (b)   An appeal is commenced by the filing of a notice of appeal with
the Board of Adjustment and the administrative official from whom the appeal is
taken, specifying the grounds of the appeal. Filing of the notice of appeal is
complete when delivered to the City Secretary for the Board of Adjustment and
to the City Administrator for the administrative official. The notice of appeal
must be filed not later than the twentieth day after the date of the decision
that is the subject of the appeal.
         (c)   The administrative official from whom the appeal is taken shall
immediately transmit to the Board of Adjustment all papers constituting the
record of the appealed action.
         (d)   The hearing of the appeal shall be set in a reasonable time
following public notice. Public notice for an appeal that does not relate to a
specific application, address, or project, shall be provided in accordance with
§
150.060(A)(2)(b) to the appealing party and the affected administrative
official. Public notice for an appeal that is related to a specific
application, address, or project, shall be provided in accordance with §
150.060(A)(2)(b) to:
            1.   Owners of all real property located within 500 feet of the
property that is the subject of the decision;
            2.   The owner of the affected property, and;
            3.   The administrative official from whom the appeal is taken.
      (2)   The Board of Adjustment shall decide the appeal not later than 60
days after the date the notice of appeal was timely filed. The Board of
Adjustment shall decide the appeal at a meeting for which public notice can be
provided as required by applicable law following the hearing, or earlier as
necessary to timely render a decision.
§ 150.061 JOINT MEETINGS BY THE ZONING COMMISSION AND THE CITY COUNCIL.
   Any public hearing required by law to be held by the Zoning Commission of
the City of Sunset Valley, Texas, or by the City Council of the City of Sunset
Valley, Texas, to consider boundaries of original districts and appropriate
regulations to be enforced therein, or any proposed changes thereafter to such
original zoning ordinance, may be a joint meeting of such legislative body and
such Commission, for the purpose of conducting such public hearing, and shall
be held at a regular meeting of said City Council at a time to be agreed upon
by the Mayor and the Chairman of the Zoning Commission, and when such date has
been agreed upon, the Mayor shall direct the City Secretary to cause notice of
such joint meeting, its date, time and place to be published in the official
paper, if any, of the city, or in a paper of general circulation in the city
for at least 15 days prior to the date of such meeting. At such public hearing
before such joint meeting of the Zoning Commission and the City Council, all
interested partes shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to make any
protest or suggestion that may occur to them, and such meeting shall continue
and may be adjourned from time to time until every interested party and citizen
has had a full opportunity to be heard.
§ 150.062 SIMILAR APPLICATIONS WITHIN SIX MONTHS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No application for a special use permit, or change of zoning
classification, shall be accepted if a similar application on the same property
has been denied by the City Council within the preceding six- month period, or
withdrawn by the applicant within the preceding 90-day period.
   (B)   For purposes of this division, the withdrawal of an application is a
withdrawal occurring any time after publication of notice of a public hearing
for consideration by the Zoning Commission of the application.
§ 150.063 APPLICATION FEES.
   Fees shall be required as shown in the City of Sunset Valley Permit Fee
Ordinance and amendments to that ordinance, at the time an application for the
permit is made.
§ 150.064 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Intent. To provide a vehicle to: (i) consider requests by property
owners to change the zoning category or to add to or delete from the terms of a
conditional overlay applicable to the owner's property when unanticipated
significant changes occur within the area that make it unlikely that the
property can be developed consistent with the Existing or Future Land Use Map;
(ii) to provide the means for future changes in regulations or zoning districts
initiated by the City Council; and (iii) to ensure that all amendments to the
zoning provisions of this Code are in accordance with the goals, standards and
policies of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan. Amendment requests may encompass:
      (1)   Changes in the zoning classification, including conditional
overlays, of specific or multiple parcels of land;
      (2)   Land use regulations; and
      (3)   General provisions of the zoning sections of this Code.
   (B)   Initiation of amendment; who may initiate an amendment request. A
request to amend the zoning provisions of this Code may be initiated by an
owner of property or by the City Council.
      (1)   Application by property owner. A property owner, or his/her
authorized agent, may file an application with the city requesting an amendment
of the zoning classification (including conditional overlays) applicable to the
owner's property.
      (2)   On Council's own motion. The Council, by motion, may initiate a
proposal to amend the zoning provisions of this Code, and may initiate a change
in zoning category (including conditional overlays) of a particular owner's
property. Such amendment(s) shall not become effective without first giving
notice and holding hearings in accordance with §
150.060.
   (C)   Application requirements for amendments initiated by property owner.
An application shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   A non-refundable deposit or fee as set forth by ordinance or
resolution of the City Council;
      (2)   A legal description, including volume and page of the deed record,
and address of the parcel affected;
      (3)   The present zoning classification and present use of the parcel and
all contiguous parcels around it;
      (4)   The type and location of any structures on the applicant's parcel
and on adjoining land;
      (5)   A conceptual site plan (See
Appendix A);
      (6)   A statement that explains:
         (a)   How the request satisfies the conditional findings set forth in
§
150.064(B);
         (b)   How the conceptual plan, if being processed concurrently, meets
the goals, standards and policies of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan; and
         (c)   How the amendment request meets the goals, standards and
policies of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
      (7)   A site plan (see
Appendix B) may be required by a member of the Council or Zoning Commission,
and shall be required by the Council in such cases where an owner of real
property located within 500 feet of the property on which the change in
classification is proposed makes such request;
      (8)   For proposals requesting amendments to zoning classification, the
following are additional application requirements:
         (a)   The zoning change requested and the proposed use;
         (b)   For zoning changes requesting a change in land use category or
overlay district boundaries, the following shall also be submitted at the time
of application:
            1.   A proposed map drawn proportionally to the existing zoning
maps; and
            2.   A statistical analysis providing applicable information, such
as acreages, maximum dwelling units, and building intensity.
      (9)   Any other relevant information requested by a member of the Council
or Zoning Commission in order to properly review the application. Such
information may include, but is not limited to preliminary plat plans, site
building plans, a traffic impact study, contour maps, or a geological survey
report of the impact the amendment could have on the environment.
   (D)   Applicability of §§
150.012 through
150.020; report of completeness. The provisions of §§
150.012 through
150.020 apply to applications submitted by an owner of property required by
this section. The City Administrator or city designee shall review each
application for completeness pursuant to the procedure provided in §
150.014. After receipt of an administratively complete application as provided
by §
150.014, the City Administrator or city designee shall cause to occur within
ten working days:
      (1)   Formal notice to be sent to the applicant stating:
         (a)   A schedule of review, hearings and report dates;
         (b)   That additional requests for other relevant information may be
requested at any time during the review process in order to properly review the
application. Such information may include, but is not limited to plat plans,
site building plans, a traffic impact study, contour maps, or a report of the
impact the amendment could have on the environment.
         (c)   If applicable, whether the requested amendment conforms to the
Existing or Future Land Use Map of the City of Sunset Valley Comprehensive
Plan; and
      (2)   A copy of the application and notice of schedule of review and
hearing dates to be delivered to each member of the Zoning Commission and City
Council.
   (E)   Review of application submitted by owner of property/on-site
inspection/action (written request required).
      (1)   Within 60 working days of the receipt of an administratively
complete application, a designated city planning professional shall review the
application for the proposed amendment and prepare a brief report on whether
the requested change conforms to the classification for the subject parcel as
specified on the Future Land Use Map of the Comprehensive Plan of the city
copies of the report shall be mailed to the applicant and to the members of the
Zoning Commission. Within ten days after the report has been mailed, the
applicant may:
         (a)   Amend the application so it is consistent with the
recommendations made in such report;
         (b)   Withdraw the application; or
         (c)   Proceed with the application as filed. Unless the City Secretary
receives notice to the contrary within the applicable time limit, the city
shall proceed to post notice of a public hearing regarding the application.
      (2)   On-site inspection. A person designated by the Chair of the Zoning
Commission shall visit the site where the proposed amendment will apply and the
surrounding area and shall report his/her findings to the Zoning Commission.
      (3)   Hearing and notice. The Zoning Commission shall hold at least one
public hearing on the application in accordance with §
150.060. The Zoning Commission shall review the amendment application at a
public hearing within 45 days of the date of the filing being declared
administratively complete.
      (4)   Findings. Findings, as required by this section, together with the
specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into
the official minutes. The burden of establishing such conditions is on the
applicant.
         (a)   Conditions required for a change in zoning classification. In
order for a zoning classification change requested by a property owner to be
recommended for approval, the Zoning Commission must find that in its opinion,
each of the following conditions have been established by competent evidence.
The burden of establishing such conditions is on the applicant.
            1.   The proposed change in zoning classification is consistent
with the goals, standards and policies of the City's Comprehensive Plan; and
            2.   Significant unanticipated changes have occurred that make
development with the current land use maps unlikely and inappropriate;
            3.   The proposed classification will allow uses that are
reasonable and not incompatible with surrounding properties and that any minor
incompatible effects of uses to be allowed will be adequately mitigated;
            4.   The zoning classification change requested is no greater than
the minimum required to allow for reasonable use of the land;
            5.   The proposed change in zoning classification is in the
community's best interest in terms of the public health, safety and welfare;
            6.   Development likely to occur as a result of the proposed change
in zoning classification can be served adequately by utilities, water supply
systems, waste water systems, and drainage facilities;
            7.   Development likely to occur as a result of the proposed change
in zoning classification can be served adequately by the following services:
police protection, fire protection, and emergency medical care;
            8.   Development likely to occur as a result of the proposed change
in zoning classification will not result in traffic conditions or vehicular
circulation that jeopardizes the city's public health, safety, welfare,
environment, or the vehicular traffic goals, standards and policies of the
Comprehensive Land Use Plan;
            9.   Development likely to occur as a result of the proposed change
in zoning classification will not disrupt the existing uses of land in the
vicinity; and
            10.   The proposed change in zoning classification and development
likely to occur as a result of the proposed change in zoning classification
will not negatively affect the value of property and improvements in the
vicinity.
         (b)   Conditions required for a change in zoning category initiated by
the City Council.
            1.   In order for a land use regulation change to be approved, the
Council must find that the change is consistent with each of the applicable
purposes set forth in §
150.080.
            2.   Conditions required for an amendment to the general provisions
of these provisions of the Code. In order for a general provision of these
provisions of the Code to be approved, the Council must find that, at a
minimum, the proposed change is consistent with each of the applicable purposes
set forth in §
150.080.
   (F)   Interpretative rules applicable to all applications for amendment by
an owner of property.
      (1)   Amendments should be granted sparingly.
      (2)   When considering requests to change zoning classification, zoning
classification changes that have been granted previously in the vicinity are
relevant to, but not determinative of the granting of such request, and
pecuniary hardship, standing alone, shall not be deemed sufficient to grant the
requested change.
   (G)   Recommendation by the Zoning Commission.
      (1)   No amendment to the zoning provisions of this Code, whether on
request of an owner of property or initiated by the City Council, shall be
enacted without a recommendation from the Zoning Commission.
      (2)   Within ten days of the conclusion of the public hearing, the Zoning
Commission shall deliver a written recommendation of action to the Council. The
Zoning Commission may postpone action on an amendment requested by an owner of
property up to 60 days following the public hearing if additional information
or assessment is required. The Commission shall not recommend an amendment
requested by an owner of property unless it finds, based on competent evidence,
that each of the conditions in § 150.064(E)(4)(a) has been established.
Findings of the Zoning Commission, together with the specific facts upon which
such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the written recommendation
by the Zoning Commission. With regard to an amendment requested by an owner of
property the Zoning Commission may recommend that the Council:
         (a)   Approve the amendment request;
         (b)   Approve the amendment request with conditions, limitations and
safeguards; or
         (c)   Deny the amendment request.
   (H)   Review and action by Council.
      (1)   Notice and hearing. The City Council shall hold at least one public
hearing on all proposed amendments to this Code before acting thereon in
accordance with §
150.060. At the City Council's discretion, the hearing before the City Council
may be combined with the hearing on the same matter before the Zoning
Commission.
      (2)   Council action. Council action on an application may include:
         (a)   Approval of the recommendation of the Zoning Commission. This
action requires a majority vote of the City Council members present;
         (b)   Overrule the recommendation of the Zoning Commission to grant an
amendment requested by an owner of property or an amendment initiated by the
City Council. This action requires the approval of three-fourths of the City
Council members present;
         (c)   Modify, add, or subtract terms or conditions of a recommendation
of the Zoning Commission for approval of an amendment requested by an owner of
property or initiated by the City Council. This action requires a majority vote
of the City Council members present; or
         (d)   Overrule a recommendation by the Zoning Commission denying a
request for amendment by an owner of property. This action requires the
approval of three-quarters of the City Council members present.
         (e)   Regardless how a proposed change is initiated, if the city has
received a written protest from 20% of the owners subject to the proposed
change, or, in the case of an amendment affecting a specific property, from 20%
of the owners of property within 200 feet of the specific affected property
(where the amendment request constitutes a unit of a larger tract owned by the
applicant, 200 feet from the property line of the larger tract), approval of
action requires a favorable vote of three-quarters of all members of the City
Council. In computing the percentage of land area under this division, the area
of streets and alleys shall be included.
   (I)   Finality of action. The Council's decision shall become final on the
effective date of its action. The action taken by the City Council cannot be
reconsidered, unless substantive information not available to the Council when
it originally made its decision is presented that significantly impacts the
Council's decision.
§ 150.065 SUSPENDING ISSUANCE OF PERMITS AND APPROVALS.
   No application for site plan approval shall be accepted for filing nor be
processed and no building, site clearance, or grading permit shall be issued
for any work, other than in connection with a single family residential use,
for a period not to exceed 90 days, on land which is being considered for a
change in zoning classification, such 90-day period to begin on the date the
City Council submits the proposed zoning change to the Zoning Commission for a
report and recommendation. Properties which have received preliminary or final
site plan approval prior to such date are excepted.
§ 150.066 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Intent. To provide a vehicle for relief from the provisions of this
Code when strict compliance would cause undue hardship due to unusual
circumstances or conditions peculiar to the subject property, such as size,
shape, topography, location, or surroundings. The Board will grant no variance
that it finds to be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare of the
community. The applicant bears the burden of establishing the requisite special
circumstances or peculiar conditions.
   (B)   Application requirements. An application for a variance shall be made
in writing in a form prescribed by the Board of Adjustment and shall be
accompanied by:
      (1)   A non-refundable deposit or fee as set forth by ordinance of the
City Council;
      (2)   A letter of justification describing the proposed project and
explaining how it satisfies the conditional findings described in division (F)
of this section (See
Appendix A);
      (3)   A conceptual site plan;
      (4)   A detailed site plan (see
Appendix B) may be required by the Board of Adjustment, and shall be required
in such cases where an owner of real property located within 500 feet of the
property on which the change in classification is proposed makes such written
request; and
      (5)   Any other relevant information requested by the Board of Adjustment
in order to properly review the application. Such information may include, but
is not limited to plat plans, site building plans, a traffic impact study,
contour/drainage maps, a surface geological assessment, or a report of the
impact that the variance could have on the environment.
   (C)   Report of administrative completeness. The City Secretary or city
designee shall review each application for administrative completeness. After
receipt of a complete application, the City Secretary or city designee shall
cause to occur within five working days:
      (1)   Formal notice to be sent to the applicant stating:
         (a)   The date on which the application was determined to be
administratively complete;
         (b)   A schedule of review, report and hearing dates to consider
action;
         (c)   That additional requests for other relevant information may be
requested at any time during the review process in order to properly review the
application. Such information may include, but is not limited to preliminary
plat plans, site buildings plans, a traffic impact study, contour maps, or a
report of the geological survey impact the variance may have on the
environment.
         (d)   If applicable, whether the requested amendment conforms to the
Existing or Future Land Use Map of the City of Sunset Valley Comprehensive
Plan; and
      (2)   One copy of an organized packet of information containing a copy of
the application, all application submittals and all correspondence to and from
the applicant to be delivered to the City Secretary to be distributed to
Members of the Board of Adjustment and Zoning Commission.
   (D)   On-site inspection. Upon the request of: a) the applicant; b) any
member of the Board of Adjustment, Zoning Commission or City Council; or c) a
property owner within 500 feet of the subject property, city representatives
shall visit the site where the proposed variance will apply and the surrounding
area and shall report his/her findings to the Board of Adjustment and the
city's other governing bodies.
   (E)   Hearing and notice. The Board of Adjustment shall hold at least one
public hearing on all variance applications in accordance with the procedures
for public notice and hearing in §
150.060.
   (F)   Findings. Findings of the Board, together with the specific facts upon
which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes
of the Board meeting at which such action is taken. No variance shall be
granted unless the Board of Adjustment finds that all of the following criteria
are met:
      (1)   Special circumstances or conditions exist such that requiring
compliance with the provisions of the applicable zoning provisions of the Code
will cause significant practical difficulties or undue hardship to the
applicant. Pecuniary hardship to the applicant, standing alone, shall not be
deemed to constitute practical hardship.
      (2)   Special circumstances or conditions affecting the parcel of land
exist such that requiring strict compliance with the provisions of this Code
will result in one or more of the following:
         (a)   Depriving the applicant of the reasonable use of the applicant's
land;
         (b)   Significant or unreasonable disruption of the natural terrain;
         (c)   Significant or unreasonable destruction of the existing flora;
         (d)   Unreasonable obstruction of direct sunlight to adjacent
property; or
         (e)   Depriving the property owner of an essential legally protected
property right.
      (3)   There is no practical alternative to the requisite variance that
will alleviate the difficulty or hardship complained of or the requisite
variance enhances the quality of the project as a whole and would result in a
better project than requiring strict compliance with the provisions of the
Code;
      (4)   The variance will be no greater than the minimum required to
alleviate the difficulty or hardship;
      (5)   The granting of the variance will not have a negative effect on
other property or improvements in the area;
      (6)   The granting of the variance will not have a negative effect on the
ability to use nearby land in accordance with the Code; and
      (7)   The variance is in harmony with the intent of the Code's zoning
provisions and with the goals, standards and policies of the City's
Comprehensive Plan.
   (G)   Action by Board. The Board of Adjustment shall not grant a variance
unless it finds, based on competent evidence, that each of the conditions in
division (F) has been established. The Board may, by concurring vote of at
least four members of the Board:
      (1)   Approve the variance request;
      (2)   Approve the variance request with conditions, limitations and
safeguards; or
      (3)   Deny a variance request.
   (H)   Conditions Imposed by Board.
      (1)   The Board may impose such conditions, limitations and safeguards as
it deems appropriate upon the granting of any variance. Violation of any such
condition, limitation or safeguard shall constitute a violation of this Code.
      (2)   The Board shall require reasonable guarantee and evidence that the
applicant, or its successors in interest, will satisfy any conditions imposed
in connection with approval of a variance.
      (3)   The applicant shall file the approved variance with the Travis
County Real Property Records for the subject property, and provide proof of
filing to the City Administrator.
      (4)   The applicant shall implement the variance as approved by the
Board.
      (5)   The power to grant variances does not extend to changing a parcel's
zoning districts, including the granting or denying of conditional overlays.
   (I)   Appeal. The Board's decision shall become final on the effective date
of its resolution or motion. The action taken by the Board of Adjustment on a
variance is final and cannot be reconsidered, unless substantive information
which was not available when the Board made its decision is presented which
could significantly impact the Board's decision. In accordance with state
statute by law, the applicant may judicially appeal the Board's decision in
accordance with state law.
   (J)   Time limits. Unless action is being diligently pursued, any rights
authorized by a variance which are not exercised within one year from the date
of granting such variance shall be conclusively presumed to have been withdrawn
by the applicant.
   (K)   Enforcement and revocation. Enforcement and revocation shall be in
accordance with §§
150.080 through
150.086, and other relevant provisions of this Code.
(Ord. 240507, passed 5-7-2024)
ZONING GENERAL PROVISIONS; ENFORCEMENT
§ 150.080 PURPOSE.
   The zoning regulations and districts adopted and established in this Land
Development Code have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the
City of Sunset Valley for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety,
moral and general welfare of the residents of the City of Sunset Valley, and to
preserve places and areas of historical, cultural, or architectural importance
and significance. They have been designed to lessen congestion in the street;
to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light
and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of
population; to maintain the environmental balance of the area; and to
facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation, water, waste water,
schools, parks, and other public requirements. They have been made with
reasonable consideration, among other things, to the unique character of the
city and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses; and with a view to
conserving the value of property and buildings and encouraging the most
appropriate use of land throughout the community.
§ 150.081 THE ZONED DISTRICT IN GENERAL.
   The Zoned District shall be the present boundary limits of the city as
herein set forth and are approved and established. A "Zoning Map" which is
adopted with and declared a part of this chapter shall be considered as much a
part of the same as if the matters of information set forth thereby were all
fully contained and described herein.
§ 150.082 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The City of Sunset Valley is hereby divided into the following zoning
districts:
District Symbol Zoning District
District Symbol Zoning District
SF              Single Family Residential
O               Neighborhood Office
NC              Neighborhood Commercial
HC              Highway Commercial
GUI             Governmental, Utility and Institutional
P               Parkland District
C               Conservation District
G               Greenspace and Preservation District
CO              Conditional Overlay Combining
 
§ 150.083 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   (A)   The locations and boundaries of zoning districts established by
ordinance shall be recorded on an Official Zoning Map to be adopted by an
ordinance of the City Council and identified and amended in the manner
specified in this subchapter. Recording on the official map is not a
prerequisite to the effectiveness of a zoning ordinance.
   (B)   The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the
Mayor attested by the Secretary for the city under the following words: "This
is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map of the City of Sunset
Valley, Texas."
   (C)   Changes in the zoning classification of particular parcels or areas of
land, approved by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, shall be noted promptly on the Official Zoning Map with the following
entry: "On (date), by official action of the City Council, the following
changes were made in the Official Zoning Map: (brief description of the nature
of the changes)", which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the
Secretary of the City.
   (D)   No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map
except in conformity with the procedures in this chapter.
   (E)   In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed,
lost, or difficult to interpret, the City Council may by resolution adopt a new
Official Zoning Map which shall exactly duplicate the original except for
corrections of errors or omissions.
§ 150.084 RULES FOR INTERPRETING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   The district boundary lines shown on the Official Zoning District Map are
usually along streets, alleys, property lines, streams or extensions thereof.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
Official Zoning District Map, the following rules shall apply:
   (A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the right-of-way lines
of streets, highways, alleys, or streams shall be construed to follow such
lines;
   (B)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines of
lots or other parcels of record shall be construed as following such lot lines;
   (C)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limit lines shall
be construed as following city limit lines;
   (D)   Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official
action of the City Council, the zoning district line adjoining each side of
such street, alley or other public way, unless otherwise acted upon by Council,
shall be automatically extended to the center line of such vacated street,
alley or way and all areas so involved shall then and thenceforth be subject to
all regulations of the extended districts;
   (E)   Where physical features on the ground are at variance with information
shown on the Official Zoning District Map or when there arises a question as to
how or whether a parcel of property is zoned and such question cannot be
resolved by the application of divisions (A) through (D) above, the property
shall be considered classified "SF" (Single Family Residential) temporarily and
the determination of permanent zoning shall be in accordance with the procedure
established in this Code for amending zoning classifications applicable to
property.
§ 150.085 ZONING OF NEWLY ANNEXED AREAS.
   (A)   Any land hereinafter annexed to the City of Sunset Valley, Texas shall
immediately and automatically upon such annexation be temporarily classified as
"SF" (Single Family Residential).
   (B)   Classifications originating upon annexation shall be noted on the
Official Zoning District Map in accordance with §
150.083.
   (C)   The Zoning Commission and the City Council shall, as soon as
practicable after the annexation of any territory to the city, institute
proceedings to give the newly annexed territory a permanent zoning
classification. The procedure to be followed is provided in this chapter of
this Code.
   (D)   Land which has been annexed to the city shall be subject to all zoning
provisions of the Code upon the effective date of such annexation.
§ 150.086 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Stop work order. The City Inspector, Council, or another duly
authorized city official may order all work, including site clearing or other
site preparation, stopped on any site where a significant violation of this the
zoning sections of this Code or a final site plan is found. Any person,
including a workman on the site, who fails to comply with a stop work order
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in the penalty section
hereof.
   (B)   Revocation of final site plan approval. If the Council finds, after
notice and hearing, that a significant violation of an approved final site plan
has occurred, the Council may revoke its approval of such site plan. It shall
be unlawful for any person to do any work on the site covered by the site plan
unless and until a new application for site plan approval has been filed and
processed in accordance with the provisions of this Code and the Council grants
approval to a new final site plan which corrects the violations of the original
site plan.
   (C)   Injunction and other remedies. Any structure erected or used, or any
work done, contrary to any of the provisions of the zoning sections of this
Code or to any of the details contained in the final site plan approved by the
City Council is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a violation
of this Code. The Council may direct the City Attorney to initiate injunction,
mandamus, abatement, or any other action available in law or equity to prevent,
enjoin, abate, correct, or remove such unlawful structure, use, or work.
   (D)   Revocation of variance. If the Board of Adjustment finds, after notice
and hearing, that information provided by the applicant to determine approval
was intentionally inaccurate or misleading and was substantive in the granting
of approval of a variance, the Board of Adjustment may revoke its approval. It
shall be unlawful for any person to do any further work on the site for which
the approval was granted until such time that a new application which corrects
the inaccuracies has been filed and processed in accordance with the provisions
of this Code.
   (E)   Penalties.
      (1)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provisions of the
zoning sections of this Code or any order made under the authority of this
Code, or who causes or permits any such violation, or who fails to perform any
act required hereunder, or does any prohibited act or takes any action contrary
to the final site plans approved by the Council or fails to take any action
required by such site plan, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 per
offense. Each and every day on which any violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
      (2)   The owner or tenant of any building, structure, or premises and any
designer, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who knowingly commits,
participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found
guilty of a separate offense and subject to civil penalties as provided herein.
ZONING; LAND USE
§ 150.100 DETERMINATION OF PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   The uses and structures permitted within each zoning district shall be
expressly limited to those specified in this chapter. The burden of proof that
a proposed use or structure is permitted within a district as specified in this
Code shall be on the applicant. No permit or other approval shall be granted if
the proposed use or structure does not comply with the provisions of this
chapter; provided, however, that amendments to the Official Zoning District Map
or text of this Code (including the addition of new zoning district
classifications) may be authorized by the Council in accordance with the
applicable provisions of this Code.
§ 150.101 SPECIAL USES; AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   The following special uses may be authorized by the City Council by
special use permit:
Special Use District Allowed
Special Use                                                District Allowed
Accessory building with a home occupation                  SF, O
Accessory food sales                                       O, NC, HC
Alcohol beverages sold in a restaurant for on-premise      NC, HC
consumption
Alcoholic beverages sold in a restaurant for on-premise    NC, HC
consumption and for off-premise consumption in growlers
Beer and wine sold in a retail store for off-premise       NC, HC
consumption
Day care facility                                          HC
Event center requiring TABC license or permit for premises HC
Winery                                                     HC
Farmers/artisan market                                     GUI, O, NC, HC, P
Medical related professional office                        O, NC, HC
Research, development, or clinical laboratory              HC
Restaurant                                                 NC
Veterinary services                                        O, NC, HC
   (B)   Permit required. No special use shall be established, operated, or
maintained except as authorized by a special use permit issued in accordance
with the requirements of this section.
   (C)   Special use permit issued by City Council. A special use permit may be
issued only for the special uses specified in this section, and only for the
district where it is authorized. A special use permit may be issued by the City
Council acting after a public hearing in accordance with §
150.060 and a recommendation on the proposed use from the Zoning Commission in
accordance with this section.
   (D)   Application. An application for a special use permit shall be made in
writing in a form prescribed by the City Council and shall be accompanied by
(1) a non-refundable fee as set forth by ordinance or resolution of the City
Council; and (2) such information as may be required (including a site plan) in
order to properly review the proposed use. Such information may include, but is
not limited to, site and building plans, drawings and elevations, and
operational data.
   (E)   Report by City Inspector. The city appointed designate shall visit the
site of the proposed special use and the surrounding area and shall prepare
findings to be delivered to the members of the Zoning Commission and to the
City Council at least one week prior to the public hearing date as set forth in
§
150.060(B).
   (F)   Notice of public hearing by Zoning Commission. The Commission shall
hold a public hearing on each application for a special use permit in
accordance with the procedures in §
150.060.
   (G)   Review and recommendation by the Zoning Commission.
      (1)   The Commission shall review the application for a special use
permit to determine whether the proposed special use complies with each of the
general criteria in §
150.103, and with each of the specific criteria in §
150.103 applicable to the proposed use.
      (2)   The Commission shall not recommend approval of an application
unless it finds that the proposed special use as presented or as modified by
the Commission complies with each of the general and applicable specific
criteria.
      (3)   A recommendation of approval may be conditioned on the applicant's
adoption of specified changes, additions, limitations, safeguards, or effective
time periods designed to assure compliance with the criteria and to protect the
public health, safety and welfare of the surrounding properties and the city as
a whole.
      (4)   For sites where the applicant owns the improvements and the
improvements do not comply with current development standards, the application
for a special use permit shall depict all improvements proposed to bring the
site into conformance with all zoning regulations in effect at the time of
application submittal. If compliance with zoning regulations at the time of
application submittal is not feasible, the special use permit may be
recommended for approval by the Zoning Commission conditioned upon the
applicant receiving a variance from the Board of Adjustment.
      (5)   The Commission shall forward its findings and recommendations to
the City Council in writing.
   (H)   Hearing before City Council. The City Council shall review an
application for a special use permit at a public hearing in accordance with the
procedures in §
150.060 after receiving findings and a recommendation from the Zoning
Commission.
   (I)   Review and action by City Council.
      (1)   The City Council shall determine whether the proposed special use
complies with each of the general criteria in §
150.102 and with each of the special criteria in §
150.103 applicable to the proposed use and shall make separate findings thereon
or adopt the findings made by the Commission.
      (2)   The City Council may condition its approval of an application on
the applicant's adoption of specified changes, additions, limitations,
safeguards, or effective time periods designed to assure compliance with the
criteria and to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the
surrounding properties and the city as a whole.
      (3)   The City Council shall not grant a special use permit unless it
finds that the proposed special use, as presented or as modified by the
Council, complies with each of the applicable general and specific criteria. If
the application meets all criteria, the Council shall approve the application.
   (J)   Temporary special use permit. A temporary special use permit may be
granted by the City Council on the terms and conditions determined by the City
Council for a period not to exceed 30 consecutive calendar days. A temporary
special use permit may be extended for an additional 15 consecutive calendar
days upon approval of the City Council. An applicant for a temporary special
use permit shall submit an application to the city setting forth the location
and all terms of the proposed use, accompanied by written approval of the owner
of the property on which the use is proposed. The procedures for public notice
and hearing in §
150.060 do not apply to temporary special use permits. Applications for a
temporary special use permit to operate a carnival or other amusement activity
may be granted for a period not to exceed 14 consecutive calendar days on the
terms and conditions approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 241203-C, passed 12-3-2024)
§ 150.102 GENERAL CRITERIA APPLICABLE TO ALL SPECIAL USES AND TEMPORARY SPECIAL
USES.
   A proposed special use or temporary special use must comply with the
following criteria:
   (A)   The appearance, size, density and operating characteristics of the
proposed special use are subject to the effective compatibility and buffering
standards set forth in §
150.105(B);
   (B)   The proposed use will not have an adverse effect on the value of
surrounding properties nor impede their property development;
   (C)   The proposed use will not create a nuisance factor nor otherwise
interfere with a neighbor's enjoyment of his property or operation of his
business;
   (D)   The traffic that the proposed use can reasonably be expected to
generate on existing streets will not create nor add significantly to
congestion, a safety hazard, or a parking problem in the area, nor will it
disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood;
   (E)   The proposed use complies with all other applicable provisions of this
Code and other ordinances and regulations; and
   (F)   The special use shall be operated either by the owner or lessee of
improved property on which the special use is located or by another pursuant to
a written agreement with such owner or lessee.
§ 150.103 SPECIFIC CRITERIA APPLICABLE TO INDIVIDUAL SPECIAL USES AND TEMPORARY
SPECIAL USES.
   (A)   Alcoholic beverages sold in a restaurant for on-premise consumption
and for off-premise consumption in growlers.
      (1)   The restaurant where the alcoholic beverage is proposed to be sold
is not located within 300 feet of a church or school as measured by state law;
      (2)   The restaurant where the alcoholic beverage is proposed to be sold
is not located on property, two or more sides of which abut property in a
residential zoning district;
      (3)   The gross receipts derived from the sale of alcoholic beverages
shall not exceed 49% of the gross receipts derived from all sales;
      (4)   The sale and use of growlers shall be in compliance with all
applicable federal, state, and local health and safety law. The sale of an
empty growler shall not count as a sale of alcohol beverage for the purpose of
determining the percentage of gross receipts derived from the sale of alcoholic
beverages.
      (5)   Sales of alcoholic beverages in a growler shall be limited to sales
of beverages with a percentage of alcohol not higher than 15% by volume.
   (B)   Alcoholic beverages sold in grocery stores for off-premise
consumption.
      (1)   The grocery store where the alcoholic beverage is proposed to be
sold is not located within 300 feet of a church or school;
      (2)   The grocery store where the alcoholic beverage is proposed to be
sold is not located on property, two or more sides of which abut property in a
residential zoning district;
   (C)   Accessory food sales. In addition to the general criteria applicable
to all special uses, a special use for accessory food sales shall be operated
and maintained in accordance with the following conditions and limitations:
      (1)   Accessory food sales shall occur in a structure, whether mobile or
otherwise, in an area not exceeding 150 square feet.
      (2)   The structure housing the special use shall not be located on any
roadway or fire lane. The special use shall not be located so as to impede
pedestrian traffic on any sidewalk.
      (3)   A permit for accessory food sales shall expire in the event that
the retail establishment to which such special use is an accessory discontinues
its business on the property.
      (4)   The operator of the special use shall at all times hold current
certificates, permits and/or licenses required by the Travis County Health
Department and any other agency of the State of Texas for operation of the food
service establishment operated pursuant to the special use.
      (5)   No signs advertising any aspect of the special use shall be
displayed except as attached to and confined to the surface area of the walls
of the structure housing the special use.
      (6)   No goods or services shall be provided other than the sale of food
and items incidental thereto, such as napkins and eating utensils. Sufficient
signs, recyclable containers, and trash receptacles shall be provided by the
permit holder to control and prevent litter incident to the special use.
      (7)   Authorization for accessory food sales pursuant to this subchapter
shall be for a period not to exceed six months. Renewal periods for such
authorization not to exceed six months may be granted not later than the
expiration of the previous authorization at the discretion of the City
Administrator provided the applicant has not received more than two validated
warnings prior thereto regarding the special use. A $25 dollar administrative
fee shall be paid for all administrative renewal authorizations. In the event
the city receives a verbal or written complaint regarding the special use, a
staff person or designee will investigate the complaint in a timely manner to
determine its validity. Administrative staff shall record the name, address,
phone number, date and time that verbal complaints are registered. In the event
the complaint is validated, the applicant shall receive a written warning with
instructions to correct the violation. If the violation has not been corrected
within 15 days after receipt of the second warning issued by the city, the
special use permit shall be revoked.
   (D)   Display of oversized merchandise (not applicable to temporary special
uses). In addition to the general criteria applicable to all special uses, a
special use for display of oversized merchandise shall be operated and
maintained in accordance with the following conditions and limitations:
      (1)   This division applies only to oversized merchandise offered for
sale to the general public, which is too large to be conveniently stored and
displayed inside the facility out of which sales are made.
      (2)   Oversized merchandise shall be stored adjacent to the main facility
out of which such oversized merchandise is sold. The display area shall be
equipped with overhead sprinklers for protection against fire in the display
area.
      (3)   No more than 20% of the frontage of the main facility may be used
for display of oversized merchandise.
      (4)   Use of a display area permitted shall not impede pedestrian traffic
on any sidewalks. The display area shall not include any part of a road,
street, thoroughfare, fire lane or parking area used by motor vehicles.
      (5)   The display area proposed to be used and the items proposed to be
displayed shall be designated in an application for this special use. Each such
designation shall be subject to approval of the City Council.
   (E)   Alcoholic beverages sold in a retail establishment for off-premise
consumption. A proposal to sell alcoholic beverages in a retail establishment
for off-premise consumption must comply with the following specific criteria
and conditions, as well as the foregoing general criteria:
      (1)   The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be restricted to beer and
wine;
      (2)   The retail establishment where the alcoholic beverage is proposed
to be sold is a minimum of 10,000 square feet and the total display or shelf
space devoted to the sale of beer and wine does not exceed 10% of the total
display or shelf space devoted to other retail sales;
      (3)   The retail establishment where the alcoholic beverage is proposed
to be sold is not located within 300 feet of a church or school as measured by
state law;
      (4)   The retail establishment where the alcoholic beverage is proposed
to be sold is not located on property, two or more sides of which abut property
in a residential zoning district;
      (5)   The gross receipts derived from the sale of beer and wine shall not
exceed 40% of the gross receipts derived from the sale of other retail
products.
   (F)   Farmer’s/artisan market. A proposal to sell goods, wares, merchandise,
produce, or products on part of a public street, sidewalk, or alley, other
public lands, or on private property.
      (1)   Definitions. For purposes of this division, unless the context
otherwise indicates, the following terms have the following meanings.
         ARTIST/ARTISAN. Any individual who displays or offers for sale his or
her own handcrafted items.
         FARM AND FOOD PRODUCTS. Any agricultural, horticultural, forest or
other product of the soil or water, including, but not limited to, fruits,
vegetables, eggs, dairy products, meat and meat products, poultry and poultry
products, fish and fish products, grain and grain products, honey, nuts, maple
products, apple cider, fruit juice, wine, ornamental or vegetable plants. This
term does not include live animals.
         FARMER/GROWER. A person whose produce or plants are organically,
sustainably or naturally grown and grown within the defined local area.
Organically grown produce must be certified by the State of Texas.
         FARMER’S/ARTISAN MARKET. A building, structure or location at which a
group of two or more farmers or artisans or a combination thereof, from a
defined local area who directly sell to the public farm and food products,
either primary or secondary producer food specialty items, handcrafted items,
goods or wares, and/or natural flowers and plants at which 80% of itinerant
vendors must have grown, reared, caught, brewed, pickled, baked, smoked or
processed the goods themselves.
         FOOD SPECIALTY ITEMS. Baked goods, jams, jellies, large-portion
prepackaged products, spices, condiments, cheeses, meats, seafood and pasta.
Food specialty items may or may not be intended for immediate consumption on
premises.
         HANDCRAFTED ITEMS. Non-machine made objects, displaying a degree of
manual skill or dexterity, and include, but are not limited to, leather goods,
wood carving, beadwork, basketry, pottery and jewelry, hand woven cloth and
blankets and objects made there from. Such items may include elements of new
materials or machine-made parts, provided that no object which is primarily
mass-produced or machine-made and assembled from a kit shall be considered to
be handcrafted. Clothes and craft items sewn with a machine shall be considered
handcrafted items.
         ITINERANT VENDOR. Any local farmer, grower, producer, person or
artisan with no established business location within the geographical
boundaries of the city who is associated with a permit holder that has been
issued a farmers/artisan market special use permit. This term excludes any
business within the city related to a home occupation permit.
         LOCAL AREA. Within the borders of the State of Texas provided no
suitable product from a primary producer, farmer, artisan or grower is
available within a radius of 150 miles from the city limits.
         MACHINE-MADE. The producing or reproducing of an item in mass
production by mechanically stamping, casting, blanking and weaving, except
beads.
         NATURAL FLOWERS/NATURAL PLANT/NATURAL PRODUCE. Propagated by seeds or
cultivated by budding, grafting, layering, or other nursery techniques. The
term “natural” excludes any produce/plants that have been irradiated, grown
using pesticides, herbicides or chemical fertilizers, and is hormone free.
         PRODUCER, PRIMARY. All produce grown, reared or caught on the
producer’s land within the defined local area. For domesticated livestock or
plants this means grown or finished (having spent at least 50% of its life) on
the producer's land. For fish and other seafood this means caught from either
inshore waters within the local area or offshore waters along the Texas
coastline.
         PRODUCER, SECONDARY. All produce must be brewed, pickled, baked,
smoked or processed by the itinerant vendor using at least one ingredient of
origin from within the defined local area (not merely bought locally). The
minimum local ingredient is 10% of each product. Receipts should be kept as
proof of origin for inspection.
         PERMIT HOLDER. An individual or representative of an organization that
represents a group of small scale itinerant vendors that come together on an
occasional or temporary basis as a collaborative group.
         SUSTAINABLY GROWN. Produce or plants that adhere to an agriculture
that promotes self-reliance, resource conservation, and viability to both the
natural environment and the parties involved. Sustainable agriculture
incorporates the principles of organic farming although it does not need to be
organically certified.
      (2)   Review of effects. Before approving a special use permit allowing a
farmer's/artisan market, the City Zoning Commission and City Council shall
consider the following:
         (a)   Pedestrian and motor vehicle safety at and surrounding the
proposed market;
         (b)   The effect of anticipated pedestrian and motor vehicle traffic
on adjoining streets and sidewalks;
         (c)   The compatibility of adjacent zoning;
         (d)   Cultural, sociological, economic, traditional, or historical
influences that create or support placement of the proposed market;
         (e)   Availability of existing market space in the area; and
         (f)   Public health, safety and welfare.
      (3)   Permanent use not created; no abandonment or vacation. The approval
of a special use permit establishing a farmer's/artisan market does not create
a permanent right to use, or is not to be construed to authorize abandonment or
vacation of a public street, sidewalk, or alley.
      (4)   Application requirements.
         (a)   An application under this section shall include:
            1.   The permit holder’s name, including the organization name,
mailing address, phone number, and email address.
            2.   A list of all itinerant vendors, including state sales tax
permit number, if applicable, or exemption certificate.
            3.   A description of the merchandise intended for sale and a
statement that the merchandise offered for sale has been created or produced by
the itinerant vendor.
            4.   A written schedule showing the days and hours of operation.
            5.   The exact limits or boundaries of the market.
            6.   The proposed closure of any public street, sidewalk, or alley.
            7.   A statement from the permit holder that the organization will
not discriminate against itinerant vendors based on race, religion, sex,
national origin, sexual orientation, age or disability.
         (b)   Two applicants may file a joint application if both applicants
are engaged in a joint business venture and complete the application form and
provide the information required in division (A) for both applicants.
      (5)   Conditions of operation.
         (a)   The permit holder shall be responsible for insuring the
following conditions of operation are adhered to:
            1.   That all itinerant vendors have individual licenses and
certificates as promulgated by the state and/or health department. For the
purpose of health permits only, farmers market may be defined as a temporary
event. A temporary event permit may be issued for the event and such permit may
run for up to fourteen consecutive Saturdays.
            2.   The location of vendor spaces shall have provision for access
and shall be divided in such a way to ensure movement and safety between the
vendors.
            3.   The location of vendor spaces shall not hinder or impede
pedestrian flow on any sidewalk or traffic flow on any roadway adjacent to the
farmer's/artisan market.
            4.   The vendor’s current sales tax permit is available on site for
inspection at all times of operation.
            5.   All supplies and storage shall be kept in a neat and orderly
fashion within the vendor’s space.
            6.   Portraits offered for sale that are created on site by the
portrait artist while the subject poses. Portrait artists may sell mailing
tubes, protective frames, mats or glass as part of the sale.
            7.   Works such as sculpture or paintings, drawings, prints, or
photographs and all other two dimensional works of art are originals or high
quality reproductions of the artist’s work, consecutively numbered, signed or
stamped by the artist. Quality reproductions of two dimensional works are
acceptable if hand enhanced.
            8.   All vendors offer for sale only the type of product as listed
on the statements submitted to the Deputy City Administrator unless other
products are reviewed and approved by the Deputy City Administrator for
compliance with this special use permit.
            9.   A vendor may not claim use of or occupy a vendor space except
during the time the farmer’s/artisan market is authorized to operate.
            10.   Any spaces in the farmer's/artisan market reserved for use by
an organization promoting public awareness, or not-for-profit fundraising,
shall not be counted towards the 20% of itinerant vendors who do not have to
grow, rear, catch, brew, pickle, bake, smoke or process the goods themselves.
         (b)   An employee of the city or another governmental entity may
inspect a license during operation of a farmer's/artisan market.
         (c)   An employee of the city, designee or another governmental entity
may inspect a vendor space and merchandise displayed, offered for sale, or sold
at a farmer's/artisan market.
      (6)   Hours of operation/parking on streets.
         (a)   The farmer's/artisan market shall only operate between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on either a Saturday or Sunday of each week. The city
may also request vendors to cease operation due to security reasons or in the
event of an emergency.
         (b)   Vehicle parking on streets surrounding the farmer's/artisan
market for the setup or tear down of vendor displays or deliveries shall not be
parked longer than 20 minutes on streets open to traffic.
      (7)   License term and renewal.
         (a)   All permits issued under this section are valid for a term of
one year from date of issuance.
         (b)   All permits issued under this section are non-transferable and a
separate permit is required for each farmer’s/artisan market area.
         (c)   All permits shall not automatically be renewed.
            1.   Persons who hold permits may submit applications for
additional one-year terms.
            2.   The City Administrator may approve a renewal application
provided the applicant has not been found to have violated the terms of the
permit.
      (8)   Enforcement.
         (a)   The city shall inspect all displays at least monthly to confirm
compliance with this section and any applicable laws. Upon determining that the
permit holder is in violation of any provision of this section, the city may
suspend or revoke the license.
         (b)   The city shall investigate complaints alleging violation of this
section provided that the complaint is in written form and signed by the
complainant including the telephone number and address.
         (c)   The city has the authority to physically take any product,
produce, or items for sale by the vendor into custody for examination and
investigation of compliance with this section, provided that such taking shall
be only for a reasonable period of time not to exceed 30 calendar days. The
city has the authority to require that a vendor demonstrate the creation of the
wares at any time after issuance of the permit, in order to determine if the
vendor is in compliance with this section. If destructive testing makes the
return of the item impossible, the city shall purchase the item from the
vendor.
         (d)   If any vendor is not in compliance with this section the permit
holder shall be notified in writing of the violation and shall have seven
calendar days to come into compliance or the permit shall be suspended until
the violation is cured, provided however, that if the violation is a health or
safety violation, then the violation must be cured immediately.
      (9)   Prohibitions. The following acts are prohibited.
         (a)   A person may not use the term “farmer’s/artisan market” to
describe a market or other sales location that does not meet the terms of the
definition set forth in the definitions for this division.
         (b)   An itinerant vendor may not sell farm and food products,
handcrafted items, or food specialty items at a market labeled “farmer’s/
artisan market” unless at least 75% of the product offered by that person was
grown or processed by that person or under that person’s direction. A product
not grown or processed by that person must have been purchased directly from
another farmer.
      (10)   Penalty.
         (a)   Any person violating any provision of this section of the Code
regulating farmer's/artisan market special use permits which do not relate to
health or sanitation within the corporate limits of Sunset Valley, Texas shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined an amount not
exceeding $100.
         (b)   Any person violating any provision of this section of the Code
regulating farmer's/artisan market special use permits within the corporate
limits of the City of Sunset Valley, Texas, that relates to health or
sanitation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined
an amount not exceeding $1,000.
         (c)   Each day that such violation continues shall be a separate
offense. Prosecution or conviction under this provision shall never be a bar to
any other remedy or relief for violations of this section of the Code.
      (11)   Relationship to farmer’s/artisan market rules. This section does
not prohibit a market from imposing more stringent requirements on its sellers
than those imposed by § 150.103(F).
   (G)   Event Center requiring TABC license or permit for premises. In
addition to the general criteria applicable to all special uses, an event
center requiring TABC license or permit for premises shall be operated and
maintained in accordance with the following conditions and limitations:
      (1)   The premises must comply with all requirements applicable to event
centers;
      (2)   The premises where the alcoholic beverage is proposed to be sold is
not located within 300 feet of a church or school as measured by state law; and
      (3)   The premises where the alcoholic beverage is proposed to be sold is
not located on property, two or more sides of which abut property in a
residential zoning district.
   (H)   Winery. A winery must comply with the following specific criteria and
conditions, as well as the foregoing general criteria:
      (1)   The winery where the alcoholic beverage is proposed to be sold is
not located within 300 feet of a church or school as measured by state law.
      (2)   The winery where the alcoholic beverage is proposed to be produced
or sold is not located on property, two or more sides of which abut property in
a residential zoning district.
      (3)   A winery shall produce no more than 20,000 gallons of wine annually
on the permitted premises.
      (4)   The quantity of alcoholic beverages produced or bottled off
premises purchased by the winery may not exceed 40% by volume of the quantity
of alcoholic beverages sold as measured in gallons.
      (5)   The permit holder shall prohibit patrons from leaving the licensed
premises with an unconsumed alcohol sample or glass of wine.
      (6)   A permit holder may offer alcohol samples and glasses of wine in
open containers and may provide them to a patron free of charge.
      (7)   A permit holder must comply with all state and federal laws and
regulations regarding the production and sale of wine.
      (8)   A permit holder must submit a report of the activities for a permit
renewal on an annual basis that includes the previous 12 months of reports to
TABC of alcoholic beverages purchased, alcoholic beverages produced and total
sales of alcoholic beverages.
   (I)   Alcoholic beverages sold in a retail establishment for off-premise
consumption under Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code Chapter 22 package store permit.
      (1)   The retail establishment where the alcoholic beverage is proposed
to be sold shall operation in pursuant to a permit issued under Tex. Alcoholic
Beverage Code Chapter 22 and shall operate in compliance with that Code;
      (2)   The retail establishment where the alcoholic beverage is proposed
to be sold is a minimum of 20,000 square feet;
      (3)   The retail establishment where the alcoholic beverage is proposed
to be sold is not located within 300 feet of a church or school as measured by
state law; and
      (4)   The retail establishment where the alcoholic beverage is proposed
to be sold is not located on property, two or more sides of which abut property
in a residential zoning district.
   (J)   Religious worship uses.
      (1)   A special use permit is required for conversion of existing
improvements on a property from a residential use to a religious worship use
where no alterations requiring a building permit are made; for construction of
new improvements to be used for a religious worship use; and for alteration of
existing improvements to be used for a religious worship use.
      (2)   Disclosure of the religious worship use shall be made in each
application for a building permit for improvements to be used for religious
worship. Construction shall comply with all applicable building regulations
pertaining to religious or public assembly facilities.
      (3)   Occupancy limits for all improvements used for religious worship
uses shall be established in accordance with fire safety regulations of the
city, regardless whether a building permit is required and issued.
      (4)   Where no construction activity is proposed and no building permit
is required, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued on approval of a
special use permit, which shall establish the maximum occupancy.
      (5)   For uses with an occupancy limit of greater than 20 persons, the
lot used for a religious worship use must be adjacent to a collector, minor or
major arterial street.
      (6)   On- or off-site parking must be provided at a ratio of one parking
space per three persons, up to the occupancy limits of the building(s) on the
property used for religious worship uses. The number of handicapped parking
spaces required by the table in §
150.589 shall be provided on site except where no buildings to be used for
religious worship are required to comply with accessibility requirements for
the disabled pursuant to applicable regulations.
§ 150.104 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SPECIAL USES AND TEMPORARY SPECIAL USES.
   (A)   Adherence to approved plans, regulations. A special use or a temporary
use shall be established, operated, and maintained in accordance with the
plans, terms, conditions, and limitations contained in the permit approved by
the City Council.
   (B)   Enforcement. Permitted special uses are integral to the zoning
districts governing the respective parcels and are subject to the enforcement
provisions of §§
150.030 through
150.252.
   (C)   Revocation.
      (1)   The City Administrator, after notice to the holder of the permit,
may revoke any special use or temporary use permit for one or more of the
following reasons:
         (a)   A substantial violation of any of the plans, terms, conditions,
and limitations applicable to the special use;
         (b)   A substantial violation of any applicable ordinance or
regulation;
         (c)   Operation or maintenance of the special use in a manner that is
detrimental to the public's health or safety, or so as to constitute a
nuisance;
         (d)   Discontinuance of the use or sale of the property;
         (e)   Transfer of an interest in the real property subject to the
special use, whether such transfer is by gift, sale, lease, devise, or
otherwise; and/or
         (f)   Giving any false, misleading, or fraudulent statements made in
connection with or on the permit application.
      (2)   The holder of a permit that has been revoked may not apply for a
new permit for one year from the date of revocation, unless the revocation is
overturned on appeal.
   (D)   Appeal. An applicant or permit holder aggrieved by a decision by the
City Administrator to deny a permit renewal or revoke a permit may appeal the
decision to the City Council. A person may file an appeal in writing with the
City Administrator not later than 15 days from the date of the City
Administrator’s decision on the permit. The appeal under this section shall
describe the action appealed from and reason for the appeal.
      (1)   The City Council shall hold a hearing not later than the forty-
fifth day after an appeal is filed. The appellant shall have the right to
present witnesses and testimony at such hearing.
      (2)   The City Council may uphold, reverse, or modify a decision by the
City Administrator.
   (E)   Lapse of permit. A special use permit shall lapse within one year of
the date the permit is issued unless the use has commenced or, and is
diligently pursued toward completion.
   (F)   Permit term and renewal.
      (1)   Special use permits shall be valid for a term of one year from date
of issuance.
      (2)   Temporary special use permits shall be valid for the number of days
specified at time of issuance, not to exceed 30 consecutive days, unless
extended.
      (3)   The holder of a special use permit may submit an application for
renewal when the permit is within 60 days of expiration. The application for
renewal shall include all information required to demonstrate compliance with
the general and specific criteria of this section and any special conditions of
the permit. If the special use includes any sale of alcoholic beverages, the
permittee shall provide documentation of compliance with all requirements of
the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission and any other applicable state or
federal agencies. The application for renewal shall be accompanied with the
annual permit fee as established by the City Council.
      (4)   The City Administrator may administratively renew the permit
provided that the applicant is found to be in compliance with the terms of this
section.
      (5)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this division, a
special use permit for a religious worship use shall remain valid for so long
as such use is continuously operated in compliance with the special use permit
issued for such use, and need not be renewed annually, if the use is limited
to: (i) religious assembly or worship services and administrative functions
associated therewith; and (ii) day care or child instruction provided during
religious assembly or worship services. An annual renewal of a special use
permit shall be required for the operation of a school, the sale of any goods
or services, and any other activity not associated with or ancillary to
religious assembly or worship services.
   (G)   Transfer. A special use permit is not transferable.
   (H)   Short-term food sales. No special use authorization for accessory food
sales shall be required pursuant to this section for the following activities:
      (1)   School or city sponsored activities with a duration less than 24
hours;
      (2)   Events not to exceed 72 hours associated with the opening of a new
retail commercial establishment;
      (3)   Fund-raising activities by charitable and/or non-profit
organizations not to exceed 24 hours;
      (4)   Activities authorized by a temporary use permit obtained pursuant
to §
150.101(J).
§ 150.105 REGULATIONS FOR ADJOINING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Districts which are adjacent to or abut each other shall conform to
the following requirements:
      (1)   SF, Single Family Residential Districts shall not be adjacent to a
HC Highway Commercial District except those properties that front Highway 290
West shown on the future Land Use Map adopted on February 21, 1995 as having
Highway Commercial Zoning and shall be effectively buffered from other
districts.
      (2)   An arterial roadway may be adjacent to a Single Family Residential
District when the Single Family Residential District is effectively buffered
from the roadway as described in this section.
      (3)   NC, Neighborhood Commercial Districts shall be adjacent only to
residential districts, O (Neighborhood Office) Districts, CO (Conditional
Overlay) Districts, GUI (Government, Utility and Institutional) Districts, or
HC (Highway Commercial) Districts.
      (4)   O, Neighborhood Office Districts shall be adjacent only to SF
(residential) areas (as shown above), a NC (Neighborhood Commercial) District,
a CO (Conditional Overlay) District, GUI (Governmental, Utility and
Institutional) District or a HC (Highway Commercial) District.
      (5)   HC, Highway Commercial shall be located only in areas accessible
from major traffic ways.
   (B)   Effective compatibility and buffering standards.
      (1)   Effective buffering of residential districts from all other
districts, except P Districts, shall include a minimum 100 feet landscaped
setback. All buffering shall be fully contained within the property of the
district required to provide the buffering, and all requirements for buffering
shall be met within that same property. Credit for existing fences, screens,
vegetation, etc. adjacent to commercially zoned land but physically located on
lesser zoned land cannot be given. However, existing natural topographic
changes may be considered for their buffering effect, regardless of the
property on which it occurs. No roadways can be located within this setback.
The applicant cannot comply with landscaping requirements of this Code in this
buffer zone.
      (2)   Applicability. The standards and guidelines set forth in this
section shall apply to O, NC, HC, GUI or other commercial or governmental
zoning districts or land so conditionally zoned and located adjacent to any SF,
P, or other non-commercial zoned district.
      (3)   Evidence of compliance. The burden of proving acceptable buffering
shall be on the applicant. The use of plans, photographs, sections, elevations,
scale models, etc. may be employed as methods of demonstrating compliance. All
requirements for screening shall be met at the time of project (or phase)
completion. Maturation of vegetative screens is anticipated and is intended to
provide a continuing and greater level of screening than the initial
requirements.
      (4)   Compliance guidelines.
         (a)   Visual screening.
            1.   Intent: To partially or fully block views to or from SF
districts to or from any commercial or governmental district so as to minimize
the potential impact of commercial and governmental uses on the residents of
the city.
            2.   The "target point" of all buffering and screening from
commercial and/or governmental to residential districts shall be a point 30
feet horizontally from the rear property line, and 20 feet high. This "target"
is intended to approximate the theoretical position of view from a two-story
residential structure located along the rear setback of a residential or office
zoned lot.
            3.   Requirements: Views from the "target point" to the outlined
elements and/or heights shall be screened as set forth in Table A following
this section.
         (b)   Light screening.
            1.   Intent: Because lights, whether used for aesthetic or
functional illumination, can be a night time intrusion on the residents of the
city by creating glare and by detracting from the rural character of the city,
this guideline is intended to minimize the impact of lights on residential
properties in the city.
            2.   Requirements: Lighting shall be screened, maintained, and
operated in compliance with the criteria, standards and methods set forth in
Table B following this section.
         (c)   Noise mitigation.
            1.   Intent: To minimize noise intrusion into residential districts
which may be considered intrusive and incompatible with the peaceful enjoyment
of adjacent residents, by way of site planning and other means which will
effectively buffer noises and sound transmission.
            2.   It is understood that the minimization of sound intrusion is
most efficiently accomplished as close to the source as possible, and that
sound travels in a radial direction from the source, unlike light which
primarily travels in one direction.
            3.   Requirements: Noise shall be mitigated and use of property
shall be restricted tomitigate noise in compliance with the criteria, standards
and methods set forth in Table C following this section.
         (d)   Odor mitigation.
            1.   Intent: To minimize the atmospheric transmission of
commercially generated odors to nearby SF districts.
            2.   General: Whenever a site or use will contain a source of odor
emissions, consider the primary wind direction for this area (normally from the
southeast) in site planning. Design landscape and vegetative screens to channel
and re-direct wind flows through placement of the more compact and evergreen
plant types to take advantage of their mass and ability to modify wind
directions.
            3.   Requirements: Odor shall be mitigated and use of property
shall be restricted to mitigate odor in compliance with the criteria,
standards, and methods set forth in Table D following this section.
   (C)   Tables.
      (1)   Table A.
 
VISUAL SCREENING: TABLE A
Element to Screen                                                           Degree of Screening                                                             Method of Screening (used singly or in combination)
• Dumpsters (including views into dumpsters from the top)                 • 100% to a minimum height of seven feet, or seven feet above floor elevation • Landscaping, including a combination of trees, shrubs, grasses, including a
• Trash collection areas                                                  of element                                                                      mixture of deciduous and evergreen species
• On-ground and outdoor storage of materials for construction or sale     • Equal to complete visual buffering with no gaps larger than one foot        • Walls, constructed of wood, stone, masonry, building extensions
• Grade-level loading docks; taised loading docks                         horizontally                                                                    • Earthen berms, either used alone or in conjunction with landscaping or walls
• Utility Equipment and meters
                                                                                                                                                            • Landscaping with a combination of trees, shrubs and grasses, both deciduous
• Parking and interior drives or maneuvering spaces, including parking    • 80% to a minimum height of four feet                                        and evergreen
spaces, aisles, cul-de-sacs, driveways                                      • No gaps larger than three feet horizontally                                 • Walls constructed of wood, stone or masonry
                                                                                                                                                            • Earthen berms
• Commercial building walls or facades                                                                                                                    • Landscaping with a combination of trees, shrubs and grasses, both deciduous
• Roof-mounted mechanical equipment (other than vents or elements smaller • 65% to the maximum height of the element to be screened                     and evergreen
than six inches diameter)                                                   • No gaps larger than eight feet horizontally                                 • Walls constructed of wood, stone or masonry
                                                                                                                                                            • Earthen berms
 
      (2)   Table B.
 
LIGHT SCREENING: TABLE B
Element to Screen                        Degree of Screening                                                             Method of Screening
• Parking lot lighting                 • Lighting levels at property lines adjacent to SF districts shall not exceed • Direct all lights away from adjacent residential areas by appropriate
• General area lighting                two footcandles                                                                 locations of lights and by utilizing directional hoods or other devices,
• Exterior building security lights                                                                                    landscaping fences or walls
• Car lights from parking lots or site                                                                                 • Provide solid screens of at least four feet height between parked or moving
driveways                                • Block lights directly shining into residential property by 95%              cars
                                                                                                                         • Screens may not have voids or gaps larger than one square foot
• Landscape lighting                   • Completely screen light sources and do not allow any lights to shine directl• Direct lights away from property lines adjacent to SF districts
• Exterior building accent lighting    into adjacent properties                                                        • Block light sources (fixtures) by using earthen berms, walls, fences or
                                                                                                                         landscaping
                                                                                                                         • Locate all lights a minimum of 100 feet from common property lines
• Advertising/sign lights              • Completely screen light sources and                                         • Provide solid screening of direct lights and glow
                                         do not allow any lights to shine directly into adjacent properties              • Keep all lighted signs lower than building heights and comply with all
                                                                                                                         aspects of the sign provisions of this Code
                                                                                                                         • Minimize window openings facing residential districts
• Building interior lights             • Block direct light visibility from or to residential properties by a minimum• Utilize window screening or other architectural treatments to reduce light
                                         of 75%                                                                          escape
                                                                                                                         • Block light sources with landscaping, walls, berms or fences
 
      (3)   Table C.
 
NOISE MITIGATION: TABLE C
Noise Sources to be Screened                                                    Method of Screening
                                                                                • May not be located within 150 feet of an SF district
                                                                                • Locate within an enclosed structure constructed of solid building materials,
• Dumpsters, refuse and recycling collection or storage facilities            such as masonry, stone, double-walled wood, etc. Physically orient access to
                                                                                area away from SF districts
                                                                                • Must also comply with guidelines for odor screening
                                                                                • Must meet all other compatibility guidelines
                                                                                • May not be located within 150 feet of SF districts
• Loading docks and loading areas intended as large-scale delivery/pick up of • Provide a physical, solid screen of walls, fences, and/or berms adjacent to
goods and materials                                                             the noise source and between the noise source and SF districts. The height of
• Fabrication or assembly areas                                               the screen shall be a minimum of eight feet, rising one foot in height for every
                                                                                20 feet in distance from the source of the noise
                                                                                • Orient direction of sound projection 180 degrees away from SF districts
• Outdoor public address systems                                              • Adjust sound levels as necessary to keep address levels unable to be heard
                                                                                within 100 feet of the intended targeted area
                                                                                • May not be located within 200 feet from any adjacent SF district, unless
• Public outdoor dining areas                                                 separated by a building or solid screen at least eight feet in height
                                                                                • This screen must be located directly adjacent to the dining area
 
   (4)   Table D.
 
ODOR MITIGATION: TABLE D
Source or Element to be Screened or Mitigated                                Method of Screening
• Dumpsters (primarily dumpsters associated with restaurants or other food • Locate a minimum of 150 feet from any SF district
establishments, or any other source which will produce waste capable of      • Whenever possible, locate to the north, west or east of any residential
emitting strong odors)                                                       district
                                                                             • Enclose on all sides within a structure made of solid building materials
• Kitchen vents to the outside                                             • Do not locate on building facades directly facing SF districts
• Vents from other interior odor sources (dry cleaners, etc.)              • Utilize hoods and/or other directional devises to direct emissions away from
                                                                             residential areas
• Grease traps                                                             • Do not locate on building facades directly facing SF districts
                                                                             • Use designs which minimize odor escapement to the outside air
 
§ 150.106 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   The uses of land, buildings, and other structures permitted in each of
the districts established in this Code are designated by listing the principal
uses. In addition to such principal uses, accessory uses may be permitted in
certain districts. Accessory buildings or structures shall:
      (1)   Be customarily incidental to the principal use established on the
same lot;
      (2)   Be subordinate to and serve such principal use;
      (3)   Be intended for the comfort, convenience, or necessity of users of
such principal use;
      (4)   Not be designed for human habitation (except in the case of a
permitted guest house);
      (5)   Not be attended by nuisance factors;
      (6)   Not be greater than 1,000 square feet;
      (7)   Not exceed the number of buildings allowable as shown in the
development standards for each district with a variance;
      (8)   Not exceed a cumulative total of 1,500 square feet per lot;
      (9)   The height of an accessory building or structure may not exceed the
height of the principal building or structure;
      (10)   All accessory buildings and structures, other than detached
garages, must be located in the rear yard behind the principal building or
structure, except where the principal building or structure is more than 75
feet from the front lot line. If the principal building or structure is more
than 75 feet from the front lot line, an accessory building or structure may be
located in front or to the side of principal building or structure provided
that the accessory building or structure is more than 75 feet from the front
lot line. Unless the accessory building or structure is architecturally
compatible in construction materials, color, and design to the principal
building or structure, it must be screened by landscaping from being seen from
the front or side lot lines. The landscaping providing the screening must be
located within 25 feet from the front and side(s) of the accessory building or
structure.
      (11)   Detached garages may be located to the side or behind the
principal building or structure, except when the principal building or
structure is more than 75 feet from the front lot line. If the principal
building or structure is more than 75 feet from the front lot line, a detached
garage may be located in front of the principal building or structure. Detached
garages must be architecturally compatible in construction materials, color,
and design to the principal building or structure.
      (12)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a fence:
         (a)   Is permitted as an accessory use in any zoning district; and
must comply with the requirements of this section. In this section:
            (i)   An ornamental fence is a fence with an open design that has a
ratio of solid material to open space of not more than one to four; and
            (ii)   A solid fence is a fence other than an ornamental fence.
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a solid fence
constructed along a property line may not exceed an average height of six feet
measured from the natural grade up or a maximum height of seven feet.
            (i)   If there is a change in grade of at least one foot measured
along any run of a solid fence along a property line, then the portion of the
fence where the grade change occurs may be constructed to a maximum height of
seven feet.
            (ii)   A solid fence along a property line may be constructed to a
maximum height of eight feet if each owner of property that adjoins a section
of the fence that exceeds a height of six feet files a written consent to the
construction of the fence with the building official; and,
            (iii)   There is a change in grade of at least two feet within 50
feet of the boundary between adjoining properties; or,
            (iv)   A structure, including a telephone junction box, exists that
is reasonably likely to enable a child to climb over a six foot fence and gain
access to a hazardous situation, including a swimming pool.
         (c)   A solid fence may be constructed to a maximum of eight feet in
height if the fence is located on or within the building setback lines.
         (d)   A solid fence may be constructed to a height of eight feet if
the fence is located between a residential use and:
            (i)   Property zoned as a commercial; or,
            (ii)   Property used for a commercial or industrial use; or,
            (iii)   An alley that separates residential uses.
         (e)   Except as provided in §
150.106(E)(c), a fence shall be constructed in accordance with this division.
            (i)   This division does not apply to a fence that was constructed
on or before or;
            (ii)   Is more than six feet in height and located on a property
with a non-residential use;
            (iii)   When more than 50% of the total linear distance of an
existing fence is replaced, the entire fence must comply with this division.
         (f)   A fence may not include:
            (i)   Spiked pickets, spiked bars, or other spiked decorative
elements above the top horizontal backer rail;
            (ii)   Vertical pickets above the top horizontal backer rail if the
vertical pickets are separated by more than two inches and less than nine
inches;
            (iii)   Razor-like wire or;
            (iv)   Barbed wire.
         (g)   A fence that creates a substantial risk of entrapment or
impalement is prohibited.
         (h)   A chain link fence shall use knuckle selvage.
         (i)   A fence used as a swimming pool barrier shall comply with the
adopted building code for pools and spas.
   (B)   Accessory buildings or structures may be used in conjunction with,
support of, or storage for a home occupation by special use permit.
   (C)   Any changes to an accessory use or structure (e.g., placement, angle,
size, etc.) not included within the plan submitted in support of the permit
application on which the accessory use or structure permit was granted must
have the written approval of the city prior to the change being constructed or
performed.
   (D)   For property zoned to be included in a single family residential or
PUD District and used only as a single family residential use, the rainwater
harvesting systems described in this division (D) shall constitute accessory
structures, but shall not (to the extent of the maximum size or capacity
provided in this division (D)) be subject to the following regulations: (i) the
limitations and restrictions set forth in divisions (A) (7), (8), and (10) of
this section; or (ii) the limitation on the maximum number of buildings and the
maximum combined floor areas of accessory structures set forth in §
150.134. By way of clarifying example, up to three accessory buildings and up
to a cumulative 1,500 square feet of accessory structures that comply with all
applicable provisions of this Code may be allowed notwithstanding the fact that
one or more of the rainwater harvesting systems described in this division (up
to the maximum size or capacity provided) are located on the affected property.
In addition, a rainwater harvesting system described in divisions (D)(1) and
(2) may be located in a side yard setback, provided that it is not located in a
utility or drainage easement; and rainwater harvesting systems described in
division (D)(1), (2), and (3) need not be architecturally compatible with the
primary structure nor screened from view.
      (1)   One or more receptacles with a cumulative capacity not greater than
175 gallons that receive water from a single downspout on the primary structure
used as a home if the receptacle(s) are located within six feet of the eaves of
the home facing the front yard (maximum capacity of allowed receptacles is
measured by each downspout but more than one downspout may be the source of
water for allowed receptacles), provided that the receptacle does not function
with the use of any electrical or pressurizing equipment;
      (2)   A receptacle with a capacity not greater than 350 gallons for each
downspout on a building if it is located behind the front wall of the primary
structure used as a home, provided that the receptacle does not function with
the use of any electrical or pressurizing equipment; and
      (3)   One or more rainwater harvesting systems with a cumulative total
area footprint of 350 square feet (whether above or below ground) located in a
back yard.
(Ord. 250520, passed 5-20-2025)
§ 150.107 NONCONFORMING LEGAL LOTS.
   A structure for a permitted use may be constructed on any legal lot even if
such lot does not meet the area, width, and depth requirements of this Code,
provided that the following conditions are met:
   (A)   Such lot shall be connected to the City of Sunset Valley centralized
waste water system when said system is located within 300 feet of the property
line. Otherwise, such lot shall properly support a private on-site sewage
facility adequate to handle the anticipated need of the proposed use.
   (B)   The structure proposed to be built upon such lot will comply with all
the remaining dimensional regulations. No deviation from such remaining
regulations shall be permitted except through the variance procedures provided
in this Code.
§ 150.108 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND AND STRUCTURES.
   Any use of land or structures lawfully existing on the effective date of
this Code, or an amendment hereto, that is not permitted in the district in
which the use is located may be continued, subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   No nonconforming use of land shall be extended to occupy a greater
area of land than was occupied at the earlier of the effective date of either
adoption or amendment of this Code or predecessor ordinances incorporated in
this Code, which adoption or amendment caused the use of land to be out of
compliance with land use regulations.
   (B)   No nonconforming use of land shall be moved in whole or in part to any
portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the
earlier of the effective date of either adoption or amendment of this Code or
predecessor ordinances incorporated in this Code, which adoption or amendment
caused the use of land to be out of compliance with land use regulations.
   (C)   When a nonconforming use of land is discontinued for a period of more
than 90 consecutive days, it shall be deemed to be abandoned and subsequent use
of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this Code for the
district in which the land is located.
   (D)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Code in
the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed,
reconstructed (except to repair damage up to an extent of 50% of the
replacement cost of the structure, or as ordered by the Building Official as
set forth in §
150.109), moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the
structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located.
   (E)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to
the regulations for the district, and the non conforming use may not thereafter
be resumed.
   (F)   When a nonconforming use of land, a structure, or structure and
premises in combination, is discontinued for three consecutive months, except
for repairs covered by an approved building permit, not exceeding six months,
it shall be deemed to be abandoned and the land, structure, or structure and
premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with
the regulations of the district in which it is located.
   (G)   Where nonconforming status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the non
conforming status of the land. Destruction for the purpose of this division is
defined as damage to an extent of more than 50% of the replacement cost at time
of destruction.
   (H)   The City Council, after notice and hearing, may require that a
nonconforming use be screened from view of the street or surrounding property,
or may require the elimination of any nuisance factor caused by a nonconforming
use.
§ 150.109 NON-COMPLYING STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Any structure lawfully existing on the effective date of this Code, or
any amendment hereto, that is designed for a use permitted in the district
where the structure is located but which does not comply with one or more of
the “dimensional regulations” of this Code, such as limitations on area, lot
coverage, height and location on lot, shall be designated a non-complying
structure. This section is intended to provide rights on the conditions
provided herein only with regard to such dimensional regulations.
   (B)   No such non-complying structure may be enlarged or altered except as
allowed in the following divisions (C) and (D).
   (C)   Single family residential property.
      (1)   If a structure on property zoned and used as single family
residential property is partly complying and partly non-complying, the
complying portion of the structure may be repaired, rebuilt, remodeled or
altered in compliance with applicable regulations in any way as long as that
portion of the structure continues to meet all applicable dimensional
regulations in place at that time.
      (2)   The non-complying portion of a structure on single family
residential property that is partly non-complying, or a structure on single
family residential property that is entirely non-complying, may only be
repaired, rebuilt, remodeled or altered so long as (i) the repairs, rebuilding,
remodeling or alteration is done in the original footprint of the structure and
(ii) the repairs, rebuilding, remodeling or alteration meet all applicable
regulations except dimensional regulations and location of the structure on the
site.
   (D)   Structures on property zoned and used for any purposes other than
single family residential.
      (1)   Status of structures. If any portion of a structure on property
zoned and used for any purpose other than single family residential is non-
complying, the entire building is deemed to be a non-complying structure. If
the non-complying portion of the structure is permanently removed and the land
is restored to an undeveloped state, the remaining structure will be deemed a
complying structure.
      (2)   Damaged structures. This division applies to non-complying
structures that are (i) located on property zoned and used for any purpose
other than single family residential; and (ii) damaged by any means other than
a purposeful destruction or demolition by the owner. Should more than 50% of
the structure be destroyed, no reconstruction may occur except in full
compliance with all then current applicable law. Should less than 50% of the
structure be destroyed, reconstruction on the original footprint may be
permitted, provided the owner complies with all applicable dimensional
regulations in place at the time the structure is repaired or reconstructed. In
the event of a repair or reconstruction pursuant to this division, the
structure repaired or reconstructed in compliance with this section shall be
deemed a non-complying structure.
      (3)   All other structures. Undamaged non-complying structures located on
property zoned and used for any purpose other than single family residential
must be maintained in good condition but may not be altered or enlarged.
   (E)   The Building Official may order an unsafe non-complying structure to
be restored to a safe condition in compliance with all applicable regulations
of this Code. Any such order is subject to the provisions of this section
regulating the repair or reconstruction of partially or wholly damaged or
destroyed noncomplying structures. A building inspector that requires or
attempts to require any modifications not required by applicable Codes and
regulations shall forfeit the right to do business in Sunset Valley for 12
months.
§ 150.110 PROHIBITED USES.
   All uses not expressly permitted or authorized by the Code are prohibited in
the city, including but not by way of limitation, the following:
   (A)   Outdoor commercial kennels;
   (B)   Open-air commercial amusements except: (i) those in place for two
weeks or less; and (ii) for which a temporary special use permit has been
issued by the city;
   (C)   Junk yards, salvage yards, and all open-air storage of junk, waste
products and salvage materials;
   (D)   Open-air storage of building materials, equipment and merchandise
(except live vegetation) except that necessary to a construction project,
provided that the materials and equipment are located on the site of the
construction and are removed immediately upon completion or discontinuance of
work;
   (E)   Placing, locating or erecting a mobile home;
   (F)   Mobile home or recreational vehicle parks;
   (G)   All signs except as expressly permitted in the billboard, sign and
outdoor lighting provisions of this Code;
   (H)   Quarrying;
   (I)   Hotels and motels;
   (J)   (1)   Sale of new or used automobiles and other motor vehicles, mobile
homes, recreational vehicles and boats, however, nothing within this section
shall be interpreted within the term, meaning, or definition of boat to include
the sale of:
         (a)   Canoes, paddle boats, kayaks, inflatable watercraft;
         (b)   Boats 15 feet or less; or
         (c)   Pontoon boats ten feet or less.
      (2)   Provided any outdoor storage of same meets the city’s screening
requirements as amended from time to time and the gross receipts derived from
the sale of these items does not exceed 40% of the gross receipts derived from
the sale of all products by the retailer.
   (K)   Storage warehouses and building material storage yards;
   (L)   Industrial, mining or extractive uses of all descriptions;
   (M)   Taverns, bars, dance halls and night clubs;
   (N)   Amusement centers or parlors;
   (O)   Automobile wash services;
   (P)   Massage establishments;
   (Q)   Adult entertainment activity;
   (R)   The sale or manufacture of fireworks;
   (S)   Uses attended by substantial nuisance factors;
   (T)   All automobile service stations;
   (U)   Storage of hazardous wastes or any facility that utilizes hazardous
materials;
   (V)   Automobile repair service;
   (W)   Convenience stores;
   (X)   Laundries, commercial or self-service;
   (Y)   Public garages;
   (Z)   Zoos;
   (AA)   Print shops; and
   (BB)   Boarding houses and lodging houses.
§ 150.111 ELIMINATION OF NUISANCE FACTORS.
   Nuisance factors attending any use lawfully existing on the effective date
of this subchapter shall be eliminated or mitigated to the maximum extent
feasible within 90 days of the effective date hereof.
§ 150.112 VISIBILITY ALONG STREETS AND AT STREET CORNERS.
   No structure shall be erected and no vegetation or fence shall be maintained
in the area of a corner lot between the sidelines of the intersecting streets
and a straight line joining points on such sidelines 15 feet distant from their
point of intersection, which materially obstructs safe visibility for vehicular
traffic.
§ 150.113 STREETS.
   No existing local streets (e.g., Sunset Trail, Reese south of Jones, Pillow
Road south of Jones, Lone Oak, Oakdale) shall be extended, connected or joined
with any other street so as to create a through street. All streets shall
comply with the standards set forth in the Land Development Code and the
Comprehensive Land Use and Roadway Plan.
§ 150.114 SIGNS.
   The only signs permitted in the city are those which meet the requirements
of billboard, sign and outdoor lighting provisions of this Code, and amendments
thereto, and which have received the necessary approval. No sign shall be
permitted in the SF District except the following categories of signs which
comply with the provisions of the sign and outdoor lighting provisions of this
Code and have received approval when necessary: political sign, real estate
sign, temporary site development sign, and residential nameplate sign.
§ 150.115 SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS.
   Storage structures for solid waste containers shall not be permitted in the
setback area, and commercial solid waste containers shall conform with the
effective compatibility and buffering standards. See § 150.105(B). The design
shall be approved at the time the site plan is approved.
§ 150.116 TELEVISION DISH ANTENNAS.
   Television dish antennas are permitted within the city provided that said
antennas do not exceed 12 feet in diameter, are not located within the setback
areas, and are painted in earthen colors so as to blend in with the natural
landscape, and are not visible from any public street. Where possible,
landscape screening should be used.
§ 150.117 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN HOME OCCUPATIONS IN SF, SINGLE FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E), a person desiring to
engage in a home occupation in a SF, Single Family Residential District that
does not occur in any accessory building shall submit an application for a
permit on form(s) provided by the city for that purpose. The application shall
be accompanied by the fee established from time to time by city ordinance.
   (B)   The City Administrator, or such other person designated by the City
Administrator shall review and approve or deny the application within ten days
of receipt by the city of a complete application with any required filing fee.
If the proposed home occupation satisfies the requirements set forth and
referred in §
150.131, the City Administrator or designee shall issue the requested permit.
   (C)   If the City Administrator or designee denies or fails to timely act on
the permit application, the applicant may, not later than ten days following
the sooner of the denial or the last day for timely action, appeal the decision
or inaction to the City Council, without any additional fee. The City Council
shall consider the appeal on the same basis and procedure used by the City
Council on an application for a special use permit as provided in §
150.101, including review for compliance with all applicable restrictions and
criteria, except that no prior consideration of the Zoning Commission shall be
necessary.
   (D)   A person desiring to engage in a home occupation in a SF, Single
Family Residential District to be conducted wholly or in part in an accessory
building shall submit an application for a special use permit pursuant to the
procedures set forth in §
150.101. Such application shall be accompanied by the fee established by the
Council from time to time for such permits.
   (E)   The following professional and business activities shall be deemed not
to constitute a home occupation if operated in compliance with the criteria set
forth and referred in §
150.131(E), and so long as no license or certification is required for the
activity, other than a personal license or certification to engage in the
profession or trade:
      (1)   Garage sales and hobbies, as defined in §
150.007 do not constitute a home occupation. However, garage sales and sales to
customers at the location of the residential property of plants, baked goods,
wood, fruit, animals, or other goods, occurring more frequently than as
described in the definition of garage sales in §
150.007 shall constitute a home occupation;
      (2)   Private music lessons to individuals;
      (3)   Production of artistic or artisanal works that do not involve more
than incidental use of motorized machinery;
      (4)   Storage of goods for sale off the premises of the subject
residential property;
      (5)   The offering of any goods or services for sale via mail, the world
wide web, or other remote marketing means where the delivery of goods or
performance of services occurs off site; and
      (6)   Business or professional activities conducted in the home by a
resident of the home by use of telephone, or other electronic communication or
data processing devices.
   (F)   Notwithstanding the general penalty for a violation of this chapter as
provided in §§
150.021 and
150.999, this division shall apply to a violation of the requirement to obtain
a required permit for the conduct of a home occupation (in addition to any
other applicable penalties where a special use permit is required and not
obtained). Written notice of an alleged violation shall be provided by regular
U.S. Mail and by certified mail to the last known occupant at the address where
the home occupation is alleged to occur stating the nature of the violation and
a general description of the activity alleged to constitute the home
occupation. A period of 30 days shall be allowed for the violation to cease,
except in the case of an activity constituting a nuisance a period of ten days
shall be permitted to discontinue the activity. If the activity continues
thereafter, prosecution of the offense pursuant to §§
150.021 and
150.999 may be initiated, except that the period of violation up to the time of
trial shall be punishable by a fine of up to $200. Subsequent offenses for
similar activities involving the same property shall be punishable as provided
in §§
150.021 and
150.999. Nothing in this division shall be construed to prohibit the city from
seeking enforcement by civil action and civil penalties as provided by law.
SF, SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 150.130 INTENT OF SF, SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   This district is intended to establish and preserve peaceful, attractive,
safe, low-density residential neighborhoods of single family detached dwelling
units with a rural character and to protect the integrity of such areas by
prohibiting the intermixture of residential and incompatible non-residential
uses, and to harmoniously blend with existing Single Family Residential
development (SF).
§ 150.131 SF, SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Single family, detached dwellings limited to no more than one such
building per lot and occupied by no more than one family.
   (B)   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to single family,
detached dwellings in a rural setting. Accessory structures shall comply with
the provisions of §
150.106.
   (C)   A recreational vehicle may be used for guests of the family residing
in the principal dwelling for a period not to exceed 30 days within a three-
month period.
   (D)   Temporary construction storage as defined in §
150.007.
   (E)   Home occupation - A proposed home occupation must comply with all
general criteria specified in §
150.106 and with specific criteria in this division. A special use permit is
not required unless an accessory building/use is involved; however, a home
occupation permit is required as set forth in §
150.116. The following specific criteria are applicable to home occupation
uses:
      (1)   The occupation shall produce no alteration or change in the
character or exterior appearance of the principal building from that of a
dwelling;
      (2)   Such use shall be incidental and secondary to the use of the
premises for residential purposes, shall not utilize an area exceeding 20% of
the gross floor area of the dwelling unit, and such use occurs in the dwelling
used by the user as his/her private residence;
      (3)   An accessory building/use shall not be used for a home occupation
without a special use permit;
      (4)   The occupation use shall be carried on by a person who uses the
premises as his/her private residence;
      (5)   The traffic that the proposed use can reasonably be expected to
generate will not increase or add to congestion, cause a safety hazard, or
cause a parking problem in the area, nor will it disturb the peace and quiet of
the neighborhood;
      (6)   No window display or on-premises sign shall be used to advertise;
      (7)   No substantial increase in waste water or water use shall be
allowed;
      (8)   No obnoxious noise or odor, excessive night lighting, excessive
street parking by customers, employees or others assisting in the activity or
providing goods or services to the operator(s) of the activity, no activity
constituting a nuisance, or that creates electrical interference in a
surrounding residential property, and no other conditions that are incompatible
with a quiet residential setting or hazardous to nearby residential property
shall be created.
   (F)   Community homes as that term is defined in §
150.007 and subject to the limitations and requirements for such homes set
forth in the Texas Human Resources Code, as it may be from time to time
amended.
   (G)   A single guest house, as that term is defined in §
150.007, which is used for human habitation by a reasonable number of persons,
provided that the habitants of guest houses in SF, Single Family Residential
Districts shall not pay rent or other compensation for use of the guest house
or any portion thereof.
§ 150.132 SPECIAL USES PERMITTED IN SF, SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.
   Home occupation in an accessory building.
§ 150.133 SPECIFIC STANDARDS, SF DISTRICT.
   A minimum of two off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit are required,
plus one-half parking space per bedroom.
§ 150.134 SF, SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   Intent. To establish and preserve peaceful, attractive, safe low-density
residential neighborhoods of single-family detached dwelling units with a rural
character and to protect the integrity of such areas by prohibiting the
intermixture of residential and incompatible non-residential uses, and to match
existing Single Family Residential developments (SF).
 
Land Uses                                                          Development Standard
Permitted Uses                                          By special Site         Supplementary
                                                        use permit Requirements Requirements
                                                                   General
                                                                   Requirements
                                                                   Maximum DU
                                                                   per acre:
                                                                   1.0
                                                                   Minimum Lot
                                                                   Size: 1.0
                                                                   acre
                                                                   Minimum Lot  Off-Street
                                                                   Width at     Parking
                                                                   Front        2 spaces/
                                                                   Setback      dwelling unit
                                                                   Line: 120    plus one-half
                                                                   ft.          parking space
                                                                   Minimum      per bedroom
                                                                   Street       Other
                                                                   Frontage:    Requirements
                                                                   Standard     by Reference
                                                                   Lot: 120 ft. to the
                                                                   Cul-de-Sac   Following
                                                                   Lot: 60 ft.  Provisions of
                                                                   Minimum Lot  this Codes,
                                                                   Depth: 300   as Amended:
                                                                   ft.          1. Wastewater
                                                                   Minimum      System
1. Single family, detached dwellings limited to no more            Floor Area:  Provisions of
than one such building per lot and occupied by no more             1,500 ft     this Code
than one family.                                        1. Home    squared      2. Watershed
2. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental Occupation Maximum      Provisions of
to single family, detached dwelling in a rural setting. in an      Impervious   this Code
3. A recreational vehicle may be used for guests of the accessory  Cover Not to 3.
family residing in the principal dwelling to a period   building   Exceed       Landscaping
not to exceed 30 days within a three-month period.      (A special Allowable    and Buffering
4. Temporary Construction Storage as defined in §      use permit under        Provisions of
150.007.                                                is not     Watershed    this Code
5. Home occupation located within the principal         required   Provisions   4. Sign and
dwelling and meeting the criteria of §                 for a home of this Code Outdoor
150.131.                                                occupation Primary Use  Lighting
6. Community homes as that term is defined in §        located    & Structure  Provisions of
150.007 and subject to the limitations and requirements within the Minimum      this Code
for such homes as set forth in the Texas Human          principal  Setbacks     with the
Resources Code, as it may be from time to time amended. dwelling   Front: 50    stipulation
7. A single guest house, as that term is defined in §  and        ft.          that all
150.007, which is used for human habitation by a        meeting    Side: 20 ft. outdoor
reasonable number of persons, provided that the         all        Rear: 30 ft. lighting
habitants of guest houses in SF, Single Family          applicable Maximum      shall be
Residential Districts shall not pay rent or other       criteria   Height: 35   directed away
compensation for us of the guest house or any portion   of this    ft.          from
thereof. Guest houses may also be used for any use that Code.)     Accessory    neighboring
would constitute an "incidental use", as that term is              Use &        properties
defined in this Code, that is permitted in SF, Single              Structure    (i.e., either
Family Residential Districts.                                      Maximum      up to light
                                                                   Height: 20   tree canopies
                                                                   ft.          or down to
                                                                   Minimum Side light ground
                                                                   and Rear     but not
                                                                   Setback: 20  horizontal
                                                                   ft.          away from
                                                                   Maximum No.  house)
                                                                   of Bldgs: 3  5.
                                                                   Minimum      Subdivision
                                                                   Distance     Provisions of
                                                                   Between      this Code
                                                                   Buildings:   6. All other
                                                                   10 ft.       applicable
                                                                   Placement:   Provisions of
                                                                   Side or Rear this Codes as
                                                                   Yd           amended
                                                                   Maximum
                                                                   Floor Area/
                                                                   Bldg: 1,000
                                                                   ft squared
                                                                   Maximum
                                                                   Combined
                                                                   Floor Area:
                                                                   1,500 ft
                                                                   squared
 
O, NEIGHBORHOOD OFFICE
§ 150.145 INTENT OF O, NEIGHBORHOOD OFFICE.
   To provide sites for quiet, low-intensity, neighborhood-oriented office uses
on a scale that is in harmony with the rural character of the community.
§ 150.146 O, NEIGHBORHOOD OFFICE PERMITTED USES.
   Office of an accountant, architect, attorney, engineer, broker, consultant,
insurance agent, religious worship use, or similar professional or semi-
professional uses other than medical-related services and veterinary services,
and uses permitted in SF Districts.
§ 150.147 SPECIAL USES PERMITTED IN O, NEIGHBORHOOD OFFICE.
   (A)   Medical-related professional offices.
   (B)   Veterinary services.
§ 150.148 SPECIFIC STANDARDS, O DISTRICT.
   (A)   No flat roofs shall be authorized.
   (B)   Varied, multiple pitched roofs.
   (C)   No store-front type structures with facade comprised of over 33% metal
and/or glass.
   (D)   No parking or parking facility between the front and sides of the
building and the front and side setback.
§ 150.149 O, NEIGHBORHOOD OFFICE DISTRICT.
   Intent. To provide sites for quiet, low-intensity, neighborhood-oriented
office uses on a scale that is in harmony with the rural character of the
community.
 
Land Uses                  Development Standard
Permitted    By special    Site          Supplementary Requirements
Uses         use permit    Requirements
                           General
                           Requirements
                           Minimum Lot
                           Size: 1.0
                           acre          Other Requirements by Reference to the
                           Minimum Lot   Following Provisions of this Codes, as
                           Width at      Amended:
                           Front Setback 1. Wastewater System Provisions of
                           Line: 120 ft. this Code
                           Minimum       2. Watershed Provisions of this Code
1. Offices                 Street        3. Landscaping and Buffering
of an                      Frontage:     Provisions of this Code
accountant,                Standard Lot: 4. Sign and Outdoor Lighting
architect,                 120 ft.       Provisions of this Code with the
attorney,                  Cul-de-Sac    stipulation that all outdoor lighting
engineer,                  Lot: 60 ft.   shall be directed away from
broker,                    Minimum Lot   neighboring properties (i.e., either
consultant,                Depth: 300    up to light tree canopies or down to
insurance                  ft.           light ground but not horizontal away
agent,                     Minimum Floor from a building).
religious    1. Medical-   Area: 1,000   5. Subdivision Provisions of this
worship use  related       ft squared    Code.
or similar   professional  Maximum Floor 6. All other applicable ordinances as
professional offices.      Area per      amended.
or semi-     2. Veterinary building:     Architectural Requirements:
professional services.     15,000 ft     1. No flat roofs
uses other                 squared       2. Varied, multiple pitched roofs.
than                       Maximum       3. No store front type, metal or
medical-                   Impervious    glass.
related                    Cover Not to  4. See Residential scale and texture.
services and               Exceed        5. No parking between the front and
veterinary                 Allowable     sides of the building, and the front
services,                  under         and side setback lines.
and uses                   Watershed     Minimum Off-Street Parking:
permitted in               Provisions of 1. No parking between the front and
SF.                        this Code     side of the building and the front and
                           Primary Use & side setback lines.
                           Structure     2. See Table 1.
                           Minimum       Compatibility and Buffering Standards:
                           Setbacks      1. 100 foot landscaped setback. See §
                           Front: 35 ft. 150.105(B).
                           Side: 20 ft.
                           Rear: 30 ft.
                           Maximum
                           Height: 35
                           ft.
 
NC, NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL
§ 150.160 INTENT OF NC, NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL.
   To provide sites for quiet, low-intensity, neighborhood-oriented retail and
office uses on a scale that is in harmony with the rural character of the
community.
§ 150.161 NC, NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL PERMITTED USES.
   Provided that there is no nuisance factor:
   (A)   Those uses permitted in SF and O Districts;
   (B)   Antique shop;
   (C)   Arts and crafts supply store;
   (D)   Bakery;
   (E)   Barber or beauty shop;
   (F)   Book or stationery store;
   (G)   Carpeting, floor covering, and rug store;
   (H)   China or glassware shop;
   (I)   Clothing or shoe store;
   (J)   Confectionery store;
   (K)   Delicatessen or catering service;
   (L)   Florist;
   (M)   Gift shop;
   (N)   Health food store;
   (O)   Ice cream parlor;
   (P)   Jewelry shop;
   (Q)   Laundry and dry cleaning substation, with no actual cleaning work
being performed on the premises;
   (R)   Nursery or greenhouse;
   (S)   Optical goods store;
   (T)   Personal service establishment;
   (U)   Pharmacy;
   (V)   Seamstress, dressmaker or tailor shop;
   (W)   Specialty food store;
   (X)   Studio for art, dance, drama, music, photography, or interior
decorating;
   (Y)   Toy store;
   (Z)   Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the foregoing
permitted uses. See §
150.106; and
   (AA)   Temporary field or construction office. See definition in §
150.007.
§ 150.162 SPECIAL USES PERMITTED IN NC, NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   Medical-related professional office.
   (B)   Veterinary services.
   (C)   Restaurant.
   (D)   Alcoholic beverage sales for on-premise consumption in a restaurant.
   (E)   Alcoholic beverage sales for off-premise consumption in a retail use.
§ 150.163 SPECIFIC STANDARDS, NC DISTRICT.
   (A)   No flat roofs shall be authorized.
   (B)   Varied, multiple pitched roofs.
§ 150.164 NC, NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   Intent. To provide sites for quiet, low-intensity, neighborhood-oriented
retail and office uses on a scale that is in harmony with the rural character
of the community.
 
Land Uses                                        Development Standard
Permitted Uses                      By special   Site         Supplementary Requirements
                                    use permit   Requirements
                                                 General
                                                 Requirements
                                                 Minimum Lot
                                                 Size: 1.0
                                                 acre
                                                 Minimum Lot
                                                 Width at
                                                 Front
                                                 Setback
                                                 Line: 120
                                                 ft.
                                                 Minimum
                                                 Street
                                                 Frontage:
                                                 Standard
                                                 Lot: 120 ft.
                                                 Cul-de-Sac
                                                 Lot: 60 ft.
                                                 Minimum Lot
                                                 Depth: 300
                                                 ft.          Other Requirements by Reference to the
                                    1. Medical-  Minimum      Following Provisions of this Codes, as Amended:
                                    related      Floor Area:  1. Wastewater System Provisions of this Code
                                    professional 1,000 ft     2. Watershed Provisions of this Code
                                    offices      squared      3. Landscaping and Buffering Provisions of this
                                    2.           Maximum      Code
                                    Veterinary   Floor Area   4. Sign and Outdoor Lighting Provisions of this
                                    services     per          Code with the stipulation that all outdoor
1. Retail, Limited as listed in §  3.           building:    lighting shall be directed away from
150.161.                            Restaurants  15,000 ft    neighboring properties (i.e., either up to
2. Those uses permitted in O        4. Beer and  squared      light tree canopies or down to light ground but
Neighborhood Office and SF Single   wine sales   Maximum      not horizontal away from a building).
Family Residential.                 in a retail  Impervious   5. Subdivision Provisions of this Code.
                                    use          Cover Not to 6. All other applicable ordinances as amended.
                                    5. Banks and Exceed       Architectural Requirements:
                                    savings and  Allowable    1. No flat roofs
                                    loans        under        2. Varied, multiple pitched roofs
                                    6. Alcoholic Watershed    Minimum Off-Street Parking:
                                    beverage     Provisions   1. See Table 1.
                                    sales in     of this Code Compatibility and Buffering Standards:
                                    restaurants  Primary Use  1. 100 foot landscaped setback. See section §
                                                 and          150.105(B).
                                                 Structure
                                                 Minimum
                                                 Setbacks
                                                 Front: 50
                                                 ft.
                                                 Side: 20 ft.
                                                 Rear: 30 ft.
                                                 Maximum
                                                 Height: 35
                                                 ft.
                                                 Parking Lot
                                                 and Other
                                                 Impervious
                                                 Cover:
                                                 Minimum
                                                 Setbacks:
                                                 Front: 50
                                                 ft.
                                                 Side: 20 ft.
                                                 Rear: 30 ft.
 
HC, HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL
§ 150.175 INTENT OF HC, HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL.
   This district is intended to provide sites for community oriented retail and
office uses fronting Highway 290 West on a scale that are in harmony with the
character of the community.
§ 150.176 HC, HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL PERMITTED USES.
   Provided there is no nuisance factor:
   (A)   Those uses permitted in SF, O and NC Districts;
   (B)   Bank and/or savings and loan association;
   (C)   Day care facilities;
   (D)   Furniture store;
   (E)   Grocery store;
   (F)   Hardware store;
   (G)   Health and/or athletic club;
   (H)   Indoor family recreation center;
   (I)   Pawn shop;
   (J)   Pet shop and pet grooming shop;
   (K)   Photocopying, typing or printing service;
   (L)   Restaurant with or without drive-up service. No intoxicating liquor
may be sold for on-premises consumption unless authorized by a special use
permit;
   (M)   Sporting goods store, excluding the servicing of boats and boat
motors, and the sale or servicing of motor vehicles;
   (N)   Variety store;
   (O)   Veterinary clinic;
   (P)   Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the foregoing
permitted uses. (See §
150.106);
   (Q)   Temporary field or construction. (See definition in §
150.007);
   (R)   Guest houses and residential inns;
   (S)   Body piercing if such activities are not the primary business of the
applicant and occupy no more than 10% of the floor area of the business
offering the service up to a maximum of 300 square feet;
   (T)   Pet services; and
   (U)   Event center.
§ 150.177 SPECIAL USES PERMITTED IN HC, HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   Day care facility;
   (B)   Medical-related professional offices;
   (C)   Alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption in a restaurant;
   (D)   Alcoholic beverages for off-premise consumption in a grocery store;
   (E)   Event Center requiring TABC license or permit for premises;
   (F)   Winery; and
   (G)   Alcoholic beverages sold in a retail establishment for off-premise
consumption under Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code Chapter 22 Package Store Permit.
§ 150.178 SPECIFIC STANDARDS, HC DISTRICT.
   (A)   No flat roofs shall be authorized.
   (B)   Varied, multiple pitched roofs.
   (C)   Beer and wine sales for off-premise consumption in a retail use.
   (D)   Event centers. All event centers shall be operated and maintained in
accordance with the following conditions and limitations:
      (1)   The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises is
permitted without a special use permit under the following conditions:
         (a)   The sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises shall not exceed
40% of gross sales for any discrete event, where gross sales shall include the
event center rental charge, if any and charges for the sale of food, if any;
         (b)   The cost of alcoholic beverages consumed on the premises shall
not exceed 40% of the total event cost for any discrete event, where total
event costs shall include the event center rental charge, if any, and charges
for the sale of food, if any;
         (c)   All third party servers of alcoholic beverages on the premises
shall obtain or maintain any license or permit required by the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Commission (TABC) for the service of alcoholic beverages;
         (d)   Regardless whether required by applicable state law, all those
serving alcohol on the premises shall be certified by the TABC;
         (e)   No location specific TABC license or permit is required for the
event center premises; and
         (f)   Each person serving alcoholic beverages for consumption at an
event shall furnish to the city proof of commercial general liability insurance
with a coverage limit of at least $1,000,000 per occurrence and proof of TABC
certification.
      (2)   No event may take place between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
      (3)   Capacity for an event at an event center shall be limited to three
people for every off-street parking space onsite. The capacity may be increased
with the approval of the City Administrator if the owner or operator of the
event center provides the City Administrator acceptable proof that additional
parking has been secured by leasing or licensing parking spaces on adjacent
properties, leasing or licensing parking spaces at another location from which
a shuttle service will transport event participants, or some other similar
parking plan. Off-site parking must not endanger event participants or create
unreasonable traffic congestion in the city. Capacity cannot be increased to
exceed the occupancy limits set by any other applicable law or regulation.
      (4)   All events centers must comply with ADA accessibility guidelines.
      (5)   A security guard will be provided for every 200 people at an event.
      (6)   All outdoor areas of the event center premises shall be kept clean.
Within two hours of its creation or placement, any trash or debris located in
outdoor areas shall be removed from the premises or placed in a garbage
receptacle for collection.
      (7)   If on-site temporary sanitation facilities will be used for an
event, the owner or operator of the event center must provide the City
Administrator with information regarding the proposed method of containment and
disposal and capacity of such facilities.
§ 150.179 HC, HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   Intent. To provide sites for community-oriented retail and office uses
fronting U.S. 290 on a scale that is in harmony with the rural character of the
community.
 
Land Uses                  Development Standard
Permitted    By Special    Site          Supplementary Requirements
Uses         Use Permit    Requirements
                           1. Property
                           subdivided
                           before May
                           10, 2007, the
                           effective
                           date of the
                           site
                           requirements
                           amendments:
                           All
                           requirements
                           provided in
                           subdivision 2
                           below, except
                           as follows:
                           Minimum Lot
                           Size shall be
                           the size of
                           the affected
                           lot in an
                           approved
                           subdivision
                           plat recorded
             1. Medical-   on or before
             related       May 10, 2007,
             professional  except that
             offices.      if such lot
             2. Veterinary was
             services.     thereafter
             3. Alcohol    re-subdivided Other Requirements by Reference to the
             beverage      in an         Following Provisions of this Codes, as
             sales in a    approved and  Amended:
             restaurant.   recorded      1. Wastewater System Provisions of
             4. Day Care   subdivision   this Code
             Facility.     plat by       2. Watershed Provisions of this Code
             5. Alcohol    combining     3. Landscaping and Buffering
1. Retail,   beverage      lots or parts Provisions of this Code
general.     sales in a    of lots, the  4. Sign and Outdoor Lighting
2. Those     retail use.   minimum lot   Provisions of this Code with the
uses         6. Alcohol    size shall be stipulation that all outdoor lighting
permitted in beverage      the size of   shall be directed away from
Neighborhood sales in a    such larger   neighboring properties (i.e., either
Office and   grocery       re-subdivided up to light tree canopies or down to
Neighborhood store.        lot.          light ground but not horizontal away
Commercial.  7. Event      2. General    from a building)
3. Guest     Center        Requirements  5. Subdivision Provisions of this
houses and   requiring     Minimum Lot   Code.
residential  TABC license  Size: 3 acres 6. All other applicable ordinances as
inns.        or permit for Minimum Lot   amended.
4. Event     premises.     Width at      Architectural Requirements:
Center       8. Winery     Front Setback 1. No flat roofs
             9. Alcoholic  Line: 120 ft. 2. Varied, multiple pitched roofs.
             beverages     Minimum       Minimum Off-Street Parking:
             Sold in a     Street        1. See Table 1.
             Retail        Frontage:     2. For Event Centers see §
             Establishment Standard Lot: 150.176
             for Off-      120 ft.       Compatibility and Buffering Standards:
             Premise       Cul-de-Sac    1. 100 foot landscape setback. See §
             Consumption   Lot: 60 ft.   150.105(B).
             under Tex.    Minimum Lot
             Alcoholic     Depth: 300
             Beverage Code ft.
             Chapter 22    Minimum Floor
             Package Store Area: 1,000
             Permit.       ft squared
                           Maximum Floor
                           Area: 50,000
                           ft squared
                           per building
                           Maximum
                           Impervious
                           Cover Not to
                           Exceed
                           Allowable
                           under
                           Watershed
                           Provisions of
                           this Code
                           Primary Use
                           and Structure
                           Minimum
                           Setbacks
                           Front: 50 ft.
                           Side: 20 ft.
                           Rear: 30 ft.
                           Maximum
                           Height: 35
                           ft.
 
GUI, GOVERNMENTAL, UTILITY AND INSTITUTIONAL
§ 150.190 INTENT OF GOVERNMENTAL, UTILITY AND INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT.
   To provide sites for important community services such as governmental,
educational, and religious facilities.
§ 150.191 GUI, GOVERNMENTAL, UTILITY AND INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Buildings and other improvements owned by a federal, state or local
governmental entity.
   (B)   Schools.
   (C)   Religious worship use without child day care facilities.
   (D)   Other uses and structures similar or incidental to the above permitted
uses.
§ 150.192 SPECIAL USES PERMITTED IN GUI, GOVERNMENTAL, UTILITY AND
INSTITUTIONAL.
   Medical-related services.
§ 150.193 SPECIFIC STANDARDS, GUI DISTRICT.
   (A)   No flat roofs shall be authorized.
   (B)   Varied, multiple pitched roofs.
§ 150.194 GUI, GOVERNMENTAL, UTILITY AND INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT.
   Intent. To provide sites for governmental, educational, religious, and other
community facilities.
 
Land Uses                 Development Standard
Permitted     By Special  Site           Supplementary Requirements
Uses          Use Permit  Requirements
                          General
                          Requirements
                          Minimum Lot
                          Size: 1.0 acre
                          Minimum Lot
                          Width at Front
                          Setback Line:
                          120 ft.        Other Requirements by Reference to the
                          Minimum Street Following Provisions of this Codes, as
                          Frontage:      Amended:
                          Standard Lot:  1. Wastewater System Provisions of
                          120 ft.        this Code
                          Cul-de-Sac     2. Watershed Provisions of this Code
1. Government             Lot: 60 ft.    3. Landscaping and Buffering
buildings                 Minimum Lot    Provisions of this Code
2. Schools                Depth: 300 ft. 4. Sign and Outdoor Lighting
3. Religious              Minimum Floor  Provisions of this Code with the
Worship Use               Area: 1,000 ft stipulation that all outdoor lighting
4. Parks                  squared        shall be directed away from
5. Other uses 1. Medical- Maximum Floor  neighboring properties (i.e., either
and           related     Area: 15,000   up to light tree canopies or down to
structures    Services    ft squared per light ground but not horizontal away
similar or                building       from a building)
incidental to             Maximum        5. Subdivision Provisions of this Code
the above                 Impervious     6. All other applicable ordinances as
permitted                 Cover Not to   amended
uses                      Exceed         Architectural Requirements:
                          Allowable      1. No flat roofs
                          under          2. Varied, multiple pitched roofs
                          Watershed      Minimum Off-Street Parking:
                          Provisions of  1. See Table 1.
                          this Code      Compatibility and Buffering Standards:
                          Primary Use    1. 100 foot landscape setback. See §
                          and Structure  150.245.
                          Minimum
                          Setbacks
                          Front: 50 ft.
                          Side: 20 ft.
                          Rear: 30 ft.
                          Maximum
                          Height:35 ft.
 
CO, CONDITIONAL OVERLAY COMBINING DISTRICT
§ 150.205 CO, CONDITIONAL OVERLAY COMBINING DISTRICT INTENT.
   To provide flexible and adaptable use or site development regulations by
requiring standards tailored to individual properties in addition to and more
stringent than the base district to which it is attached, to insure
compatibility among competing or potentially incompatible uses, to ease the
transition from one base district to another, to address land uses or sites
with special requirements, and to guide development in unusual situations or
unique circumstances.
§ 150.206 CONDITIONAL OVERLAY COMBINING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Application. Property may be zoned as a CO Combining District in
accordance with the provisions of this Code. When an applicant applies for
zoning or rezoning using the CO Combining District, any notice required by this
Code shall include a description of the restrictions proposed by the applicant
and a statement that additional conditions may be imposed by the City Council
and that additional notice shall be provided if the City Council proposes to
require fewer conditions than proposed by the applicant or to zone or rezone
the property into the requested base district without the requested CO
Combining District.
   (B)   Use and site development regulations in the Conditional Overlay
Combining District. The CO Combining District modifies and restricts the use
and site development regulations otherwise authorized in the base district. All
requirements of a CO Combining District are in addition to and supplement all
other applicable requirements of this Code. Restrictions which may be imposed
by the CO Combining District shall be limited to the following:
      (1)   Prohibiting permitted and special uses and accessory uses otherwise
authorized in the base district, or making a permitted use a special use;
      (2)   Decreasing the number or average density of dwelling units which
may be constructed on the property;
      (3)   Increasing minimum lot size or minimum lot width requirements;
      (4)   Decreasing the maximum floor to area ratio permitted;
      (5)   Decreasing the maximum height permitted;
      (6)   Increasing the minimum yard and setback requirements;
      (7)   Decreasing the maximum building or impervious coverage permitted;
      (8)   Restricting access to abutting and nearby roadways, including
specific design features intended to ameliorate potentially adverse traffic
impacts;
      (9)   Providing for architectural and design features to enhance
compatibility with the residential character of the city; or
      (10)   Any other specific site development regulations required or
authorized by city ordinance or Code provision.
   (C)   Method of adoption. Conditions imposed by the CO Combining District
shall be included in the ordinance zoning or rezoning the property as a CO
Combining District. All property included in a CO Combining District shall be
identified on the Official Zoning Map by adding the letters "CO" to the base
district symbol. The ordinance zoning or rezoning property as a CO Combining
District shall specifically state the modifications imposed pursuant to this
Code. The restrictions shall be considered a part of the zoning provisions of
this Land Development Code. A violation of the restrictions shall be a
violation of the zoning provisions of this Code. The restrictions shall
continue in full force and effect until modified by City Council by amendment
to the ordinance zoning or rezoning the property as a CO Combining District.
   (D)   CO zoning of property subject to public restrictive covenants. For
purposes of this section, a "public restrictive covenant" is a covenant which
(i) names the city as its beneficiary, (ii) restricts use or development of the
property, and (iii) was recorded as a condition of approval of zoning or
rezoning by the City Council. The owner of any property subject to a public
restrictive covenant may request CO Combining District zoning of the property,
provided it pays an application fee for zoning. The City Council may initiate
CO Combining District zoning for any property subject to a public restrictive
covenant notwithstanding a request from the owner of the property. Restrictions
imposed under an ordinance granting a CO Combining District shall be identical
to restrictions in the public restrictive covenants. An ordinance zoning
property as a CO Combining District that includes all restrictions imposed by
public restrictive covenant(s) constitutes the consent of the City Council to
terminate the public restrictive covenant(s) on the property.
   (E)   Permitted uses. Permitted uses are determined by the base district
except as limited or further restricted by the CO conditional overlay.
   (F)   Special uses. Special uses are determined by the base district except
as limited or further restricted by the CO conditional overlay.
   (G)   Site requirements. Site requirements are determined by the base
district except as limited or further restricted by the CO conditional overlay.
   (H)   Supplementary requirements. Supplementary requirements are determined
by the base district except as limited or further restricted by the CO
conditional overlay.
P, PARKLAND; G, GREENSPACE AND PRESERVATION; AND C, CONSERVATION
§ 150.220 INTENT OF PARKLAND DISTRICT.
   To provide publicly owned parcels for parks and recreation, including active
and passive recreation, water quality protection, air purification, and
continuity of aesthetic open space and nature area buffering for the citizens
of Sunset Valley.
§ 150.221 PARKLAND DISTRICT PERMITTED USES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARD.
 
Land Uses                 Development Standards
Permitted Uses            Site Requirements          Supplementary Requirements
1. Public Parks
2. Publicly owned Open
Areas
3. Conservation area or
easement
4. Vehicular parking
5. Playground equipment
and other recreational
structures                1. Direct public access
6. Drainage improvements, must be provided for parks 1. Only vegetation
Water quality protection  and active recreation      included in the city's
facilities, Infiltration/ areas.                     approved plant list may be
Passive detention         2. Any improved parking    used.
facilities                surfaces must be for park- 2. Maintenance, management
7. Shelters related to    related uses and conform   and construction practices
park uses and activities  with the city's approved   must conform to the city's
8. Paths and trails,      Parks and Open Space       approved Parks and Open
including foot bridges    Management Plan.           Space Management Plan.
9. Uses permitted in a
Greenspace/Preservation
District
10. Uses permitted in a
Conservation District
11. Other uses and
structures similar or
incidental to the above
permitted uses
 
§ 150.222 INTENT OF GREENSPACE/PRESERVATION DISTRICT.
   To provide publicly and privately owned parcels for permanent open space or
preservation purposes, including passive recreation, wildlife habitat,
ecological and historical preservation, water quality protection, air
purification, science education, nature observation, and continuity of
aesthetic open space and natural area buffering for the citizens of Sunset
Valley.
§ 150.223 GREENSPACE/PRESERVATION DISTRICT PERMITTED USES AND DEVELOPMENT
STANDARD.
 
Land Uses                 Development Standard
Permitted Uses            Site Requirements          Supplementary Requirements
1. Publicly owned Open
Areas
2. Privately owned Open
Areas
3. Conservation area or
easement
4. Drainage improvements,
water quality protection
facilities, infiltration/
passive detention
facilities
5. Paths and trails,
including foot bridges
and pedestrian links                                 1. Only vegetation
6. Historical sites and                              included in the city's
structures                                           approved plant list may be
7. Uses permitted in a                               used.
Conservation District                                2. Maintenance, management
8. Other uses and                                    and construction practices
structures similar or     1. Direct public access is must conform to the city's
incidental to the above   not required in the        approved Parks and Open
permitted uses            Greenspace/Preservation    Space Management Plan.
9. Buffering, berming or  District                   3. Pets are not allowed,
other visual or sound                                except when under direct
mitigation not in                                    control of owner in
conflict with the                                    certain time periods, in
intention of the                                     accordance with the city's
Greenspace/Preservation                              approved Parks and Open
District                                             Space Management Plan.
10. Motorized Vehicular
access in the Greenspace/
Preservation District is
restricted to emergency
vehicles, City of Sunset
Valley vehicles or for
specifically approved
City of Sunset Valley
projects and activities
that are consistent with
the goals and objectives
of the Conservation
District.
 
§ 150.224 INTENT OF THE CONSERVATION DISTRICT.
   To provide publicly and privately owned parcels for permanent conservation
purposes including space for wildlife habitat (including federally listed
endangered species habitat), ecological and geological preservation, water
quality protection, air purification, science education, nature observation,
and continuity of aesthetic open space and nature area buffering for the
citizens of Sunset Valley.
§ 150.225 CONSERVATION DISTRICT PERMITTED USES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARD.
 
Land Uses                Development Standard
Permitted Uses           Site Requirements          Supplementary Requirements
                                                    1. Only endemic vegetation
1. Boundary fences and                              may be used.
applicable signage                                  2. Maintenance and
2. Publicly owned Open                              management practices must
Areas                                               conform to the city's
3. Privately owned Open                             approved Parks and Open
Areas                                               Space Management Plan.
4. Conservation area or                             3. The only structures
easement                                            permitted are those that
5. Motorized Vehicular                              adhere to the intent of
access in the            1. Direct public access is the Conservation District.
Conservation District is not required in the        4. Pets are not allowed,
restricted to emergency  Conservation District.     except when under direct
vehicles, City of Sunset                            control of owner in
Valley vehicles or for                              certain time periods, in
specifically approved                               accordance with the city's
City of Sunset Valley                               approved Parks and Open
projects and activities                             Space Management Plan.
that are consistent with                            5. Public access may be
the goals and objectives                            restricted in accordance
of the Conservation                                 with the city's approved
District.                                           Park and Open Space
                                                    Management Plan.
 
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
§ 150.235 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OF SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONED LAND.
   (A)   Purpose. Planned Unit Development (PUD) is intended to encourage
innovative subdivision or site plan design and promote superior development. It
is suitable for the comprehensive development of large tracts of vacant or
substantially vacant land. The Planned Unit Development (PUD) District is
intended for tracts for which a standard zoning classification may be
inappropriate. Special circumstances that may warrant a PUD zoning
classification include the following:
      (1)   Areas with environmental constraints which may require special
design considerations for the preservation of environmental features not
adequately protected under current ordinances; and
      (2)   Areas of special concern to existing or proposed residential
neighborhoods where standard zoning may not adequately address concerns of land
use intensity, buffering and screening, open spaces, tree preservation, cluster
development, infill areas, undesirable activities or design features, access
and transportation impacts, landscaping, lighting, signage, noise, air quality,
protection of water resources, type of construction, type of building
materials, allowable uses, design concept, architectural diversity,
maintenance, height of improvements, building mass, square footage of
residential units, setbacks, recreational amenities, covered parking, view
preservation, historical preservation, public safety and welfare, or any other
features for which special site conditions or other considerations may warrant
innovative or custom design.
   (B)   Permitted uses. PUD may be utilized for any type of land use permitted
in single family residential zoning districts within the city, provided all
uses are compatible with adjacent uses and the Comprehensive Plan.
   (C)   Standards and criteria. When considering a PUD, the unique nature of
each proposal for a PUD may require, under proper circumstance, the departure
from certain codes and ordinances. The adoption of an ordinance establishing a
PUD District shall constitute authority for such flexible planning to the
extent that the PUD, as approved, departs from City Codes and ordinances.
However, each PUD must comply with the following criteria.
      (1)   Goals and objectives. Before approving a PUD, the City Council
shall determine that it meets all of the following goals and objectives:
         (a)   The development in the proposed PUD is equal to or superior to
development that would occur under the standard ordinance requirements;
         (b)   The proposed PUD shall be in harmony with the general purposes,
goals, objectives, and standards of the Comprehensive Plan;
         (c)   The proposed PUD shall not have an adverse effect upon adjacent
property, the character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, parking,
utilities or any other matters affecting the public health, safety and general
welfare;
         (d)   The proposed PUD shall be adequately served by essential public
facilities and services including streets, parking, drainage, water, wastewater
facilities and other necessary utilities; and
         (e)   The proposed PUD shall be constructed, arranged and maintained
so as not to dominate, by scale and massing of structures, the immediate
neighboring properties or interfere with their development or use in accordance
with any existing zoning district.
      (2)   Size. Creation of a PUD is only justified for development of tracts
30 acres or greater in size. There is no maximum size for a PUD. However, a PUD
must consist of a parcel or group of parcels that form a single contiguous land
unit. For this purpose, an ownership separated solely by the width of a public
or utility right-of-way will be considered contiguous.
      (3)   Height and street requirements.
         (a)   Height. The height limitation for structures within the PUD
shall be approved as part of the development plan to assure compatibility with
adjacent developments and other portions of the PUD. Height may not exceed the
maximum height allowance for similar proposed uses in Single Family Residential
Zoning Districts within the city.
         (b)   Street. All pavement widths and curve radii, for public streets,
shall be designed to assure adequate access by fire and emergency vehicles.
      (4)   General provisions.
         (a)   Developments within a PUD must comply with all other applicable
ordinances not specifically waived by this section.
         (b)   The proposed PUD shall not waive any basic health or safety
standards.
      (5)   Density.
         (a)   Maximum density. The maximum density shall be as specified in
the PUD land development ordinance approved by the City Council, but shall be
no greater than one and one-half times the density allowed without PUD zoning
based on gross site acreage.
         (b)   Minimum lot sizes. Minimum lot sizes as required by the
subdivision and zoning ordinances may be waived, provided that:
            1.   The overall density of the PUD shall not exceed one and one-
half times the density permitted without a PUD designation;
            2.   The PUD provides for adequate buffers to assure compatibility
with adjacent developments inside and outside of the PUD; and
            3.   The PUD preserves natural features on the site to the extent
reasonably feasible.
         (c)   Density transfers and bonuses. Density transfers and bonuses may
be granted within a PUD, which would result in a variety of densities for
specific parcels within the PUD while maintaining the overall permitted density
of the entire PUD.
      (6)   Impervious cover standards. The maximum impervious cover for the
entire property within the PUD must conform to the impervious cover limitations
for each of the water quality zones for that property. PUDs are not required to
conform to any per lot requirements regarding impervious cover.
      (7)   Setback requirements. The proposed PUD may deviate from setback
requirements in the zoning ordinance.
      (8)   Street and alley sizes. The proposed PUD may contain streets and
alleys that deviate from the minimum street and alley size required by the
Sunset Valley Code or ordinances.
      (9)   Location. Creation of a PUD is only justified for large tracts of
land with street frontage along Ernest Robles Way or Highway 290.
   (D)   Designation of a PUD District.
      (1)   The designation of a PUD District shall be achieved though
amendment to the zoning ordinance.
      (2)   The applicant for PUD approval shall submit a development plan and
supporting documents shall form part of the ordinances and be attached as
exhibits thereto.
      (3)   Prior to formal consideration of a plan for a PUD, the Planning and
Zoning Commission and the City Council shall hold public hearings at which
interested parties or citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard in the
same manner as required for a rezoning application.
      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may take action to:
         (a)   Recommend approval of the development plan as submitted;
         (b)   Recommend approval of the plan contingent on changes suggested
by the Commission; or
         (c)   Recommend disapproval of the plan.
      (5)   The City Council may take action to:
         (a)   Approve the development plan as submitted;
         (b)   Amend and approve the plan as amended; or
         (c)   Disapprove the plan.
   (E)   Development plan.
      (1)   The development plan shall include both plans and written documents
for the entire PUD area and shall specifically include the following as a
minimum:
         (a)   The location and gross acreage of each density area including
the dwelling intensity of any residential areas or the lot sizes and locations
of any other uses within the PUD;
         (b)   A plan and written documentation of the locations and types of
open spaces in the PUD, including their intended uses, finished landscaping,
public access, and restrictions on development and access. This information
shall include details concerning access to and through open spaces,
restrictions or conditions on any development within each type of open space,
and responsibilities for maintenance of landscape and access and improvements
within open spaces;
         (c)   The location of the 25-year and 100-year floodplains and all
public streets;
         (d)   The conceptual location and acreage of streets and common open
space;
         (e)   The location, development, landscaping and maintenance criteria
of all buffer areas, which shall include at a minimum the area within 100 feet
inside the perimeter of the parcel, except for tracts fronting on Ernest Robles
Way shall include a buffer area with an overall average in width of at least
125 feet, provided the width of the buffer shall never be less than 100 feet
from Ernest Robles Way. Landscaped buffer areas may include naturally vegetated
or undisturbed areas;
         (f)   The development controls, such as deed restrictions and federal
wildlife restrictions, which will be applied to assure compatibility of the
proposed development with adjacent existing development and zoning districts;
         (g)   The assurance of maintenance and continued protection of the
PUD, including any of the common open space. This includes, but it is not
necessarily limited to, restrictive covenants, home owners’ association
agreements, maintenance agreements, deeds and agreements establishing easements
and rights-of-way;
         (h)   The public dedications and physical improvements which will be
undertaken to assure compatibility with adjacent land uses and the assurance
that the development will not require any excessive expenditures by the city
for road or utility improvements;
         (i)   A plan for the location of all public utilities;
         (j)   Drainage, water quality protection and flood control plans; and
         (k)   A plan showing the land uses, names of property owners, and
density of adjacent to development within 200 feet of the boundary of the PUD.
         (l)   A plan and elevation drawings showing building facades and
exterior details, fences, and landscaping and buffering, as will be seen from
the vantage points of public street rights-of-way abutting the PUD. Included
with such plans and elevations there shall be written documents that will
assure adherence to and compliance with such plans and elevation details. The
purpose of this provision is to provide assurance that the PUD will complement
and enhance, not degrade, the visual quality of the land and buildings in the
surrounding area.
      (2)   All plans shall be submitted as multiple copies, for review by each
Planning and Zoning Commission member, each City Council member, and
appropriate city staff. Plans shall adequately illustrate all of the required
information at a scale no finer that one inch equals 100 feet and a sheet size
no larger than 30 inches by 40 inches.
      (3)   Plans shall be submitted for review by the city staff at least 45
calendar days in advance of the first public hearing of the Planning and Zoning
Commission for this amendment.
      (4)   Detailed site plans, showing details in excess of those required on
the PUD Development Plan, may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission
or the City Council as part of a PUD approval.
   (F)   Changes to a development plan.
      (1)   Minor changes. Minor alterations to the development plan required
by engineering or other circumstances that do not substantially change the
concept of the PUD may be approved administratively by the Deputy City
Administrator. Changes that reduce the intensity of the land use are minor
changes.
      (2)   Major changes. Major changes such as increased density shall be
submitted following the same procedure required in the original PUD
application.
   (G)   Platting. Platting will be determined by the proposed development
plan. The development plan must be approved prior to or simultaneously with the
approval of any plat.
   (H)   Procedures.
      (1)   Pre-application conference. Prior to filing an application for PUD
approval, the prospective applicant may request a pre-application conference
with the Deputy City Administrator and other city officials as deemed to be
appropriate. At the conference, the applicant shall present the general outline
of the PUD proposal, evidenced schematically by sketch plans. If the applicant
so requests, city staff shall, within ten working days, furnish the applicant
with written comments regarding the conference, including any appropriate
recommendations, to inform and assist the applicant in preparation of the
development plan.
      (2)   Zoning requirements. All zoning procedures, including fee payment,
shall be in accordance with this subchapter.
      (3)   Additional fees.
         (a)   Additional fees incurred by the city for review of the
development plan by city staff and consultants shall be reimbursed to the city
by the applicant in accordance with the city’s fee ordinance.
         (b)   Recording a PUD. The PUD ordinance approving the PUD shall be
recorded in the official deed records of Travis County. The recording costs
shall be paid by the applicant.
GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ALL ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 150.245 HOW TO MEASURE LOT AREA, WIDTH, DEPTH.
   (A)   Area. In computing the area of a lot, no part of a street shall be
included.
   (B)   Width. The width of a lot shall be measured along the front building
setback line.
   (C)   Depth. The depth of a lot shall be the horizontal distance between the
front and rear lot lines measured along the median between the side lot lines.
§ 150.246 BUILDING SETBACK DISTANCES.
   (A)   No principal building shall have any front, side, or rear setback
distance less than that shown on the schedule of regulations provided in this
Code as being required in the district in which the building is located.
Unroofed steps and ramps shall not be considered as a part of the principal
building when measuring the setback distance of such building.
   (B)   Corner lots. In the case of lots abutting on more than one street, the
property line fronting the street which serves as the primary entrance and
identity for the lot shall be deemed the front for purposes of setback
requirements.
§ 150.247 SETBACKS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES OTHER THAN FENCES, WALLS, SOLID
WASTE CONTAINERS AND MAILBOXES.
   The minimum setback distances for an accessory structure, other than
unroofed steps, ramps, fences, walls, walks, driveways, solid waste containers,
and mailboxes shall be as shown in the table under the appropriate category in
§§
150.134,
150.149,
150.164,
150.179, and
150.194.
§ 150.248 LOT COVERAGE.
   The amount of ground covered by the principal and accessory structures and
parking areas shall not exceed the maximum percentage of the total lot area
shown on the schedule of regulations.
§ 150.249 HEIGHT OF STRUCTURE.
   (A)   No structure shall have a height greater than that shown on the
schedule of regulations as being permitted in the district in which the
structure is located.
   (B)   Height shall be measured vertically from the undisturbed natural grade
at the mean elevation of the building pad to the highest point of the building
or structure, excluding spires, dish antennas, ventilators, chimneys, or other
similar appurtenances. Chimneys, spires, dish antennas, ventilators and other
appurtenances shall not extend over six feet above the building on which they
are located.
§ 150.250 MINIMUM FLOOR AREA FOR DWELLINGS.
   (A)   No dwelling unit shall have an enclosed living area smaller than that
shown on the schedule of regulations.
   (B)   The minimum floor area shall be computed exclusive of breezeways,
garages, open porches, carports, or accessory buildings not designed and used
directly and specifically for dwelling purposes.
§ 150.251 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Construction standards shall be in conformity with all city building
code requirements, as amended.
   (B)   Exterior surfaces of all principal buildings shall be constructed at a
minimum of 51% masonry materials. The percentage is calculated on the exterior
wall surface of the entire structure, excluding doors, windows, door and window
casings, porch decking and roofs. Exterior surfaces may be constructed of
masonry or approved siding, such as wood, or aluminum, or fiber cement siding,
or solar energy conservation materials, or any combination of such materials,
or other type shingles, subject to compliance with compliance with local
regulations. No shiplap may be used.
   (C)   All foundation plans shall be designed and sealed by a registered
engineer.
   (D)   All exposed foundation types shall be enclosed.
   (E)   The following shall apply to offices:
      (1)   Residential in scale and texture.
      (2)   No parking between the front and sides of the building and the
front and side setback lines.
§ 150.252 IMPERVIOUS COVER REQUIREMENTS.
   See the watershed provisions of this Code, and amendments thereto, for
requirements.
SUBDIVISION GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.265 AUTHORITY, APPLICABILITY OF LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE.
   (A)   This chapter is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and
laws of the State of Texas, including particularly, but not limited to,
Chapters 231, Acts of the 40th Legislature, Regular Session, 1927, as
heretofore or hereafter amended, and the provisions of Tex. Loc. Gov't Code
Chapter 212 as heretofore or hereafter amended. This subchapter is adopted
pursuant to the provisions of the general law of the city.
   (B)   In addition to the requirements of this subchapter, the provisions of
§§
150.012 through
150.020 apply to applications required by this subchapter.
§ 150.266 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the orderly, safe and
healthful development of the area within the corporate limits of Sunset Valley
and the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction and to promote the health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the community.
§ 150.267 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   No land in the City of Sunset Valley or its extraterritorial
jurisdiction shall be divided into one or more lots until such subdivision of
land has been approved by the City Council in accordance with the regulations
herein.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued pursuant to any city ordinance for any
structure or for the repair, modification or installation of public or private
sewage facility upon any lot in a subdivision, resubdivision or confirming plat
for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record by the City
of Sunset Valley, Texas, or upon any lot in a subdivision or confirming plat in
which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been
complied with in full. For purposes of this paragraph, the term "structure"
does not include signs.
   (C)   No building, repair, plumbing or electrical permit shall be issued by
the city for any structure on a lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has
not been approved and filed for record, nor for any structure on a lot within a
subdivision in which the standards contained herein have not been complied with
in full.
   (D)   The city shall not repair, maintain, install or provide any streets or
public utility services in any subdivision for which a final plat has not been
approved and filed for record, nor in which the standards contained herein or
referred to herein have not been complied with in full.
   (E)   Any right, privilege or remedy granted by this subchapter to the
person obtaining or holding plat or plan approval shall also run in favor of
such person's successors in interest and assigns. Any duty or obligation of or
remedy against such person arising from this subchapter shall also inure as to
such person's successors in interest, assigns, agents, employees,
representatives, or any person acting pursuant to the direction of any of the
foregoing, or under color of same.
   (F)   The city shall not sell or supply any water, gas, electricity, or
sewage service within a subdivision for which a final plat has not been
approved or filed for record, nor in which the standards contained herein or
referred to herein have not been complied with in full.
   (G)   In behalf of the city, the City Attorney shall, when directed by the
City Council, institute appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction
to enforce the provisions of this subchapter or the standards referred to
herein with respect to any violation thereof which occurs within the city,
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city as such jurisdiction as
determined under the Texas Local Government Code, or within any area subject to
all or a part of the provisions of this subchapter.
   (H)   If any subdivision exists for which a final plat has not been approved
or in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been
complied with in full, and the City Council of the city shall pass a resolution
reciting the fact of such noncompliance or failure to secure final plat
approval, and reciting the fact that the provisions of divisions (A), (B), (C),
and (D) of this section will apply to the subdivision and the lots therein, the
secretary for the city shall, when directed by the City Council of the city,
cause a certified copy of such resolution under the corporate seal of the city
to be filed in the deed records of Travis County in which such subdivision or
part thereof lies. If full compliance and final plat approval are secured after
the filing of such resolution, the secretary for the city shall forthwith file
an instrument in the deed records of Travis County stating that divisions (A),
(B), (C), and (D) no longer apply.
   (I)   The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the
issuance of permits for any lots upon which a residence building exists and was
in existence prior to passage of this chapter, nor to prohibit the repair,
maintenance, or installation of any street or public utility services for, to
or abutting any lot, the last recorded conveyance of which prior to February
15, 1985 was by metes and bounds, and/or any subdivision, or lot therein,
recorded or unrecorded, which subdivision was in existence prior to February
15, 1985.
§ 150.268 FISCAL SECURITY REQUESTED.
   (A)   All plans and actual construction of required improvements shall be
inspected by a registered professional engineer retained by the city. No plans
or completed construction shall be considered for approval or acceptance by the
City Council without certification from said engineer that such plans and
calculations and such construction is complete and that they are in accordance
with specifications and standards contained or referenced herein, and/or with
plans previously approved for the subject subdivision. The engineer shall make
frequent field inspections during the construction period and arrange for
testing in accordance with accepted civil engineering practice. The engineer
shall submit periodic progress reports to the City Council during the
construction period. The final responsibility for the adequacy and
acceptability of all construction shall rest with the subdivider.
   (B)   Maintenance of improvements. The subdivider shall maintain such
improvements in good condition and in a manner acceptable to the City's
Engineer and without cost to the city for a period of two years after
acceptance of completed construction. Upon completion of construction and final
acceptance, the subdivider shall either deposit money in escrow or file with
the City Council a letter of credit or other such guarantee acceptable to the
City Council, executed by a bank or a surety company holding a license to do
business in the State of Texas, and acceptable to the City Council, in an
amount equal to 10% of the construction costs of the improvements required, and
approved by the city. Such money or surety shall be irrevocable for two years
from the date of acceptance of completed construction. Such surety shall
guarantee that, in the event of failure of the subdivider to maintain such
improvement as provided above, the subdivider's credit shall be encumbered so
as to cause the improvements to be repaired or restored without cost to the
city. Such money in escrow or bond shall be approved as to form and legality by
the City Attorney.
   (C)   Construction guarantee. The subdivider shall file the security and the
maintenance guarantee if all construction is not completed prior to requesting
final plat approval. The security shall be either money in escrow or a letter
of credit, irrevocable for a period of two years from the date of approval of
the final plat, in escrow or in a form approved by the City Attorney, in the
amount equal to the total estimated cost of constructing and installing all the
improvements required by this subchapter. Such letter of credit shall guarantee
that, in the event of failure of the subdivider to make such improvements,
within two years from the date of approval of the final plat, the subdivider's
credit shall be encumbered so as to cause the improvements to be constructed
and installed without cost to the city.
   (D)   Construction inspection. The City's Engineer shall inspect such
improvements while in progress and upon completion of construction shall notify
the subdivider, the City Council, and the attorney for the city in writing as
to his acceptance or rejection of the construction. He shall reject such
construction if it fails to comply with the standards and specifications
contained or referred to herein. If he rejects such construction, the attorney
for the city shall, on direction of the City Council, proceed to enforce the
guarantees provided in this chapter.
   (E)   Extensions. Where good cause exists, the City Council may extend the
period of time for completion under division (C) of this section for an
additional period of time not to exceed six months if the subdivider has not
completed the required site improvements or completed such improvements in
compliance with this subchapter. No such extension shall be granted unless
security and maintenance guarantees as required herein have been provided by
the subdivider covering the extended period of time.
   (F)   Release of escrow. Security and/or maintenance guarantees shall not be
released by the city until all the requirements for approval and acceptance of
improvements have been met. Money in escrow may be drawn from time to time in
relation to the percent of construction completed. Completion of construction
phases shall be approved by the City's Engineer and submitted to the City
Council for approval and release of funds. If it becomes apparent that the
subdivider is not going to complete the construction of any or all of the
required improvements in accordance with the previously approved plans and Code
requirements, or provide the necessary maintenance within the stipulated two-
year period or any extension thereof granted under division (E) of this
section, the city's engineer shall so inform the City Council in writing and
the City Council shall take necessary action against the guarantees and
security posted by the subdivider to complete such construction or maintenance
at no cost to the city. The City Council may also file appropriate proceedings
in District Court against the subdivider and his/her security as set forth
above.
§ 150.269 VARIANCES.
   (A)   All requests for variances must be submitted in writing to the City
Council. The City Council may authorize a variance from these regulations when,
in its opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In
making the findings herein required, the City Council shall take into account
the nature of the proposed use of the land involved, existing uses of land in
the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed
subdivision, and the probable effect of such variance upon traffic conditions
and upon the public health, safety, convenience, and the welfare in the
vicinity. No variance shall be recommended unless the City Council finds:
      (1)   That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the
land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this
chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land;
      (2)   That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment
of a substantial property right of the applicant;
      (3)   That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area;
      (4)   That the granting of the variance will not have the effect of
preventing the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with
the provision of this Code; and
      (5)   That the variance request is of such a minor nature that the spirit
and intent of this Code is not to be violated.
   (B)   Such findings of the City Council together with the specific facts
upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official
minutes of the City Council meeting at which such variance is recommended.
Variances may be recommended only when in harmony with the general purposes and
intent of this chapter so that the public health, safety, and welfare may be
secured and substantial justice done. Pecuniary hardships to the subdivider,
standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship.
   (C)   No variance of the lot dimensional requirements shall be granted by
the City Council except after a public hearing wherein notice is given to
owners of real property within 500 feet of the boundaries of the subject
property.
   (D)   Where such conditions are found, the variance permitted shall be the
minimum departure from the terms of this subchapter necessary to avoid such
deprivation of privileges enjoyed by such other property to facilitate a
reasonable use, and which will not create significant probabilities of harmful
environmental consequences. The City Council may not grant a variance if it
would provide the applicant with any special privileges not enjoyed by other
similarly situated property with the similarly timed development, or if based
on a special or unique condition which was created as a result of the method by
which a person voluntarily subdivides land after the effective date of this
subchapter.
   (E)   Any application for a variance shall be accompanied by the fees set by
the City Council by ordinance or resolution.
§ 150.270 AUTHORITY OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Council is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate rules,
regulations, fees, standards and specifications for the construction,
installation, design, location and arrangement of streets, curbs, street
lights, street signs, alleys, utility layouts, utility easements, gates for
utility easements, sidewalks, water supply and water distribution systems, fire
hydrants, sewage disposal systems, septic tanks, water wells, monuments,
criteria for drainage easement requirements, drainage facilities, and crosswalk
ways. It shall file same with the City Clerk at least 14 days before it becomes
effective. It may amend the same from time to time, provided that an amendment
must be filed with the City Clerk at least 14 days before it becomes effective.
No such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall conflict with
the provisions of this Code or any ordinance of the City of Sunset Valley,
Texas. All such improvements shall be constructed, installed designed, located
and arranged by the subdivider in accordance with such rules, regulations,
standards and specifications.
SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES
§ 150.280 SUBDIVISION FAIR NOTICE.
   An applicant filing an application or request for a permit under this
subchapter must file a "Subdivision Fair Notice" or similar form promulgated
and in use by the City of Sunset Valley at the time the applicant files the
application or request for a permit under this subchapter.
§ 150.281 PRELIMINARY PLAT AND ACCOMPANYING DATA.
   (A)   General. The subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat
by a surveyor or engineer in accordance with this subchapter.
   (B)   Time for filing and copies required. The subdivider shall file eight
blue or black line copies of the plat, along with all accompanying data and
exhibits, with the secretary for the city at least 15 days prior to the date at
which formal application for the preliminary plat review is made to the City
Council. The application must be complete before any review by the city can
begin.
   (C)   Filing fees. Such plat shall be accompanied by a filing fee set forth
in the fee schedules adopted by ordinance or resolution. The filing fee is non-
refundable and no review or action by the City Council shall be made until the
fee is paid.
   (D)   (1)   (a)   Once formal application for preliminary plat approval has
been made, any substantial
changes to the form or content of any preliminary plat submissions shall be
deemed to constitute a new submission, superceding and replacing any prior
filing of a preliminary plat or application for preliminary plat approval
governing the same tract.
         (b)   If an applicant makes substantial changes to a preliminary plat
solely in response to requests for such changes made in writing by the city, a
checking entity, or the City Council, no new filing fee is required.
      (2)   Hearing dates, deadlines or filing fees applicable to earlier
preliminary plat applications or submissions do not apply to new submission or
application made pursuant to §
150.281(D)(1). A new filing fee is required for each new submission. New
deadlines and hearing schedules shall be established for each new submission or
application. New deadlines and hearing schedules shall be established for each
new submissions or application.
   (E)   Form and content. The plat shall be drawn on 24-inch by 36-inch sheets
or 18-inch by 24-inch sheets with a binding margin of not less than one and
one-half inches on the left side of the sheet and margins on the other three
sides of not less than one-half inch. The plat shall be drawn to scale of 100
feet to one inch. When more than one sheet is necessary to accommodate the
entire area, an index sheet showing the entire subdivision at an appropriate
scale shall be attached to the plat. The plat shall show the following:
      (1)   Names and addresses of the subdivider, record owner, engineer and/
or surveyor.
      (2)   A copy of the deed shall be attached.
      (3)   Proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not have the same
spelling or be pronounced similar to the name of any other subdivision located
within the city.
      (4)   Names of contiguous subdivisions and the owners of contiguous
parcels of unsubdivided land, and an indication of whether or not contiguous
properties are platted.
      (5)   Description, by metes and bounds, of the subdivision.
      (6)   Primary control points or descriptions, and ties to such control
points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, block numbers and similar
dates shall be referred.
      (7)   Subdivision boundary lines, indicated by heavy lines, and the
computed acreage of the subdivision.
      (8)   Existing features as follows:
         (a)   The exact location, scaled dimensions, name and description of
all existing or recorded streets, alleys, reservations, easements or other
public rights-of-way within the subdivision, intersecting or contiguous with
its boundaries or forming such boundaries.
         (b)   The exact location, scaled dimensions, description and name of
all existing or recorded residential lots, parks, public areas, permanent
structures and other sites within or contiguous with the subdivision.
         (c)   Location of all trees having a diameter of four inches measured
four and one- half feet above the natural grade.
      (9)   A topographic map, with two-foot contour intervals, meeting
national map accuracy standards, showing:
         (a)   Each location of each major, intermediate and minor waterway, as
defined herein; and each type of waterway shall be distinguished from others;
         (b)   The 100-year and 25-year flood elevations and food plain
boundaries;
         (c)   The two-year floodplain where needed to determine the critical
water quality zone required by the provisions of this Code;
         (d)   Critical water quality zones as required by the provisions of
this Code;
         (e)   Existing topographical features including but not limited to
existing faults and fractures along waterways, and sinkholes;
      (10)   A map or maps showing soil map units, surficial and bedrock
geology, faults, sinkholes and other geologic units. Maps may be based on
compiled data available from the Soil Conservation Service, U.T. Bureau of
Economic Geology, City of Austin Environmental Resource Management Office and
U.S. Geological Survey, and shall be complemented by an onsite geological
survey conducted by a professional geologist.
      (11)   A report that includes the following items:
         (a)   A description of existing topography;
         (b)   Geologic, soil, and vegetation characteristics;
         (c)   General description of the proposed changes to the site;
         (d)   A general description of the temporary measures which shall be
utilized for the control of erosion;
         (e)   General sequencing of construction;
         (f)   A description and calculation of all impervious cover on the
site and for each commercial lot.
      (12)   General plans for wastewater lines or onsite sewage treatment
systems' installation shall be submitted with the preliminary plan and shall
include:
         (a)   The use of minimum construction corridor widths that might
disturb subsurface faults and fractures; and
         (b)   The use of environmental protection measures and vegetative
restorations as provided for in the watershed provisions of this Code.
      (13)   The exact location, scaled dimensions, description and name of all
proposed streets, alleys, parks, other public areas, reservations, easements or
other rights-of-way, blocks, lots, and other sites within the subdivision.
      (14)   A preliminary plan of the proposed drainage systems with grade,
pipe size, and location of outlet.
      (15)   A preliminary plan of proposed fills or other structure-elevating
techniques, levees, channel modifications, floodwalls, and other methods to
overcome flood or erosion-related hazards.
      (16)   Date of preparation, scale of plat, and north arrow.
      (17)   A number or letter to identify each lot or site and each block.
      (18)   Front building setback lines on all lots and sites; side yard
building setback lines at street intersections and crosswalk ways.
      (19)   Landscaping setbacks and buffer zones on all lots except single
family residential.
      (20)   Location of the city limits line, the outer border of the city's
extraterritorial jurisdiction, and zoning district boundaries, if they traverse
the subdivision, form part of the boundary of the subdivision, or are
contiguous to such boundary.
      (21)   Vicinity sketch or map at a scale of not more than 500 feet to an
inch which shall show existing subdivisions, streets, easements, rights-of-way,
parks and public facilities in the vicinity, the general drainage plan and
ultimate destination of water, and possible storm sewer, water, gas, electric
and sanitary sewer connection by arrows.
      (22)   The certification of a registered professional engineer that the
plans and specifications included with the preliminary plat are accurate and of
adequate design, and that the preliminary plat is complete.
      (23)   Special notes or attachments as may be required by other section
of this Code.
      (24)   Description of permanent water quality controls to be established
pursuant to §
150.336 or other applicable law. This description would include, but not be
limited to, an identification of the location of any controls, the capture
depth and volumes to be attained, and the construction material and treatment
technology to be used.
   (F)   Processing of preliminary plat.
      (1)   The City Council shall appoint an entity to check the preliminary
plat as to its conformity with the prevailing master plan, major street plan,
land use plan, zoning districts, the standards and specifications set forth by
ordinance and Code, and the result of the conceptual presentation between the
subdivider and the city pertaining to said plat. The appointed person shall
determine whether the proposed plat and all required supporting materials are
complete and fees paid.
      (2)   Within 30 days after a complete preliminary subdivision application
has been filed and the required fees paid, the City Council shall consider and
take action on the application.
      (3)   If the City Council disapproves a proposed preliminary plat, it
shall reference, in writing, any and all deficiencies of the proposed
preliminary plat which were cause for disapproval. The subdivider shall be
allowed to submit a revised preliminary plat which resolves the deficiencies on
or before 180 days after the disapproval of the preliminary plat. The City
Council shall approve or disapprove the revised preliminary plat within thirty
days after the complete revised preliminary plat is formally filed. If the
subdivider fails to file a revised preliminary plat on or before 180 days after
the disapproval of the proposed preliminary plat, the application for review
shall be conclusively presumed to have been withdrawn by the applicant.
      (4)   Approval of a preliminary plat by the City Council shall be deemed
an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a
guide to the installation of streets, water, sewer and other required
improvements and utilities and to the preparation of the final or record plat.
Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute automatic approval of the
final plat.
      (5)   Approval of a preliminary plat by the City Council shall be
effective for six months. Any portion or all of the preliminary plat may be
subject to modification or revision in light of information previously not
brought to the attention of the City Council. If in the light of new or
significant information, the City Council should require revisions to a
previously approved preliminary plat, it shall so inform the subdivider in
writing.
      (6)   If no development has occurred which would affect the proposed
plat, after six months of effective approval, the City Council may, upon the
application of the subdivider, extend the approval for an additional six
months.
      (7)   In no case shall any development commence prior to City Council
approval of the preliminary plat.
      (8)   Notice.
         (a)   Written notice of a proposed subdivision or confirming plat
shall be given to owners of real property lying within 500 feet of the
boundaries of the property to be subdivided. Such notice shall be given not
less than ten days prior to the date set for City Council review to all owners
who have rendered their said property for city taxes as the ownership appears
on the last approved city tax rolls.
         (b)   Every notice required by this chapter may be served by
delivering a copy of the notice to the person to be served, or his duly
authorized agent either in person or by registered or certified mail to his
last known address, or it may be given in such other manner reasonably
calculated to give notice, if approved by the City Council. Whenever the notice
is served by mail, three days shall be added to the prescribed period.
         (c)   The notice, document, or paper shall consist of:
            1.   A written statement in plain and concise language sufficient
to give fair notice of the proposed subdivision and any variance requested;
            2.   Information as to where the plat or variance of such
subdivision may be inspected; and
            3.   The date, time, and location of the City Council review on
such application.
         (d)   Should the City Council deem it necessary, ten days prior to the
hearing of any application for a subdivision, the applicant shall place a sign
(s) on the property easily visible to the public for the purposes of advising
the public of the subdivision proposed. All required signs shall remain on the
property until after final disposition of the application.
§ 150.282 FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Requirements.
      (1)   The final plat and accompanying data shall conform to the
preliminary plat as approved by the Council, incorporating any and all changes,
modifications, alterations, corrections and conditions imposed by the City
Council.
      (2)   The final plat shall be drawn in indelible ink on a durable
reproducible and permanent medium acceptable to the City Council. It shall be
at least 24 inches wide and 18 inches long with a margin of at least one and
one-half inches on the left side of the sheet and margins of not less than one-
half inch on the other three sides. The plat shall be drawn at a scale of 100
feet to one inch. When more than one sheet is necessary to accommodate the
entire area, an index sheet showing the entire subdivision at an appropriate
scale shall be attached to the plat.
      (3)   The final plat shall be submitted in such number as is required by
the City Council, and shall contain all of the features required for the
preliminary plats in §
150.281(E) above.
      (4)   The final plat shall also include the following information on the
plat or as an attachment to the plat:
         (a)   description, by metes and bounds, of the subdivision, including
location of all monuments and primary control points to which dimension,
angles, bearing, etc., in the description are referenced.
         (b)   The location, scaled dimensions, name and description of all
existing or recorded streets, alleys, reservations, easements, or other public
rights-of-way within the subdivision, intersecting or contiguous with its
boundary forming such boundary, with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflecting
angles and radii, area, and central angle, degree of curvature, tangent
distance and length of all curves where appropriate.
         (c)   The exact location, dimension, description and name of all
proposed streets, alleys, parks, other public areas, reservations, easements or
other rights-of-way, blocks, lots, and other sites within the subdivision with
radii, area, and central angeles, degree of curvature, tangent distance and
length of all curves where appropriate. These proposed improvements shall
comply with the standards and specifications in, or referenced in, §
150.283.
         (d)   The final plat shall also be accompanied by a complete list of
restrictive covenants which are intended to be recorded along with the plat and
all plat notes which are required by this Code.
      (5)   In addition, the final plat shall be accompanied by detailed
construction plans and detailed cost estimates for all proposed site
improvements. The plat and all plans and engineering calculations shall bear
the seal and signature of an engineer, certifying their completeness and
accuracy. These site improvements shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
         (a)   Streets, alleys, walks, and monuments;
         (b)   Sanitary sewer systems, including, where appropriate, treatment
and disposal systems;
         (c)   Water supply systems, including pipes and hydrants and, where
appropriate, wells and reservoirs, and pumping stations; and
         (d)   A detailed drainage plan and street layout, as follows:
            1.   Grades and runoff figures on the inlet and outlet side of all
channels and storm sewers.
            2.   Drainage easements.
            3.   A general location map of the subdivision showing the
watershed sub-areas.
            4.   Calculations showing the anticipated stormwater flow,
including watershed area, percent runoff, and time of concentration. When a
drainage ditch or storm sewer is proposed, calculations shall be submitted
showing the basis for design.
            5.   When a drainage channel or storm sewer is proposed, complete
plans, profiles, and specifications shall be submitted, showing complete
construction details.
            6.   When conditions upstream or downstream from a proposed channel
or storm sewer do not permit maximum design flow, high water marks based on a
25-year frequency, shall be indicated based on existing conditions.
            7.   Identification of all critical water quality zones with
notation of restrictions pertaining to such zones as required by the provisions
of this Code.
         (e)   A documentation of compliance with water quality control
strategies as required by the watershed provisions of this Code as amended.
         (f)   A final erosion-sedimentation control plan and construction
sequencing plan as required by the watershed provisions of this Code, as
amended.
         (g)   A statement signed and acknowledged by the owner dedicating all
streets, easements, water distribution and wastewater collection systems, parks
and other open access to public use, or where, with the approval of the City
Council, the owner has made provisions for perpetual maintenance thereof to the
inhabitants of the subdivision. Disapproval of the plat shall indicate refusal
to accept any offered dedications. Approval of the plat shall not be deemed
acceptance of such dedications until such time as the city has appropriated
same by entry, use, or maintenance.
         (h)   The certification statement to be signed by the Mayor upon
approval of the City Council that the final plat conforms to all requirements
of the subdivision regulations and other relevant regulations of the City of
Sunset Valley, Texas.
         (i)   A certification by the surveyor responsible for surveying the
subdivision area, attesting to its accuracy;
         (j)   The certification of the engineer responsible for the
preparation of the final plat and supporting data, attesting to its
completeness and accuracy.
   (B)   Processing of final plat.
      (1)   General. A final plat shall not be filed for recording with the
County Clerk until the City Council has approved the final plat and the
accompanying construction plans and cost estimates. Processing for final plat
approval shall parallel that described in §
150.281(F) for processing preliminary plats. Within 30 days after the complete
application for final plat approval is formally filed, the city shall approve
or disapprove such plat. If the City Council disapproves a proposed final plat,
it shall reference, in writing, any and all deficiencies of the proposed final
plat which were cause for disapproval. The subdivider shall be allowed to
submit a revised final plat which resolves the deficiencies on or before 180
days after the disapproval of the proposed final plat. The City Council shall
approve or disapprove the revised final plat within 30 days after the complete
revised final plat is formally filed. If the subdivider fails to file a revised
final plat on or before 180 days after the disapproval of the proposed final
plat, the application for review shall be conclusively presumed to have been
withdrawn by the applicant.
      (2)   If desired by the subdivider and approved by the Council, the final
plat may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he
proposes to record and develop. However, such portion shall conform to all the
requirements of this Code.
      (3)   As soon as practical after the subdivider is notified of the
approval of the preliminary plat, his engineer shall submit to the City Council
at an official meeting the final plat of the subdivision or portion thereof.
      (4)   (a)   1.   Once formal application for final plat approval has been
made, any substantial changes to the form or content of any final plat
submissions shall be deemed to constitute a new submission, superceding and
replacing any prior filing of a final plat or application for final plat
approval governing the same tract.
            2   Substantial changes to a final plat that have been requested in
writing by the city, a checking entity or the City Council do not create a new
submission within the meaning of the foregoing division.
         (b)   Hearing dates, deadlines or filing fees applicable to earlier
final plat applications or submissions do not apply to any new submission or
application made pursuant to §
150.282(B)(4)(a). A new filing fee is required for each new submission. New
deadlines and hearing schedules shall be established for each new submission or
application.
      (5)   No final plat will be considered unless a preliminary plat has been
submitted and approved. However, if an approved plat has been duly recorded and
the subdivider wishes to increase the size of the lots by combining two or more
lots or by combining one lot with a portion of the adjacent lot in such manner
that no portion of a lot remains smaller than the original lots, no preliminary
plat will be necessary. Major changes from the development proposed on the
preliminary plat may necessitate filing and approval of an amended preliminary
plat.
      (6)   A final plat of an approved preliminary plat or a portion thereof
shall be submitted to the City Council within six months of the date of
approval of the preliminary plat; otherwise, the approval of the City Council
shall become null and void, unless an extension of time is applied for and
granted by the City Council.
      (7)   If no development has occurred which would affect the proposed
plat, after six months of effective acceptance, the City Council may, upon the
application of the subdivider, extend the acceptance for one additional six-
month period. After review by the City Council, further modification may be
required by the City Council at that time of review. No additional filing fee
shall be required if modifications are requested by the City Council.
      (8)   City Council approval or disapproval of final plat. The City
Council shall disapprove the proposed final plat unless;
         (a)   The plat complies with the provisions of this chapter; and
         (b)   The uses proposed for the property being subdivided are
consistent with its zoning.
      (9)   Disapproval of the final plat shall indicate refusal to accept any
offered dedications. If the final plat is disapproved, the City Council shall
inform the subdivider in writing of the reasons for disapproval.
      (10)   Approval of the plat shall not be deemed acceptance of such
dedications until such time as the city has appropriated same by entry, use, or
maintenance and by the approval of the constructed improvements therein.
Approval of the final plat, plans, and specifications required herein shall not
prevent the City Council or the entity responsible for checking such documents
from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans and
specifications and in the construction of the associated improvements.
      (11)   When the final plat is filed with the City Council for approval,
it shall be accompanied by all relevant fees as set forth in the fee schedules
adopted by ordinance or resolution. Filing fees are non-refundable.
      (12)   Recording of plat.
         (a)   A final plat shall not be filed for recording with the County
Clerk until the City Council has approved the final plat and the accompanying
construction plans, cost estimates and security and maintenance guarantees as
hereinafter required, and certificates have been received stating that all
taxes on the land being subdivided have been paid to the current year.
         (b)   After the final plat has been finally approved and the
subdivider has constructed all the required improvements and such improvements
have been approved and accepted by the city and a maintenance guarantee filed
as hereinafter provided; or after the final plat has been finally approved and
the subdivider has filed the security and maintenance guarantees as hereinafter
provided, the secretary for the city shall cause the final plat to be recorded
with the County Clerk within two weeks after consent for filing has been
received from the subdivider. The City Council shall also cause the check or
checks from the recordation fee or fees deposited at the time the final plat
was filed for approval to be delivered with the final plat to the County Clerk.
         (c)   No plat shall be filed for record without the written consent of
the subdivider. If the subdivider fails to give such written consent within 30
days of the date of the final approval of the plat, the City Council may at any
time thereafter cancel such approval.
§ 150.283 STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   No preliminary or final plat shall be approved by the City Council, and no
completed improvements shall be accepted by the City Council unless they
conform to the following standards and specifications.
   (A)   Conformity with a comprehensive plan. The subdivision shall conform to
any comprehensive plans, codes and ordinances of the city.
   (B)   Provision for future subdivisions. If a tract is subdivided into
parcels larger than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged to
allow the opening of future streets.
   (C)   Reserve strips prohibited. There shall be no reserve strips
controlling access to land dedicated or intended to be dedicated to public use.
§ 150.284 VACATION OF PLAT OR SUBDIVISION.
   (A)   General. Any plat or replat may be vacated or resubdivided or
corrected by the owner of the land, provided that the Council approves the
action and the owner complies with applicable state law. No plat shall be
allowed to be resubdivided until the original plat has been vacated.
   (B)   Plat vacation. If no lots in the subdivision have been sold or
conveyed by any other means to another owner, the owner of the subdivision
shall be allowed to vacate said plat by submitting a written instrument to and
approved by the City Attorney and the County Clerk, and recording the same with
the County Clerk. In cases where lots in the subdivision have been sold or
otherwise conveyed to the owner, the plat shall only be allowed to be vacated
upon the application of all the owners of lots in said subdivision and with the
approval, as provided above, of the City Attorney and County Clerk.
   (C)   Plat correction. Plat corrections may be allowed by the City Attorney
without complying with the procedure for vacation and resubdivisions as
provided above. However, the correcting documents must be approved by the City
Council and City Attorney and recorded by the County Clerk.
   (D)   Fees. Any application for plat vacation or resubdivision or correction
shall be accompanied by fees set by the City Council in the fee schedules
adopted by ordinance or resolution set forth in this Code.
§ 150.285 BURDEN OF PROOF.
   Any subdivider applying for a subdivision plat approval under this chapter
must establish that the plat complies with the requirements of this chapter.
PLATTING REQUIREMENTS
§ 150.295 MONUMENTS.
   (A)   Monuments shall be located at centerline intersections and at points
of curvature and points of tangency of the centerline of interior streets and
at the intersection of street centerlines with the perimeter boundary.
   (B)   In addition to the requirements specified herein, the requirements of
the county for monumentation shall apply.
   (C)   Where, due to topographic conditions, permanent structures, or other
conditions, the view is obstructed between any two adjacent monuments,
intermediate monuments shall be so set as to assure a clear view between
adjacent monuments.
§ 150.296 ALLEYS.
   No alleys will be permitted, except to serve commercial sites, as required
by the City Council. Where required by the City Council, consideration shall be
given to intersection of alleys and overhang easements, among others. In no
case shall dead end alleys be permitted.
§ 150.297 UTILITY EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Each block shall have utility easements reserved for the use of all
public utility lines, conduits, and equipment. These utility easements shall be
a minimum of 15 feet in width, taking feet from each lot where appropriate, and
shall be adequate to provide service to the entire length of the block. All
utilities must be underground. The subdivider shall be responsible for placing
the easements in locations acceptable to utility companies.
   (B)   Normal ribbon curb exposure shall be required where utility easements
intersect streets.
§ 150.298 STREETS.
   (A)   Street layout. Adequate streets shall be provided by the subdivider
and the arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of each
shall conform to the comprehensive plan of the city and shall be considered in
their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to
public safety and convenience, and in their appropriate relationship to the
proposed uses of land to be served by such streets. The street layout shall be
devised for the most advantageous development of the entire neighborhood and
shall minimize the opportunity for through traffic in neighborhoods. Trees
which are required to be shown on the preliminary plat shall be avoided
whenever possible in the construction of streets.
   (B)   Relation to adjoining street system. Where necessary to the
neighborhood pattern, existing streets in adjoining areas shall be continued,
and shall be at least as wide as such existing streets and in alignment
therewith.
   (C)   Projection of streets. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the
arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall make provision for the proper
projection of streets into such unsubdivided areas.
   (D)   Street jogs. Whenever possible, street jogs with center line offsets
of less than 150 feet shall be avoided.
   (E)   Half-streets or adjacent streets. Street intersections shall be as
nearly at right angles as practicable, giving due regard to terrain and
topography. In no case will intersections at angles more acute than 70 degrees
be permitted.
   (F)   Street intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right
angles as practicable, giving due regard to terrain and topography. In no case
will intersections at angles more acute than 70 degrees be permitted.
   (G)   Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets as defined in §
150.007 shall be allowed with sufficient turning radius for emergency vehicles.
   (H)   Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sac streets shall have a turnaround of not less
than 45 feet in diameter of pavement in residential areas, and not less than 50
feet in diameter of pavement in commercial.
   (I)   Streets on comprehensive plan. Where a subdivision embraces a street
as shown on the comprehensive plan of the city, such street shall be platted in
the location and of the width indicated by the comprehensive plan. Areawide
needs shall be addressed through the procedures specified in §
150.280.
   (J)   Design and construction standards. Street design proposals shall be
certified by a registered professional engineer as to maintainability,
operation, safety and traffic design with due regard to subgrade conditions,
base and pavement specifications, grades, curves, speed limits and adequacy of
drainage. The subdivider shall excavate, fill, grade and pave all streets,
including sidewalk areas. No street shall be surfaced until the underground
utilities which are to be installed in the portions of the streets intended for
vehicular traffic have been so installed and inspected. The city's engineer
shall be responsible for approving the specifications for design and
construction. Texas Highway Department Standard Specifications shall be the
minimum standard.
   (K)   Pavement widths and right-of-way. Pavement widths and rights-of-way
shall be as follows:
      (1)   Major arterial streets shall have a right-of-way width of at least
90 feet, with a pavement width of at least two divided 27-foot lanes.
      (2)   Minor arterial streets shall have a right-of-way of at least 70
feet and a pavement width of at least 36 feet.
      (3)   Collector streets shall have a right-of-way of at least 60 feet and
a pavement width of at least 24 feet.
      (4)   Local streets shall have a right-of-way width of at least 60 feet
and a pavement width of at least 18 feet with ribbon curbing causing a total
width of 20 feet.
   (L)   Pavement widths and rights-of-way of streets forming part of the
subdivision. Pavement widths and rights-of-way of streets forming part of the
subdivision shall be as follows:
      (1)   The subdivider shall dedicate a right-of-way of 90 feet in width
for new adjacent major arterial streets, and two lanes each with 27-foot widths
shall be paved.
      (2)   New major arterials, minor arterials, collector, and local streets
shall conform to §
150.298(Q).
      (3)   Where the proposed subdivision abuts upon an existing street or
half-street that does not conform to the requirements of this division, the
subdivider shall dedicate right-of-way sufficient to make the full right-of-way
width conform to such division, and there shall be paved so much of such right-
of-way as to make the full pavement width comply with such division. Before any
pavement is laid to widen existing pavement, the existing pavement shall be cut
back at least two feet to assure an adequate sub-base and pavement joint.
   (M)   Curbs. Ribbon curbs shall be installed by the subdivider on both sides
of all interior streets, and on the subdivision side of all streets forming
part of the boundary of the subdivision. In lieu of curbs and gutters, ribbon
curbs shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete at least 12 inches in
width, and 18 inches in depth and flush with the pavement. Materials shall
conform to the City of Austin Standard Specifications for Public Works
Construction as amended.
   (N)   Roadway drainage.
      (1)   As a general rule, drainage carried in roadside channels shall be
minimized and off-roadway locations shall be used as the primary drainage
network whenever practicable.
      (2)   When roadside channels are required, they shall be contained within
a dedicated right-of-way or right-of-way easement. Channel sideslopes shall be
no steeper than four to one, except for curves and transitions where slope
stabilization acceptable to the City's Engineer may be allowed. Roadways shall
be designed for fordable driveway approaches whenever practical. All driveways
shall be designed such that drainage flow from a 25-year storm shall not exceed
a depth of 12 inches on any portion of the driveway. Should driveway culverts
be required, the culvert design, capacity, and general location shall be shown
on the construction plans. In no case shall driveway approaches constitute a
blockage of roadway drainage.
   (O)   Street names. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or cause
confusion with the names of existing streets in the cities of Sunset Valley and
Austin unless the new streets are a continuation of or in alignment with
existing streets, in which case names of existing streets shall be used.
   (P)   Street lights. Street lights shall be installed by the subdivider at
major street intersections within the subdivision and at major intersections on
the boundaries of the subdivision inside the corporate limits of the city, as
deemed appropriate by the City Council.
   (Q)   Street signs. Street signs shall be installed by the subdivider at all
intersections within or abutting the subdivision. Such signs shall be of a type
approved by the city, and shall be installed in accordance with standards of
the city.
   (R)   Street striping. Striping shall be applied by the subdivider in
compliance with state and city guidelines.
§ 150.299 BLOCKS.
   Block lengths shall not exceed 2,000 feet, nor be less than 400 feet unless
approved by the City Council.
§ 150.300 CROSSWALK WAYS.
   Crosswalk ways four feet in width shall be dedicated where deemed necessary
by the City Council to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds,
shopping centers, and transportation and other community facilities, or to
provide pedestrian circulation within the subdivision. Crosswalk ways shall be
provided with concrete or other approved sidewalk material at least four-feet
wide.
§ 150.301 LOTS.
   (A)   The minimum and average sizes of lots shall be in accordance with §
150.329(C) and §
150.330(C). Lots shall not be located within the Critical Water Quality Zone.
   (B)   In case of irregularly shaped lots, the minimum width shall be
measured at the front building setback line. Corner lots shall be at least 100
feet wide. Lots abutting on crosswalk ways shall be treated as corner lots.
   (C)   Each single family lot shall front upon a public street. Lots of
irregular shape shall not be allowed unless they have a street frontage of at
least 100 feet. Lots on a cul-de-sac street shall have a minimum street
frontage of 60 feet.
   (D)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to straight
street lines and radial to curved street lines.
   (E)   The minimum front building setback line shall be required of at least
50 feet from the front property line. Where a corner lot is a key lot (where
lots face the frontage street and other lots face the side street), the corner
lot shall have at least the minimum building setback line on both streets.
Where a corner lot is not a key lot, it shall have a minimum building setback
line from the side street of at least 20 feet. Lots abutting a crosswalk way
shall be treated as corner lots.
   (F)   Minimum rear yard depths shall be 30 feet from the rear lot line.
   (G)   The minimum side yard width on each side of buildings on interior lots
and on the building side of corner lots shall be at least 15 feet. Lots
abutting on crosswalk ways shall be treated as corner lots.
   (H)   Where a lot in a residential area backs up to a railroad right-of-way,
a high-pressure gasoline, oil or gas line, an arterial street, an industrial
area, or other land use which has a depreciating effect on the residential use
of property, and where no street is provided at the rear of such lot,
additional depth shall be required by the City Council. In no case shall a
depth in excess of 20 additional feet be required, where a lot sides to any of
the above, additional width shall be required by the City Council, but in no
event shall a width in excess of 20 additional feet be required.
   (I)   The minimum setback lines, minimum yard depths, side yard widths, and
other such features as required by the Council and by this subchapter shall be
clearly indicated on the final plat, either by delineation or by statement.
§ 150.302 SIDEWALKS.
   Sidewalks shall be constructed in the following locations:
   (A)   On the subdivision side of all through streets adjacent to the
subdivision;
   (B)   As deemed necessary by the City Council in commercial, public, and
residential areas.
   (C)   Sidewalks shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
accepted civil engineering practice, and with approval of the City Council.
Consideration should be given to use of porous asphalt and other permeable,
stable materials.
§ 150.303 SHORT FORM SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   General. A short form procedure may be followed for the approval of a
subdivision only when the land proposed to be subdivided or resubdivided meets
the following conditions and requirements:
      (1)   Such land abuts upon a street of adequate width and is so situated
that no additional streets and no easements or other public property, other
than public utility easements, are required in order to meet the requirements
of this Code.
      (2)   The perimeter of the tract being subdivided has been surveyed and
marked on the ground and plat thereof prepared and filed with the City Council,
and the nearest corner of each lot or parcel of such proposed subdivision is
within 200 feet of a known corner which is adequately marked by a concrete
monument or iron stake.
      (3)   The topography of the tract and the surrounding lands is such that
no regard need be given in such subdivision to drainage, or, where drainage
facilities are required, arrangements have been made for the construction of
such facilities and noted as conditions on the plat upon which approval is
predicated.
      (4)   The utilities, as required in this Code, are in place to serve each
parcel or lot of such subdivision or resubdivision, or arrangements to provide
such utilities have been made and their construction and maintenance guaranteed
as required by this chapter.
      (5)   Written notice of a proposed subdivision or confirming plat shall
be given to owners of real property lying within 500 feet of the boundaries of
the property to be subdivided in accordance with §
150.281(F)(8).
   (B)   Plat filing.
      (1)   When the land proposed to be subdivided meets the requirements and
conditions of the preceding division, the owner of such tract of land may
deliver to the city a plat of the same, accompanied by a fee as specified by
ordinance or resolution for the final plat not less than 15 days prior to the
next regularly scheduled City Council meeting.
      (2)   The plat shall be signed and acknowledged by the owner of the land
and shall be accompanied by tax certificates indicating that all taxes are
current.
      (3)   This procedure shall not be used if the uses proposed for any part
of the land are inconsistent with existing zoning regulations.
   (C)   Plat contents. The plat of a subdivision under this chapter shall be
drawn in indelible ink on a durable, permanent, and reproducible medium
acceptable to the City Council at a scale of 100 feet to one inch and shall
show the following information:
      (1)   Existing streets, alleys, easements and other public property
serving the land being subdivided.
      (2)   Adjoining tracts of land.
      (3)   Known marked or monumented corners.
      (4)   Length of lot lines and, where necessary, their courses.
      (5)   Certification by a registered professional engineer as specified in
§
150.282(A)(5)(j).
   (D)   Plat approval or disapproval.
      (1)   The City Council shall cause the plat filed under this Code to be
checked as specified in §
150.282(B)(4).
      (2)   The City Council shall consider the plat filed under this Code, and
shall approve or disapprove such plat within 30 days from the date of its
filing with the City Council.
§ 150.304 PARKS AND OTHER PUBLIC USES.
   (A)   All land within the critical water quality zone in the property to be
subdivided shall be dedicated in fee simple to the city to protect water
quality. A space equal to at least 3% of the total property to be subdivided
shall be dedicated in fee simple to the city for recreational or conservational
use. The subdivider shall receive a credit on meeting this 3% requirement for
all land dedicated in the critical water quality zone, provided there will be
no credit for any land used for roadway or utility easements.
   (B)   In lieu of land within the property to be subdivided, the city shall
have the option to arrange for the acquisition and dedication of other land of
similar value if mutually agreeable to the subdivider and the city, or to
accept a deposit of money in a trust account in the amount equal to the market
value, as reflected on an appraisal prepared within 12 months of making
application to subdivide the property, of 3% of the total property to be
subdivided. These funds are to be used by the city for acquisition of park
land, recreational facilities or conservation in another area. No area or
facility shall be dedicated for such public purposes unless approved and
accepted by the Council.
§ 150.305 WASTEWATER SYSTEM INSTALLATION.
   (A)   All subdivisions shall be provided with city approved sewage treatment
and disposal systems. Pursuant to the Wholesale Water Service Agreement
executed on or about October 2, 1987 and amended on February 27, 2003 between
the City of Sunset Valley and the City of Austin and pursuant to the Wholesale
Wastewater Service Agreement executed on or about December 27, 1985 and amended
on February 27, 2003 between the City of Sunset Valley and the City of Austin,
all public wastewater facilities must be constructed according to City of
Austin water and wastewater utility standards and specifications in effect on
the effective date of this chapter. The City of Austin's water and wastewater
utility standards and specifications shall include those regulations contained
in following chapters of the City of Austin Code of Ordinances: Chapter 15-
2 Drainage Facility; Chapter 15-3 Fire Hydrant Regulation; Chapter 15-7 Use of
City-Owned Infrastructure; Chapter 15-9 Utility Service Regulations; Chapter
15-10 Wastewater Regulations; and Chapter 15-9, Article 1 Utility Service. All
public wastewater facilities must also be constructed according to the City of
Sunset Valley Master Water Line Plan in effect on the effective date of this
chapter.
   (B)   Connection with a sanitary sewer system shall be required by the City
Council.
   (C)   Alternative sewage systems may be allowed upon approval of the City
Council.
   (D)   If the subdivision is not to be served immediately by a sewage-
collecting system connected to a community septic tank system or treatment
plant or to a public sewer system, and if disposal of domestic sewage through
an onsite system has not been approved by the city or another duly authorized
official, a restriction shall be filed with the Secretary for the city and the
County Clerk which states that occupancy of any lot shall be prohibited until a
wastewater system is installed in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the state Department of Health and the County Health Department and has been
inspected and approved by the city.
§ 150.306 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT OF INSTALLATION COSTS.
   (A)   All expenses for installation of utilities, water, sewer extensions,
street lights, signs, streets, and all other installation expenses associated
with the subdivision or confirming plat shall be borne by the subdivider.
   (B)   The subdivider is responsible for the water and sewer extensions, tap
fees, and any other charges which may be assessed against the improvements by
the subdivider on water and sewer improvements.
   (C)   All street construction costs and installation of street appurtenances
are to be paid by the subdivider.
§ 150.307 DRAINAGE.
   (A)   The interpretation of the requirements set forth in this section shall
be made by the City's Engineer or designate, unless specified otherwise by the
City Council. The subdivider shall be responsible for the conveyance of all
storm drainage flowing through or abutting the subject property, including
drainage directed to the property by prior development as well as that
naturally flowing by reason of topography.
   (B)   Where new drainage improvements are required along the boundary of a
subdivision, the owner proposing development shall be responsible for designing
and constructing all the required improvements at or before the time of
development, including the dedication of all necessary rights-of-way or
easements necessary to accommodate the improvements. Where the subdivider
proposes to subdivide only a portion of the property, only the drainage
improvements for the portion being subdivided shall be required to be
installed, except as drainage improvements outside the portion being subdivided
are deemed necessary by the city for proper drainage of the portion being
subdivided.
   (C)   The responsibility of the subdivider shall extend to the provision of
adequate off-site drainage facilities and improvements to accommodate the full
effects of the development of said property.
   (D)   When the subdivider certifies by affidavit that a bona fide attempt to
acquire property rights to meet off-site drainage requirements was not
successful, the city may assist at its discretion in the acquisition of
necessary property rights to provide for the construction of off-site drainage
improvements. In such cases, the subdivider shall make adequate guarantees that
he will stand the full cost of acquiring said property rights and constructing
the off-site improvements and facilities.
   (E)   Unless otherwise specified herein, the design of all storm drainage
facilities shall at least meet the requirements of the City of Austin Drainage
Criteria Manual.
   (F)   Computation of runoff shall be based on a fully developed drainage
area, or watershed, in accordance with City of Austin drainage criteria. The
drainage system shall be designed to convey the theoretical 25-year storm as
predicted in the Drainage Criteria Manual. The design shall further provide for
system overflows from larger storms up to the intensity of the 100-year storm
without increasing the risk of flood damages to development.
      (1)   Natural drainage channels shall be preserved whenever possible.
Open surface drainage through grass-lined swales shall be preferred over the
use of enclosed sewers, streets and street right-of-way as the central drainage
network. The provisions of §
150.063 shall apply in regard to street drainage. Drainage into or across
sinkholes, faults and other areas of rapid groundwater recharge shall be
avoided whenever practicable.
      (2)   The rate of runoff after construction shall not exceed the site's
runoff rate prior to construction. Rate of runoff shall be computed on a 25-
year storm peak flow using the City of Austin Drainage Criteria Manual as of
the effective date of this Code.
      (3)   In the event that stormwater drainage systems and/or culverts are
necessary, such systems shall be designed to mitigate their impact on water
quality through the use of approved control strategies to control sediment and
dissipate energy and through the use of multiple smaller outlets whenever
practical and by locating discharges to maximize overland flow.
      (4)   Surface drainage channels shall be designed to reduce velocity,
minimize potential erosion and to maximize the bottom width to flow depth
ratio, in accordance with the following criteria:
         (a)   Channel cross-sections shall be trapezoidal in configuration.
         (b)   Side slopes of channels shall be no steeper than four horizontal
to one vertical.
         (c)   For a six-month design storm assuming wet antecedent conditions,
channel bottom flow depth shall not exceed four inches and design flow velocity
shall be two and one-half feet per second.
         (d)   All constructed and altered drainage channels shall be
stabilized and vegetated immediately after final grading.
         (e)   The City Council may allow exceptions to the design flow
velocities or depths in the following situations in conformance with the
purpose of §
150.307(F)(3) hereof.
            1.   On lands with greater than 15% slope, or less than 2% slope;
provided that the design flow velocity shall never be greater than three feet
per second or design depth greater than six inches.
            2.   In limited transitional channel sections (such as culverts,
culvert entries and exits, drop sections, sharp bends, and water quality basin
entries).
   (G)   Public easements or rights-of-way shall include all drainage at least
to the limits of the 25-year flood as indicated on the floodplain maps or as
determined on the basis of the Drainage Criteria Manual. The minimum drainage
easement or right-of-way width shall be 25 feet. All drainage easements across
private property shall contain the necessary language to permit the required
unobstructed water flow, require maintenance of vegetation by the property
owner(s), and permit the necessary access by city officials for inspection and
repairs. All easements, 25 and 100-year floodplain boundaries and water quality
zones shall be clearly shown on drainage plans and the final plat.
   (H)   As a general rule, drainage carried in roadside channels shall be
minimized and off-roadway locations shall be used as the primary drainage
network whenever practicable.
   (I)   When roadside channels are required, they shall be contained within a
dedicated right-of-way or right-of-way easement. Channel side slopes shall be
no steeper than four to one, except for curves and transitions where slope
stabilization acceptable to the City's Engineer may be allowed. Roadways shall
be designed for fordable driveway approaches whenever practical. All driveways
shall be designed such that drainage flow from a 100-year storm shall not
exceed a depth of 12 inches on any portion of the driveway. Should driveway
culverts be required, the culvert design, capacity, and general location shall
be shown on the construction plans. Minimum driveway culvert diameter shall be
12 inches. In no case shall driveway approaches constitute a blockage of
roadway drainage.
   (J)   All drainage facilities located in the street rights-of-way shall be
maintained by the appropriate jurisdiction. All drainage facilities located on
private property shall be maintained by the property owner.
   (K)   Duly authorized inspectors of the city shall have the right of entry
on the land or premises where property owners are required to maintain drainage
facilities or detention facilities, at reasonable times, for the purpose of
inspection of writing that the property owner comply. This notice shall
describe the measures required to be taken. If, within three months of the
notice the maintenance required is not accomplished, the city shall either:
      (1)   Cause the necessary restoration to be accomplished and assess the
property owner for the city's actual cost; or
      (2)   Bring an action for mandatory injunction to require the property
owner to accomplish the necessary maintenance.
   (L)   The required maintenance by private landowners and the power of the
city shall be noted on the plat.
§ 150.308 WATER SYSTEM INSTALLATION.
   (A)   All subdivisions shall be provided with water supply and water
distribution systems approved by the City Council. Pursuant to the Wholesale
Water Service Agreement executed on or about October 2, 1987 and amended on
February 27, 2003 between the City of Sunset Valley and the City of Austin, all
public water facilities must be constructed according to City of Austin Water
and Wastewater Utility standards and specifications in effect on the effective
date of this chapter. The City of Austin's Water and wastewater utility
standards and specifications shall include those regulations contained in
following chapters of the City of Austin Code of Ordinances: Chapter 15-
2 Drainage Facility; Chapter 15-3 Fire Hydrant Regulation; Chapter 15-7 Use of
City-Owned Infrastructure; Chapter 15-9 Utility Service Regulations; Chapter
15-10 Wastewater Regulations; and Chapter 15-9, Article 1 Utility Service. All
public wastewater facilities must also be constructed according to the City of
Sunset Valley Master Water Line Plan in effect on the effective date of this
chapter. Connection with the Municipal Water Supply System shall be required.
Isolated lots may be served by a private well if permitted by the City Council.
In no event shall a water well be dug without a permit from the city.
   (B)   If the subdivision is not to be served immediately by the existing
system, the subdivider shall be required to make necessary improvements to the
system.
   (C)   Before the City Council may approve a final plat for a subdivision
located outside of or beyond the existing water supply system, the subdivider
shall furnish the City Council and the City's Engineer with statements from the
state Health Department that water satisfactory for human consumption may be
obtained from sources on the land.
   (D)   All subdivisions shall provide for, as a minimum, 130 gallons per
capita of additional ground storage or 55 gallons per capita of additional
elevated storage. The calculated storage volume for a residential subdivision
shall be based on three persons per single family living unit. In addition, as
a minimum, a firm pumping capacity of 500 gallons per minute, with 20 pounds
per square inch of residual pressure, shall be provided.
§ 150.309 REGIONAL WATER QUALITY CONTROL FACILITIES FOR SINGLE FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   For property to be subdivided into single family residential lots,
where at least one of such lots is less than five acres, the subdivision shall
be provided with adequate water quality control facilities that comply with the
requirements of the Watershed Development chapter of this Code. Those
facilities shall be reflected on all subdivision applications required in the
subdivision regulations of this Code.
   (B)   The subdivider shall designate a reasonable number of water quality
control facilities, each of which of sufficient design to serve as much of the
area of the subdivision as is practical for each individual facility; the total
number of facilities shall, however, be sufficient to serve the entire
subdivision.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, such water quality
control facilities may be designed, at the subdivider's option, to cross lot
lines, provided that the facilities lie entirely within the subdivision; and
provided that the subdivider complies with all other applicable regulations and
standards in this Code regarding water quality control facilities; and provided
further that the facilities comply with any other applicable minimum setbacks
for structures, including but not limited to setbacks from streets, water
quality zones, adjacent property that is not part of the subdivision, and
critical environmental features.
WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT
§ 150.320 AUTHORITY, APPLICABILITY OF LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE.
   (A)   This chapter is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and
laws of the State of Texas, including particularly, but not limited to Chapters
231, Acts of the 40th Legislature, Regular Session, 1927, as heretofore or
hereafter amended (compiled as Article 974a, V.T.C.S.), and the provisions of
Tex. Loc. Gov't Code Chapter 212. This subchapter is adopted pursuant to the
provisions of the general law of the city.
   (B)   In addition to the requirements of this subchapter, the provisions of
§§
150.012 through
150.020 apply to applications required by this subchapter.
§ 150.321 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the orderly, safe and
healthful development of the area within the corporate limits of Sunset Valley
and the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction and to promote the health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the community.
§ 150.322 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No land in the City of Sunset Valley or its extraterritorial
jurisdiction shall be developed and no improvement shall be constructed or
installed thereon until such proposed development, construction or installation
is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code and any other
ordinance or city Code and has been approved, as applicable, in accordance with
this Code.
   (B)   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, no permit of
any kind shall be issued pursuant to this Code for the construction, repair, or
modification of any structure, or improvement or for the installation of a
public or private sewage facility unless a watershed development permit for
such construction, repair or modification or installation has been approved and
filed with the City of Sunset Valley and all applicable standards contained
herein or referred to in this chapter have been complied with in full.
   (C)   Any right, privilege or remedy granted by this chapter to the person
obtaining or holding permit approval shall also run in favor of such person's
successors in interest and assigns. Any duty or obligation of or remedy against
such person arising from this chapter shall also inure to such person's
successors in interest, assigns, agents, employees, representatives, or any
person acting pursuant to the direction of any the foregoing, or under color of
the same.
   (D)   The city shall neither seel nor supply any water or sewage service nor
authorize natural gas or electricity service for use on: (i) improved property
either developed or improved without an approved watershed development permit
at a time when such permit was required by applicable law; or (ii) improved
property which is not in compliance with any standard or regulation applicable
to the property pursuant to approval of a watershed development permit for the
property.
   (E)   In behalf of the city, the City Attorney, shall when directed by the
City Council, institute appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction
to enforce the provisions of this chapter or the standards referred to herein
with respect to any violation thereof which occurs within the city, within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, or within any area subject to all or
a part of the provisions of this chapter.
   (F)   Provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not be
construed to prohibit the issuance of a permit for any parcel of land that
meets the following conditions:
      (1)   The parcel had a residential building and the building was in
existence and in use as a residence prior to the passage of Ordinance 920519 of
the City of Sunset Valley; and
      (2)   The last conveyance of the parcel prior to the passage of Ordinance
920519 was either by metes and bounds or by lot and block if within a
subdivision and said conveyance was filed of record with the property records
of Travis County, Texas prior to the passage of Ordinance 920519.
   (G)   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the
issuance of permits for repair or maintenance.
   (H)   Section
150.322 is subject to and limited by §
150.011.
§ 150.323 VARIANCES AND ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVALS.
   (A)   Except as provided in the provisions of this section authorizing
variances or administrative approvals in connection with single family
developments, the City Council may authorize a variance from these regulations
when, in its opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict
compliance. In making the findings herein required, Council shall take into
account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved, existing uses of
land in the vicinity, and the probable effect of such variance upon traffic
conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience, and the welfare in
the vicinity. No variance shall be approved unless the City Council finds:
      (1)   That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the
land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this
chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable and economic use of his
land;
      (2)   That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment
of a substantial property right of the applicant;
      (3)   That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area;
      (4)   That the granting of the variance will not have the effect of
preventing the orderly development of other land in the area in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter; and
      (5)   That the proposal demonstrates water quality will be equal to or
better than would have resulted had development proceeded without the variance.
   (B)   Such findings described in division (A) together with the specific
facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the
official minutes of the City Council meeting at which such variance is
recommended. Variances may be recommended only when in harmony with the general
purposes and intent of this chapter so that the public health, safety, and
welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. Pecuniary hardships to a
person or developer standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue
hardship.
   (C)   The City Council may grant a variance, pursuant to division (A), from
the terms referring to the Development Free Zone within a proposed plan when
the strict compliance will result in an unreasonable and unwarranted taking or
an undue hardship. Where such conditions are found, the variance permitted
shall be the minimum departure from the terms of this chapter necessary to
avoid such deprivation of privileges enjoyed by such other property to
facilitate a reasonable use, and which will not create significant
probabilities of harmful environmental consequences. The City Council may not
grant a variance if it would provide the applicant with any special privileges
not enjoyed by other similarly situated property with the similarly timed
development.
   (D)   Any application for a variance shall be accompanied by the fees set by
the Council in the fee schedules adopted by ordinance or resolution.
   (E)   Section
150.323 is subject to and limited by §
150.011.
   (F)   (1)   Except as provided in division (G) of this section in connection
with administrative approval of certain incidental improvements, for a single
legal lot or two adjacent existing legal lots that are zoned and used or
proposed to be used for single family residential purposes, a variance,
administrative approval, or modified administrative approval is required, as
applicable, as provided in this division (F), to develop any portion of the lot
that lies within the Water Quality Transition Zone ("WQTZ") or Critical Water
Quality Zone ("CWQZ").
      (2)   In connection with any such variance, administrative approval, or
modified administrative approval, all development shall, to the greatest extent
practicable, be located first in the Uplands Zone, then in the WQTZ, and
lastly, in the CWQZ located on such legal lot (such zones being listed in order
from least protected to most protected). For purposes of this division (F), the
development in a less protected zone shall be deemed not to be practicable: (I)
where a restrictive covenant recorded before April 1, 2009 that is enforceable
by one or more third parties other than the city prohibits development in a
manner that precludes the location of a proposed additional development in the
less protected zone; (II) for a residential home constructed before April 1,
2009, the requirement of developing first in the least protected zone would
necessitate a new front entrance, or reconstruction of the front of such
residence; and (III) for a residential home constructed before April 1, 2009,
the requirement of developing first in the least protected zone would result in
the location in the front or side yard of a swimming pool, accessory structure
or other improvement typically located in the backyard of a residence.
         (a)   If so much of the legal lot lies within the WQTZ that applicable
regulations restricting development in the WQTZ would restrict the developer to
less impervious cover than otherwise would be permitted if the legal lot lay
wholly in the Uplands Zone, the developer may be granted administrative
approval, to be issued by the City Administrator or his/her designee, to
include impervious cover of up to 14% of the area in the WQTZ on the terms and
conditions provided in this division (F)(1):
            1.   The allowable improvement (not including the mitigation
measure required by division (F)(1)(e)) does not require the addition of any
fill;
            2.   The improvement is in compliance with all applicable
provisions of this Code, including but not limited to §§
150.030 through
150.252 and §§
150.360 through
150.384, and complies with other City Codes, rules and regulations;
            3.   The improvement does not impede surface water runoff or
drainage patterns and does not increase flooding on upstream or downstream
properties; and
            4.   The improvement is not used for the storage or processing of
hazardous materials or substances other than those normally associated with
household or residential use and only in small quantities (e.g., small
quantities of gasoline and oil used for the operation of landscape equipment).
            5.   One of the three mitigation measures described in §
150.323(J) as a rain garden, natural vegetative filter strip, or engineered
vegetative filter strip will be provided and maintained at all times to the
standard described or referred in §
150.323(J) to minimize degradation of water quality, and the owner of the legal
lot agrees, as a condition of administrative approval, to impose the
requirement on the owner of such legal lot to provide and maintain such
measures on the legal lot as a restrictive covenant, to run with the land, in
favor of the city, in a form approved by the City Attorney, and to be recorded
in the Official Records of Travis County, Texas;
            6.   The percentage of impervious cover on the legal lot as a whole
does not exceed 18%;
            7.   In the event that a transfer of development rights from the
affected legal lot has occurred, the amount of impervious cover so transferred
shall be deemed to be located on the affected legal lot in determining the
amount of impervious cover available, if any, with an administrative approval
pursuant to this division.
            8.   For the purpose of calculating whether the total maximum
impervious cover of 18% is reached, items identified as excluded in §
150.332(E) shall be treated as impervious cover includable in the resulting
total amount of impervious cover.
            9.   A minimum setback of at least 75 feet shall be maintained
between the critical water quality zone and developed, impervious, or pollutant
source areas, or areas of disturbed vegetation or soil in the water quality
transition zone. Within the aquifer recharge zone, a 100-foot minimum setback
shall also be preserved between developed, impervious, or pollutant source
areas, or areas with disturbed vegetation or soil in the water quality
transition zone and any identified recharge features.
         (b)   Subject to any rights pursuant to an administrative approval for
development in the WQTZ, if so much of the legal lot lies within either the
WQTZ or the Critical Water Quality Zone ("CWQZ") that the developer cannot
reasonably develop the lot without encroaching into the WQTZ or the CWQZ, or if
disallowing development in either the WQTZ or CWQZ located on the legal lot
would restrict the developer to less impervious cover than otherwise would be
permitted if the legal lot lay wholly in the Uplands Zone, and an
administrative approval for development in the WQTZ pursuant to this division
(F) is insufficient to allow a total of 18% impervious cover on the legal lot,
a variance may be approved for development of up to 18% impervious cover in
either the WQTZ or CWQZ on the terms and conditions provided in divisions (A)
through (D).
         (c)   For lots developed as part of a subdivision of land of ten or
more lots that are restricted, as a result of an allocation of development
rights among such lots, to less than 18% impervious cover, the provisions of
this division (F) shall apply to an administrative approval or modified
administrative approval regarding impervious cover on such lot, except that the
following shall apply: (i) the requirements of divisions (F)(1)(g) shall not
apply; (ii) the requirement of division (F)(1)(e) shall apply regardless
whether the lot is located wholly or partially in the Uplands Zone or where on
the lot the development is proposed; and (iii) the restriction to no more than
14% impervious cover in the WQTZ on the lot will apply, but an administrative
approval or modified administrative approval may be granted for up to a total
of 18% impervious cover to the extent that any impervious cover that exceeds
14% is located in the Uplands Zone on the lot.
         (d)   In the event that a restrictive covenant affecting a legal lot
provides for a limitation on impervious cover less than that allowed pursuant
to this division (F) that is enforceable by the city, the Mayor shall, at the
request of the affected legal lot owner, execute an instrument amending such
restriction in a manner that limits the amount of impervious cover on the
affected lot to the amount allowed pursuant to an administrative approval,
modified administrative approval, or variance granted pursuant to this division
(F). For convenience, any restrictive covenant required by the terms of this
division (F) in connection with an administrative approval or variance may be
combined in one instrument with an amendment of any then existing restrictions
regarding impervious cover. In the event that the term of any restrictive
covenant, whether or not enforceable by the city, that is applicable to a legal
lot provides for a limitation on impervious cover less than allowed pursuant to
this division (F) but provides for modification or termination in the event
that the city's regulations are altered to allow for increased impervious cover
on affected property, this division (F)(4) shall be effective to automatically
terminate or modify such restrictive covenant to the extent of development
permitted by this division (F) and as provided by the terms of such restrictive
covenant. In particular, this division (F)(4) shall apply as an action taken by
Council to allow the amount of impervious cover on any lot to exceed the amount
shown for such lot on Exhibit "A" as stated in Section 3.12 of the Declaration
of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions for Sunset Valley Meadows Subdivision
recorded in Document No. 1999032885 of the Official Public Records of Travis
County, Texas, provided that the total amount of impervious cover on any such
lot does not exceed 18%.
         (e)   A modified administrative approval may be given for development
to which division (F)(1) applies on the following basis: An applicant may
submit a request for such development with a proposal to provide another means
of mitigation not listed in §
150.323(J). Such application will be subject to City Council approval, which
approval may be given if: (i) the City Council determines that the alternative
means of mitigation provides water quality protection equal to or better than
the means listed in §
150.323(J); (ii) such alternative means does not, as determined by the City
Council, require excessive maintenance and/or is not more likely to be subject
to equipment malfunction or deterioration; (iii) such alternative means is not
unsightly and does not create excessive noise or other conditions that are
incompatible with surrounding residential uses, as determined by the City
Council; (iv) all conditions and obligations set forth in §
150.323(F)(1)(a) through §
150.323(H) are met; and (v) applicant agrees to comply with any other condition
imposed by the City Council in connection with such an approval.
   (G)   (1)   Water quality transition zone small structures. Subject to
divisions (G)(1)(a) through (G)(1)(d), below, the City Administrator or his/her
designee shall grant administrative approval of an application to construct,
operate, and maintain in the WQTZ on a legal lot zoned and used for single-
family residential purposes improvements described in §
150.332(E), provided the applicant demonstrates that the following conditions
are met:
         (b)   The improvement is in compliance with all applicable provisions
of this Code, including but not limited to §§
150.030 through
150.252 and §§
150.360 through
150.384, and complies with other city Codes, rules and regulations;
         (c)   The improvement does not impede surface water runoff or drainage
patterns and does not increase flooding on upstream or downstream properties;
and
         (d)   The improvement is not used for the storage or processing of
hazardous materials or substances other than those normally associated with
household or residential use and only in small quantities (e.g., small
quantities of gasoline and oil used for the operation of landscape equipment).
      (2)   In addition to the requirements of division (G)(1), an applicant
seeking to construct any structures or buildings described in §
150.332(F) other than those described in §
150.332(F) (1)[sidewalks],(2)[uncovered decks],(4)[swimming pools, hot tubs,
wading ponds, fountains, birdbaths, fish ponds] must, as a condition of the
approval, implement and maintain on the property on which the proposed
improvement will be located at least two of the Pollution Reduction Practices
described in division (I) of this §
150.323, which are more fully described in the CSV Pollution Reduction Manual.
The obligation to implement and maintain Pollution Reduction Practices shall be
specified in a duly recorded restrictive covenant affecting the property which
shall be enforceable by the city. Such obligation to implement and maintain
shall remain effective so long as such improvements remain on the property.
      (3)   An applicant may receive credit for any existing pollution
reduction practice maintained on the property for which an administrative
approval is requested unless: (i) the applicant has previously received credit
for the pollution reduction practice pursuant to this division or other
approval by the City Council; and (ii) the improvement, the structure or
building for which the previous approval was granted still exists on the
property.
      (4)   If the applicant objects to a determination on his or her request
for administrative approval under this division, he or she may appeal the
determination to the City Council by submitting a written notice of appeal
setting forth the bases on which the applicant believes the determination was
incorrect. Such written appeal must be addressed to the City Administrator and
submitted on or before 20 days after the date of the determination from which
an appeal is sought. The City Council may affirm, modify, or reverse the
determination based on the criteria set forth in this section.
      (5)   An applicant seeking an administrative approval for the
improvements described or referred in this division (G) is not required to
satisfy any other variance provisions of §
150.323.
   (H)   Pollution reduction measures. The residential pollution reduction
practices are described in detail in the CSV Pollution Reduction Manual as
amended and approved by the City Council, which Manual shall be applicable to
any pollution reduction practice required by this §
150.323. The following is a list of such pollution reduction practices:
Item No. Method Purpose
Item Method                                                                          Purpose
No.
Natural Area Conservation
1    Utilize on a continual basis only city approved Organics First herbicides,      Improves water quality by preventing the use of harmful chemicals,
     pesticides, and fertilizers on the entire lot or property                       compounds, and substances
2    Utilize on a continual basis city approved Livestock Pollution Management Plan  Improves water quality by reducing livestock waste loads
     on the entire lot or property
3    Utilize on a continual basis city approved Domestic Animal Waste Management     Improves water quality by reducing small animal waste loads
     Plan on the entire lot or property
     Install or retrofit and maintain a city approved Water-Wise (Xeriscape)         Improves water quality by reducing the need for the use of harmful
4    Landscape Plan having an area equal to or greater than the aggregate amount of  chemicals, herbicides, and insecticides
     impervious cover located on the property or lot
     Install or retrofit and maintain city approved Soil Amendment and Conservation  Improves water quality by promoting vegetative growth on the property –
5    Landscaping Program having an area equal to or greater than the aggregate       Reduces runoff and need for supplemental irrigation
     amount of impervious cover located on the property
6    Obtain and maintain a “Certificate of Backyard Habitat” issued by the NationImproves water quality by maintaining a natural/native habitat
     Wildlife Federation for the lot or property
Capture Rooftop Runoff with Rainwater Harvesting
     Equip any roofed structure for which an Administrative Approval is being
     requested and/or install on an existing roof structure located on the property
     a Rainwater Collection System – The Rainwater Collection System must gather
7    water from roof areas of a sufficient size to harvest the required Water        Improves water quality by reducing the amount of runoff being discharged
     Quality Mitigation Volume. Collected rain water must be temporarily stored on-  from the property
     site in approved storages providing for Water Quality Mitigation of 720 gallons
     per 300 square feet of exempted impervious cover being permitted, with a
     minimum capacity of 720 gallons.
     Direct rooftop runoff captured by rainwater harvesting techniques over a city
     approved Natural Vegetative Filter Strip where it can either infiltrate into
     the soil or filter over it and/or direct rooftop runoff to a city approved Dry  Improves water quality by reducing the amount of runoff being discharged
8    Well or Rain Garden. Natural Vegetative Filter Strip, Dry Well or Rain Garden   from the property
     must be sized for Water Quality Mitigation of 720 gallons per 300 square feet
     of exempted impervious cover being permitted, with a minimum capacity of 720
     gallons.
Capture Non-Rooftop Runoff from Impervious Cover
     Install and maintain, downstream of the improvement for which an Administrative
     Approval is being requested, a city approved Natural Vegetative Filter Strip –Improves water quality by providing treatment of surface water runoff
9    The Natural Vegetative Filter Strip must have Water Quality Mitigation of 720   before leaving the property
     gallons of runoff per 300 square feet of exempted impervious cover being
     permitted, with a minimum capacity of 720 gallons.
     Install and maintain, downstream of the improvement for which an Administrative
     Approval is being requested, a city approved Engineered Vegetative Filter Strip Improves water quality by providing treatment of surface water runoff
10   – The Engineered Vegetative Filter Strip must have Water Quality Mitigation ofbefore leaving the property
     360 gallons of runoff per 300 square feet of exempted impervious cover being
     permitted, with a minimum capacity of 360 gallons.
     Install and maintain, downstream of the improvement for which an Administrative
11   Approval is being requested a Rain Garden sized for Water Quality Mitigation of Improves water quality by providing treatment of surface water runoff
     720 gallons per 300 square feet of exempted impervious cover being permitted,   before leaving the property
     with a minimum capacity of 720 gallons.
     Install and maintain, downstream of the improvement for which an Administrative
     Approval is being requested, a Natural Buffer having a minimum area of 1,125    Improves water quality by providing treatment of surface water runoff
12   square feet (length to width ratio of about 1.8 to 1) for Water Quality         before leaving the property
     Mitigation of 360 gallons per 300 square feet of exempted improvement being
     permitted, with a minimum capacity of 360 gallons.
     Install and maintain a Pollution Reduction Measure proposed by the Applicant,
     provided such measure meets or exceeds the Water Quality Mitigation of 720
13   gallons per 300 square feet of exempted impervious cover for non-engineered
     pollution reduction measures or 360 gallons per 300 square feet of exempted
     impervious cover for engineered pollution reduction measures.
 
   (I)   The mitigation measures required for an administrative approval
pursuant to division (F)(1) of this §
150.323 shall be comprised of (i) a vegetated filter strip; (ii) an engineered
filter strip; or (iii) a rain garden. Each such mitigation measure shall be
designed and shall perform to the standards for such measure provided in the
standards applicable to the particular mitigation measure as provided in the
City of Sunset Valley Pollution Reduction Manual appended to this §§
150.320 through
150.349 and
150.360 through
150.384 as periodically amended.
§ 150.324 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   General. Except as expressly authorized in this section, no
development, as that term is defined in this Code, can occur or be undertaken
within the City of Sunset Valley or its extraterritorial jurisdiction unless a
watershed development permit has been issued in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter.
   (B)   Residential construction. For the construction of a single family
development that proposes residential lots of no less than five acres per lot
and is appropriately restricted to that residential density, a watershed
development permit is required, however, no water quality controls are
required, provided the owner and/or developer of the property complies with the
impervious cover requirements set forth in this chapter and with the building
and site development requirements imposed by this or other applicable
provisions of this Code and city ordinances.
   (C)   Capital improvement projects. For the construction of capital
improvement projects for roadways, a watershed development permit is required,
however, the impervious cover calculations addressed in this chapter do not
apply.
   (D)   Minor fill activities.
      (1)   No watershed development permit shall be required for minor fill
activities involving the deposit of no more than ten cubic yards of fill on
property within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction, provided that no
part of such fill shall be or is to be deposited on land located within the
critical water quality zone, the water quality transition zone or a drainage
easement. If any part of such fill is to be deposited on any land so located, a
watershed development permit must be applied for and issued and the
requirements of this chapter must be complied with in full.
      (2)   If the city has reason to believe that more than ten cubic yards of
fill is being deposited within the critical water quality zone, water quality
transition zone or a drainage easement, without a permit therefore, the city
shall issue a stop work order to both the property owner and the person
depositing the fill. No additional fill shall be deposited or further work done
in connection with the project until either a development fill permit is
obtained pursuant to division (D)(3) of this section, or a watershed
development permit is obtained in accordance with and as required by the
provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Any developer, property owner or other person wishing to deposit
more than ten but fewer than 50 cubic yards of fill on a lot or legal lot that
is one acre or less within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall
first secure a development minor fill permit. The application for the
development minor fill permit shall be on such form as may be provided by the
city, and shall be reviewed by the City Administrator or his/her designee, who
shall determine whether the proposed project qualifies as a minor fill
activity. Such determination shall be based upon the information contained in
the application and such other information as the city may reasonably require.
Due consideration shall be given to such factors as the use and proposed
location of the fill, the nature, number, location and frequency of prior
deposits of fill on the property, the location and topography of property on
which the fill is proposed to be deposited, and the impact of the deposit on
the environment and the public health, safety and welfare. If the proposed
project is found to qualify as a minor fill activity, a development minor fill
permit shall be issued, subject to such conditions as the city may reasonably
impose. No permit fees and no city inspections shall be required in connection
with the issuance of the permit.
      (4)   For lot or legal lot larger than one acre, a developer, property
owner or other person wishing to deposit more than ten but fewer than 50 cubic
yards of fill per acre included in such lot or legal lot within the city or its
extraterritorial jurisdiction shall first secure a development minor fill
permit. The application for the development minor fill permit shall be on such
form as may be provided by the city, and shall be reviewed by the City
Administrator or his/her designee, who shall determine whether the proposed
project qualifies as a minor fill activity. Such determination shall be based
upon the information contained in the application and such other information as
the city may reasonably require. Due consideration shall be given to such
factors as the use and proposed location of the fill, the nature, number,
location and frequency of prior deposits of fill on the property, the location
and topography of property on which the fill is proposed to be deposited, and
the impact of the deposit on the environment and the public health, safety and
welfare. If the proposed project is found to qualify as a minor fill activity,
a development minor fill permit shall be issued, subject to such conditions as
the city may reasonably impose. No permit fees and no city inspections shall be
required in connection with the issuance of the permit.
      (5)   If the City Administrator determines, in accordance with the
guidelines set forth in divisions (D)(3) or (4) of this section, that the
proposed project does not qualify as a minor fill activity, the permit
applicant shall be notified of such determination in writing, and advised that
he or she may not engage in or proceed with the proposed fill activity without
first complying with all provisions of this chapter relevant to the securing of
watershed development permits and the requirements for the issuance of said
permits.
      (6)   The applicant may appeal the determination of the City
Administrator that the proposed project does not qualify as a minor fill
activity by filing written notice of appeal with the City Secretary within ten
business days of receipt of the notice referred to in division (D)(5) of this
section. The City Council shall consider the appeal as soon as practicable, and
shall either affirm, modify or overrule the determination. The decision of the
City Council shall be based on the maximum volume of fill allowed pursuant to
this section, and the factors to be considered pursuant to divisions (D)(3) or
(4), as applicable.
      (7)   With respect to any minor fill proposed to be deposited pursuant to
this section, the applicant shall submit to the city the identity of the source
of any fill material to be deposited and the certification of the owner of such
fill that same does not contain any hazardous or toxic substances or materials.
   (E)   Signage. Signs or three-dimensional lettering, logos, designs or
symbols that contribute less than eight square feet of impervious cover and
that do not collect or divert significant amounts of rainfall or runoff or
contribute in any significant way to water pollution or degradation are wholly
exempt from the operation of this chapter.
   (F)   Mailboxes. Structures devoted entirely for use as mailboxes are wholly
exempt from the operation of this chapter provided the structure does not
significantly affect drainage or contribute in any significant way to water
pollution or degradation.
   (G)   Fences. Fences are wholly exempt from the operation of this chapter
provided the fence does not significantly affect drainage or contribute in any
significant way to water pollution or degradation.
   (H)   Pre-existing structures.
      (1)   Gardening and landscaping of lots containing pre-existing
structures are wholly exempt from the operation of this chapter so long as such
activities do not have significant impacts on drainage and do not contribute in
any significant way to water pollution or degradation.
      (2)   Remodeling, alteration, or repair of existing structures is not
subject to the operation of this chapter so long as such remodeling, alteration
or repair does not increase impervious cover and so long as such activities do
not have significant impacts on drainage and do not contribute in any
significant way to water pollution or degradation.
      (3)   Demolition activities are not subject to the operation of this
chapter so long as such demolition does not involve sinkholes or other critical
environmental features, have significant impacts on drainage and does not
contribute in any significant way to water pollution or degradation.
      (4)   The extension of water or wastewater lines to single family homes
is not subject to this chapter so long as such extensions do not extend through
creeks, sinkholes or other critical environmental features or do not contribute
in any significant way to water pollution or degradation.
   (I)   Sprinkler system. No watershed permit is required for the installation
or repair of residential irrigation or sprinkler systems so long as such
installation or repair does not have significant impacts on drainage and does
not contribute in any significant way to water pollution or degradation.
§ 150.325 SITE PLAN SUBMITTALS.
   (A)   General. Prior to issuance of a watershed development permit, the
following information shall be submitted to the city for review and approval.
The applicant shall also file a "Site Plan Fair Notice" or similar form
promulgated and in use by the City of Sunset Valley at the time the applicant
files the application or request for a permit under this chapter.
   (B)   Standard preliminary requirements.
      (1)   Preliminary site plan submittals shall include the following:
         (a)   Six copies of a preliminary site plan showing the following
information shall be submitted with the development permit application.
         (b)   Legal description of the property;
         (c)   Name and address of the owner/developer;
         (d)   Name and address of the company or individual who prepared the
site plan;
         (e)   A topographic map with two-foot contours based upon City of
Austin data showing;
            1.   Location of all classified waterways showing the limits of
each classification;
            2.   The horizontal limits and elevations of the 100 and 25-year
floodplains with a citation of the source of the information;
            3.   Locations of the Critical Water Quality Zone (CWQZ) and the
Water Quality Transition Zone (WQTZ);
            4.   Location of trees having a trunk with a four-inch diameter or
greater as measured 4% feet above the ground;
            5.   Existing geologic features including but not limited to faults
and fractures along waterways and other critical environmental features (CEF)
as defined herein;
            6.   Location of all proposed improvements including buildings,
streets, driveways, storm drainage systems, water supply and distribution
systems, wastewater collection systems or wastewater treatment and disposal
systems;
            7.   Location of all temporary erosion/sedimentation controls and
permanent water quality controls;
         (f)   Location of the city limits line, the outer boundary of the
city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, and the boundaries of the zoning
districts, both on the subject property and on adjacent properties;
         (g)   Tabulations for the entire site and each individual lot showing
total area of the site or lot, area of the CWQZ, area of the WQTZ, area of the
25-year floodplain, net site area, allowable impervious cover, impervious cover
transfers, area of proposed impervious cover separated into buildings, streets,
driveways, parking lots, sidewalks, and other impervious cover as appropriate;
and
         (h)   With respect to any fill proposed to be deposited, the identity
of the source of any fill material to be deposited, and the certification of
the owner of such fill that same does not contain any hazardous or toxic
substances or materials.
         (i)   Tree protection and tree replacement plans as required by §§
150.770 through
150.788.
         (j)   Other information as the city may reasonably require.
      (2)   A map or maps showing soil map units, surface and subsurface
geology, faults, sinkholes and other geologic units. Maps may be based on
compiled data available from the Soil Conservation Service, U.T. Bureau of
Economic Geology, City of Austin Environmental Resource Management Department
and U.S. Geological Survey, and shall be complimented by an on-site geological
survey conducted by a professional geologist.
      (3)   A report that includes the following:
         (a)   A description of existing topography of the site;
         (b)   A description of the geologic, soil, and vegetation
characteristics of the site;
         (c)   A general description of the proposed changes to the site;
         (d)   A general description of the temporary measures to be utilized
for the control of erosion/sedimentation during construction;
         (e)   General sequencing of construction;
         (f)   A description of the proposed permanent water quality controls
and the basis of design;
         (g)   A description of the methods proposed for site restoration;
         (h)   An analysis of the impact of the development project on
sedimentation in creek bottoms, on ground and surface water quality, on the
quantity and quality of recharge, and the extent to which the proposed project
will alter natural drainage patterns and the impact of any such changes; and
         (i)   A traffic impact analysis, if required as a condition of
approval of the preliminary site plan.
      (4)   Preliminary landscape plan prepared in compliance with the
requirements of the landscape provisions of this Code.
   (C)   The preliminary site plan submittal shall be approved if the City
Council finds that the proposed development as specified in the preliminary
site plan submittal is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this
Code and any other ordinance or City Code.
   (D)   Standard final site requirements. Within six months of approval of the
preliminary site plan, a final site plan shall be submitted. A preliminary site
plan shall expire if a final site plan is not submitted within this time frame.
A final site plan shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Detailed construction plans bearing the seal and signature of a
professional engineer, containing the following information.
         (a)   Cover sheet with appropriate signature block;
         (b)   General construction notes;
         (c)   Final grading plans where appropriate drawn at a scale of one
inch equals 50 feet (max.);
         (d)   Plans and profiles for streets, storm sewers, drainage channels,
wastewater lines, water lines 12 inches in diameter and larger, water quality
control facilities, driveways, curbcuts and access points to public streets,
alleys and rights of way drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet (max.)
horizontal and one inch equals five feet (max.) vertically;
         (e)   Construction details and typical sections;
         (f)   Temporary erosion/sedimentation control plans drawn at a scale
of one inch equals 100 feet (max.) and appropriate details;
         (g)   Tree protection plan drawn at a scale of one inch equals 100
feet (max.) and appropriate details; and
         (h)   Final restoration plan drawn at a scale of one inch equals 100
feet (max.) including any appropriate specifications, details, and application
rates for seeding, fertilizing, and mulching.
         (i)   Any change or deviation from the preliminary site plan submittal
for the affected property.
      (2)   Engineering design report bearing the seal and signature of a
professional engineer certifying to the accuracy and completeness of the report
containing the following information:
         (a)   Description of the basis for design of each element of the
project;
         (b)   Detailed design calculations in conformance with the provisions
of this chapter on "standards and specifications" and other referenced design
manuals;
         (c)   Printouts of computer models used in the design of the proposed
improvements;
         (d)   Subsurface investigation reports where appropriate to justify
basis of design;
         (e)   Traffic Impact Analysis if required as a condition of the
approval of the preliminary site plan;
         (f)   Itemized estimated cost of all proposed improvements.
         (g)   Such other information as the city may reasonably require; and
         (h)   The signature of the owner of the property to be developed and,
if someone other than the owner, the developer of the project.
      (3)   Final landscape plan.
   (E)   The final site plan shall be approved and a watershed development
permit shall be issued if the City Council finds that the proposed development
as specified in the final site plan is in compliance with all applicable
provisions of this Code and any other ordinance or City Code. Any site plan
approval, watershed development permit, and any variance approved in connection
therewith shall expire 18 months after the issuance or approval thereof if
construction of the project or improvement that is the subject of such site
plan, watershed development permit, or variance has not then been commenced.
§ 150.326 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ISSUANCE OF WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
FOR DEPOSITS OF FILL UNRELATED TO ONSITE CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   General provisions. This section sets forth requirements applicable to
watershed development applications and permits for deposits of fill unrelated
to on-site construction activities. For purposes of this section, the deposit
of fill is unrelated to on-site construction activities if the construction or
substantial modification of the building, structure, roadway or utility in
connection with which the fill is deposited is not sequenced to begin within 60
days prior to or after the deposit of the fill.
   (B)   Application requirements.
      (1)   Designate where the fill is proposed to be deposited;
      (2)   Identify the quantity of the fill to be deposited;
      (3)   Identify the source and type of the fill to be deposited;
      (4)   Be signed by the contractor or other person responsible for the
transport of the fill and the owner of the property on which the fill is to be
deposited.
   (C)   Cash deposit. A cash deposit shall be tendered to the city prior to
the issuance of a permit for any fill activity subject to the provisions of
this section. The amount of the cash deposit shall be based upon the City
Engineer's estimate of the following:
      (1)   The cost of hiring a gatekeeper to monitor compliance with the
terms of the permit relevant to the source and quantity of the fill;
      (2)   The cost of removing the fill if same is not deposited in
accordance with the terms of the permit;
      (3)   The cost of grading and/or revegetating the fill site if same is
not done in accordance with the terms of the permit; and
      (4)   Reasonable administrative costs incurred by the city in connection
with the foregoing.
   (D)   Permit terms. Upon the applicant's tender of the cash deposit, and
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the City Council may issue the
watershed development permit. The permit shall specify the duties of the
gatekeeper, the location at which the fill shall be deposited, the quantity of
the fill that shall be deposited, the source of the fill to be deposited, how
the fill site is to be graded, how the fill site is to be revegetated, and the
dates by which such grading and revegetation must be completed. Unless
authorized by the City Council, all grading shall be completed within 30 days
of the deposit of the authorized fill, and revegetation of the fill site within
30 days thereafter.
   (E)   Inspections and notice to correct. The city shall have the right to
enter upon the property and inspect the fill site. If the city determines that
the terms of the permit are being or have been violated, the city shall issue a
written stop work order, and/or a written notice to correct the violation(s).
The notice to correct shall be served upon the owner and the contractor and
shall identify the violations and specify the corrective action to be taken and
the time within which same must be completed. The notice shall also advise that
if the corrective action is not completed as directed, the city will draw upon
the cash deposit and perform or cause to be performed the required corrective
action.
   (F)   Appeals. The owner and/or contractor may appeal the city's
determination that the terms of the permit have been violated by filing a
written notice of appeal with the City Secretary within ten business days of
receipt of the notice to correct. The City Council shall consider said appeal
as soon as practicable. If the City Council determines that any condition of
the permit has been violated, it may proceed to draw upon the cash deposit and
perform or cause to be performed the required corrective action.
   (G)   Draw on deposit. If no appeal is taken in accordance with and as
authorized by division (F), and the required corrective action is not completed
as and within the time directed, the city may draw upon the cash deposit and
perform or cause to be performed the required corrective action.
   (H)   Refund of deposit balance. Upon final inspection and the city's
determination that the terms of the permit have been satisfied, the city shall
refund the balance of the cash deposit that remains after deductions therefrom
have been made to pay the expenses of the gatekeeper, the costs incurred by the
city in connection with its performance of any required corrective action and
the city's reasonable administrative costs incurred in connection with the
foregoing.
§ 150.327 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL SMALL PROJECT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   This section applies to a legal lot which is to be developed with one
single family residence, or to two contiguous legal lots which are to be
developed or redeveloped by the same developer with one or two single family
residence(s), or in connection with which additional or expanded improvements
resulting in additional impervious cover is proposed.
   (B)   Three copies of a preliminary site plan showing the information
required in this section shall be submitted with the development permit
application. Only the following information will be required for submittal if
the lot or lots are not otherwise exempt from the requirements of this chapter:
      (1)   Legal description of the property;
      (2)   Name and address of the owner/developer;
      (3)   Name and address of the company or individual who prepared the site
plan;
      (4)   A topographic map with two-foot contours based upon City of Austin
data showing;
         (a)   The horizontal limits and elevations of the 100 and 25-year
floodplains with a citation of the source of the information;
         (b)   Locations of the Critical Water Quality Zone (CWQZ) and the
Water Quality Transition Zone (WQTZ);
         (c)   Location of all trees having a trunk with a four-inch diameter
or greater as measured four and one-half feet above the ground;
         (d)   Existing geologic features including but not limited to faults
and fractures along waterways and other critical environmental features (CEF)
as defined herein;
         (e)   Location of all proposed improvements including buildings,
streets, driveways, storm drainage systems, water supply and distribution
systems, wastewater collection systems or wastewater treatment and disposal
systems;
         (f)   Location and description of all temporary erosion/sedimentation
controls and permanent water quality controls, if such controls are required;
         (g)   Changed drainage patterns from the property after completion of
construction;
         (h)   Final grades of all topography, structures, drainage ways,
parking and driveways;
         (i)   Location of existing and proposed drainage easements;
      (5)   With respect to any fill proposed to be deposited, the identity of
the source of any fill material to be deposited, and the certification of the
owner of such fill that same does not contain any hazardous or toxic substances
or materials.
      (6)   Tree protection and tree replacement plans as required by §§
150.770 through
150.788.
      (7)   Other information as the city may reasonably require, including but
not limited to the information specified in §
150.327(C) below.
   (C)   For an existing legal lot to which this section applies, a variance,
administrative approval, or modified administrative approval, pursuant to the
applicable provisions of §
150.323 is required to develop any portion of the lot that lies within the
Development Free Zone.
§ 150.328 CRITICAL WATER QUALITY ZONE.
   (A)   Critical water quality zones shall be established along all creeks and
tributaries with drainage basins greater than 64 acres in size. The zone line
shall be delineated parallel to each such creek or tributary according to the
size of the drainage basin.
      (1)   For minor waterways, the zone line shall be defined by the limits
of the one hundred year floodplain, provided that it shall never be extended
beyond 100 feet on each side from the centerline of the waterway.
      (2)   For intermediate waterways, the zone line shall be defined by the
one hundred year floodplain, provided that it shall never be located greater
than 200 feet nor less than 100 feet on each side from the center line of the
waterway.
      (3)   For major waterways, the zone line shall be defined by the one
hundred year floodplain; provided that it shall never be located greater than
400 feet not less than 200 feet on each side from the center line of the
waterway.
   (B)   The floodplain delineation shall be based on a channel in its
unaltered state, and shall assume fully developed watershed conditions.
   (C)   The critical water quality zone shall remain free of all construction
activity, development and alterations except that the following may be
permitted:
      (1)   Utilities as provided by §
150.328(D) and §
150.328(E).
      (2)   Fences that do not obstruct flood flows.
      (3)   Public and private parks and open space, with development in the
parks and open space limited to trails and outdoor facilities (other than
stables and corrals for animals) for hiking, jogging, nonmotorized biking, and
nature walks when a program of fertilizer, pesticide and herbicide use is
approved by the city.
      (4)   Concrete private drives to allow access to property not otherwise
accessible.
      (5)   Arterial, collector and residential street crossings provided no
major waterways may be crossed.
      (6)   Structures described in §
150.332(F) located on lots zoned and used for single family residential
purposes, provided that the placement of any such allowable structure: (i) does
not require the addition of any fill; (ii) is designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for entry and
exit of floodwaters; (iii) does not impede surface water runoff or drainage
patterns that effect adjoining upstream or downstream properties; (iv) does not
result in increased flooding on upstream or downstream properties; (v) is in
compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code; and (vi) the City
Council has granted a variance or the City Administrator or his/her designee
has granted an administrative approval, as may be required pursuant to §
150.323.
      (7)   Structures for which the City Council has granted a variance
pursuant to §
150.323.
   (D)   All utilities other than wastewater shall be located outside the
critical water quality zone, except for crossings.
   (E)   Wastewater trunk lines and lateral lines shall be located outside the
critical water quality zone whenever possible except for crossings. At the time
of the watershed development permit application review, the city's appointed
designate shall make a report to the City Council on any significant
environmental impact and possible alternatives related to wastewater line
locations in the critical water quality zone. In no case shall any wastewater
line be located less than 100 feet from the center line of a major waterway or
50 feet from the center line of an intermediate waterway except for crossings,
unless approved by the City Council upon consideration of reports by the city
appointed designate, and unless the applicant has shown that installation
outside of this zone is physically prohibitive or environmentally unsound.
§ 150.329 WATER QUALITY TRANSITION ZONE.
   (A)   A water quality transition zone shall be established parallel to all
critical water quality zones, and shall extend from the outer boundaries of the
critical water quality zone for 300 feet along major waterways, 200 feet along
intermediate waterways, and 100 feet along minor waterways.
   (B)   The water quality transition zone shall remain free of all
construction activity, development and alterations except that the following
may be permitted:
      (1)   Utilities as provided by §
150.328(D) and §
150.329(E).
      (2)   Fences that do not obstruct flood flows.
      (3)   Public and private parks and open space, with development in the
parks and open space limited to trails and outdoor facilities (other than
stables and corrals for animals) for hiking, jogging, non motorized biking, and
nature walks when a program of fertilizer, pesticide and herbicide use is
approved by the city.
      (4)   Concrete private drives to allow access to property not otherwise
accessible.
      (5)   Arterial, collector and residential street crossing provided no
major waterways may be crossed.
      (6)   Minor drainage facilities and water quality controls, provided such
facilities or controls are in compliance with the floodplain modification
guidelines section of the City of Austin Environmental Criteria Manual, as
amended, as if they were in the floodplain.
      (7)   Structures described in §
150.332(F) located on existing residential lots for which an administrative
approval has been granted by the city pursuant to §
150.323(G), and development allowed by administrative approval or modified
administrative approval pursuant to §
150.323(E).
   (C)   The minimum size of all lots within or partially within a water
quality transition zone shall be at least one acre, exclusive of all land
within a 25-year floodplain.
   (D)   No development shall occur within the water quality transition zone
unless a variance, administrative approval, or modified administrative approval
has been obtained pursuant to §
150.332(G) or §
150.323 and the property and improvements are in compliance with all other
provisions of this Code.
§ 150.330 UPLAND ZONE.
   (A)   An uplands zone is established to be that portion of land which is not
located within the Critical Water Quality Zone or the Critical Water Transition
Zone.
   (B)   Development limitations including impervious cover shall not exceed
the limits set forth in §
150.332.
   (C)   The minimum size of all lots within the uplands zone shall be at least
one acre.
§ 150.331 BUILDING SITES.
   All lots or tracts of land shall contain an adequate building site prior to
development. An adequate building site shall not contain:
   (A)   Discontinuous segments;
   (B)   Land within the critical water quality zone, except as development is
otherwise allowed pursuant to §
150.323(F) or §
150.323(G) (variances, administrative approvals and modified administrative
approvals);
   (C)   Land within the water quality transition zone, unless a variance,
administrative approval, or modified administrative approval is obtained
pursuant to §
150.332(G) and/or §
150.323(F) or §
150.323(G).
   (D)   Land within a drainage or utility easement;
   (E)   Any stream, pond or permanent water quality controls;
   (F)   Land within building setback lines.
§ 150.332 IMPERVIOUS COVER.
   (A)   Although a certain percentage of impervious cover is discussed and
designated within this section, nothing in this section shall release a person
from meeting the requirements of the zoning, landscape, and other provisions of
this Code.
   (B)   (1)   Impervious cover and calculations thereof shall include, but
shall not be limited the following:
         (a)   Alleys, streets, and any kind of pavement driveways, and parking
areas used for vehicular purposes. For roadways or streets located within the
boundaries of a proposed subdivision, the area to be included in an impervious
cover calculation will be based on roadways widths of up to and including 24
feet. Requirements for sizing water quality controls or detention facilities
for runoff from such roadways are not affected by this provision.
         (b)   Buildings, concrete, and other impermeable construction covering
the natural land surface.
         (c)   Roadways or streets located adjacent to a development area shall
be included in the calculation of impervious cover as described in the City of
Austin Environmental Criteria Manual, as amended, except that this provision
does not apply to those roadways that either already have water quality
controls in place or water quality controls have been previously approved for
construction by the city council and construction of such controls timely
occurs as approved before the earlier of expiration of the permit or one year
after the issuance of the subject watershed development permit.
         (d)   Site area used for the storage of scrap, auto, and metal
salvage.
      (2)   Impervious cover and calculations thereof shall not include the
following when located on property zoned and used for single family residential
purposes:
         (a)   Water surface area of a swimming pool, hot tub, wading pond,
fountain, bird bath, fish pond, and other similar city approved structure.
         (b)   Uncovered decks meeting the following standards:
            1.   The deck must be constructed on piers or posts to allow for
the unabated flow or passage of water underneath the deck;
            2.   The deck floor must be constructed of slatted material that
provides for a minimum of quarter-inch drainage spaces between the slats; and
            3.   The deck must be constructed over pervious cover.
         (c)   Up to 350 square feet of city approved rainwater harvesting
systems whose sole purpose is for the collection, treatment, and/or storage of
rainwater for on-site use.
         (d)   Walkways and uncovered patios used for landscaping and
pedestrian use only that are placed on pervious material and allow for the
unobstructed passage of water between or through the material used in the
construction thereof, as permitted pursuant to regulations adopted by the
Director of Public Works for pervious structures.
         (e)   Pads for air conditioning units provided they are less than ten
square feet in area per unit.
   (C)   In calculating projected impervious cover, all existing impervious
surfaces shall be included in the calculations and charged against impervious
cover allowances. This provision does not include any “natural” imperviousness,
such as rock outcrops, or any surfaces excluded from impervious cover pursuant
to the terms of divisions (D) or (E) below, provided there is full compliance
with any pollution reduction measures required pursuant to such divisions.
Pedestrian sidewalks located within the public right-of- way and approved water
quality controls/treatment devices and other drainage facilities are not
impervious cover for the purposes of impervious cover calculations. In
addition, trails in green spaces and conservation areas no more than 11 feet
wide constructed of natural soil, granite gravel, and stabilized soil
aggregate, with concrete or stone edging no more than six inches wide on each
side, are exempted from impervious cover calculations. Pervious concrete may
also be exempted from impervious cover calculations in trail areas prone to
high erosion.
   (D)   Roads, parking area, buildings and other construction are to be
assumed as 100% impermeable unless specific proposed alternate surfaces are
authorized as being less than such by the City Council.
   (E)   Properties in Sunset Valley are limited to 18% impervious cover or
less.
   (F)   Residential impervious cover exemption allowance.
      (1)   To assist property owners with small residential improvements the
city has considered certain exemptions on residential properties. Residential
properties zoned and used for single family residential purposes will be
allowed the following exemptions from impervious cover totals:
 
Impervious Cover Exemptions
Lot Size                      Total Exemption in Square Feet
Up to 1/4 acre                200
Between 1/4 acre and 1/2 acre 400
Between 1/2 acre and 3/4 acre 600
Between 3/4 acre and 1 acre   800
Greater than 1 acre           800 + an additional 50 feet per 1/4 acre
 
      (2)   Exempted items shall fall within the following categories:
         (a)   Pedestrian sidewalk or walkway that is:
            1.   Not greater than three and one-half feet in width;
            2.   Connects to the primary single-family residential structure;
and
            3.   Has a minimum of one foot of pervious cover on each side.
         (b)   Covered decks or gazebos meeting the following specifications:
            1.   The deck or gazebo must be constructed on piers or posts to
allow for the substantially unobstructed flow or passage of water underneath
the deck or gazebo;
            2.   The deck or gazebo floor must be constructed of slatted
material that provides for a minimum of one-fourth inch drainage spaces between
the slats;
            3.   The deck or gazebo must be constructed over pervious cover;
and
            4.   Each wall of the deck or gazebo, excluding those sides of the
structure adjoining a primary single-family residential structure, does not
exceed 20% of the area measured from the top of the overhead cover to the top
of the floor.
         (c)   Coping with a maximum width of 18 inches on: a swimming pool,
hot tub, wading pond, fountain, bird bath, fishpond, and other similar
structures.
         (d)   Solar or wind power structures and facilities used for the
primary purpose of providing on-site energy.
         (e)   An accessory building meeting the following specifications:
            1.   Structure is elevated to allow for the substantially
unobstructed flow or passage of water underneath the structure.
            2.   Structure is constructed over pervious cover.
      (3)   Nothing in this division shall exempt a lot or accessory structure
from the requirements of Chapter 2 of the Land Development Code, including but
not limited to the limitations on the number of structures allowed per lot or
setback requirements
   (G)   Variance allowing additional development in the water quality
transition zone. The provisions of this division apply only to development of
property not described in §
150.327. The City Council may grant a variance allowing development of
commercial, multi-family, and developments of single family residential lots
comprised of more than two lots in the water quality transition zone as
provided in this division, and as permitted pursuant to §
150.323(A).
      (1)   A person desiring to develop in the water quality transition zone
may submit an application for a variance at the time of submission of the
preliminary site plan, and the application shall be acted upon by the City
Council at the same time that the preliminary site plan is acted upon.
      (2)   The granting of a variance under this division shall not be
construed as relieving the grantee from obtaining a watershed development
permit under applicable ordinances or this Code, nor shall the granting of a
variance be construed as committing the Council to approving the grantee's
application for a watershed development permit.
      (3)   A variance may be granted only if the following standards are met:
         (a)   Impervious cover in the water quality transition zone shall be
no more than 8% of the total portion of the lot that is in the transition zone.
The impervious cover within the water quality transition zone shall be part of,
and not in addition to, the total amount of impervious cover allowed on the lot
as a whole.
         (b)   A minimum setback of at least 75 feet shall be maintained
between the critical water quality zone and developed, impervious, or pollutant
source areas, or areas with disturbed vegetation or soil in the water quality
transition zone. Within the aquifer recharge zone, a 100-foot minimum setback
shall also be preserved between developed, impervious, or pollutant source
areas, or areas with disturbed vegetation or soil in the water quality
transition zone and any identified recharge features.
         (c)   Impervious cover, water quality controls, and drainage shall be
designed to allow maximum infiltration of clean rainfall runoff. The applicant
shall provide an increased average annual infiltration equal to 125% of the
infiltration volume lost due to development within the transition zone. The
increase must be shown compared to the average annual infiltration volume
without the proposed water quality transition zone encroachment. Increased
infiltration can be achieved using retention/re-irrigation of stormwater
runoff, infiltration basins, disconnected impervious cover, and/or engineered
vegetative buffers. Infiltration estimates must be based either on soil data
for the site published by the Soil Conservation Service (U.S. Department of
Agriculture, 1974), or on field measurements of the infiltrative capacity of
the surface soil, using such devices as a ring infiltrometer. Subsurface
infiltration testing methods for septic systems are not acceptable.
         (d)   Water quality controls shall be designed to be at least 25% more
efficient at reducing the average annual pollutant load for total suspended
solids, total nitrogen, total phosphorous and total organic carbon or chemical
oxygen demand than water quality controls required for development in the
Upland Zone.
         (e)   Where development encroaches into the water quality transition
zone, associated turf and landscaped areas requiring fertilizer, pesticides,
herbicides, insecticides, or fungicides for maintenance shall be prohibited.
Disturbances of the natural vegetation and tree cover shall be prohibited
except within the building footprint and the surrounding construction
disturbance area. The surrounding construction disturbance area within the
water quality transition zone shall be limited to a maximum radius of 20 feet
from the building footprint, unless the developer can demonstrate that a
greater, specified radius is necessary and would not produce greater adverse
effects than a 20-foot radius.
         (f)   A variance under this division may be granted only if the
property to be developed in the water quality transition zone has not already
been used for transferring development intensity credits.
      (4)   The conditions of a variance permitted under this division shall be
imposed on the property as a restrictive covenant running with the land, in a
form approved by the City Attorney, and recorded in the real property records
of the Travis County, Texas once a final site plan is approved by the City
Council.
(Ord. 211109-B, passed 11-9-2021)
§ 150.333 IMPERVIOUS COVER LIMITS FOR NON-COMMERCIAL, NON-RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENT.
   The impervious cover limits set forth in this chapter for commercial and
multi-family development shall apply to development for governmental, utility,
and institutional purposes.
§ 150.334 STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS; GENERAL.
   (A)   The City Engineer shall inspect all land grading, drainage, detention
and water quality controls to determine compliance with the released site plan.
   (B)   When construction of these facilities is complete, the design engineer
shall submit a concurrence letter to the City Engineer stating that in the
engineer's opinion, the project is in substantial conformance with the approved
construction plans. A final inspection will then be performed by the City
Engineer. If all applicable Code provisions and construction plan requirements
are met, a Certificate of Occupancy will be released by the accountable
official.
   (C)   Final acceptance of facilities by the city, or approval of
Certificates of Occupancy shall not be issued until a water quality control
inspection of the facility and certificate of compliance is completed by the
city.
§ 150.335 EROSION SEDIMENTATION CONTROL AND CONSTRUCTION SEQUENCING; DUST
CONTROL.
   (A)   Erosion and sedimentation controls in accordance with the
specifications established in the Environmental Criteria Manual, as amended,
are required for all construction and development, including without limitation
commercial, multi-family, single-family, and two-family construction, the
construction of all roads, utilities, parks, golf courses, water quality
controls, detention basins, and all other activities utilizing clearing,
trenching, grading or similar construction techniques.
   (B)   Projects shall not be considered complete until restoration has been
made, the approved permanent vegetation established and installation certified
for acceptance by the city after receipt of the engineer's concurrence letter.
   (C)   Significant changes to approved erosion control and construction
sequencing plans may be made in the field after two days written notice to the
permit holder if the city inspector deems the control or sequencing
inappropriate or inadequate, and has confirmed those findings with the city.
Minor changes which result in an upgrading of erosion controls or simply
reflect the progression of construction on a site may be accomplished in the
field without such written approval.
   (D)   Development shall require a temporary erosion and sedimentation
control plan and water quality plan certified by a registered professional
engineer and approved by the City Engineer which will control off-site
sedimentation during the construction of the project by temporary structural
controls, site management practices, or other approved methods until permanent
revegetation is certified complete. The temporary erosion control plan must be
phased to be effective at all stages of construction and must be adjusted,
maintained, and repaired as necessary. The water quality plan shall be approved
in conjunction with the site plan approval. In addition, a dust control plan
approved by the City Engineer shall be included with the other plans required
herein.
      (1)   At the time the developer submits a final site plan, the developer
also shall submit the erosion and sedimentation control, water quality, and
dust control plans.
         (a)   The plan must specify site layout, grading, and drainage
patterns, locations of all land disturbance, silt fences, spoils disposal
areas, delineation of limits of construction, construction staging areas,
construction entrances, temporary and permanent erosion and sedimentation
controls, and temporary and permanent water quality controls.
         (b)   The plan must contain a discussion of project phasing and
measures for assuring that proper erosion protection is in place.
         (c)   The plan must contain measures to limit airborne particulates
and dust when dry and/or windy conditions create potential air quality
degradation.
      (2)   Prior to clearing activities at the site, all permanent water
capture-type controls must be excavated and drainage appurtenances constructed
such that these facilities will serve as temporary construction-phase
sedimentation traps prior to final finishing and revegetation of the structure.
      (3)   Silt control measures must be placed in the unfinished water
quality structure to assure that sediment does not flow unfiltered from the
unfinished facility.
      (4)   The contractor's representative responsible for compliance with
construction-phase sediment and erosion control rules must perform the
following activities:
         (a)   Attend the pre-construction meeting at the site to present
proposed temporary erosion control measures to the City Engineer and/or the
city's representative.
         (b)   Prior to any site clearing, conduct an inspection of all
temporary erosion control measures with the City Engineer and/or the city's
representative.
         (c)   During or immediately after al significant rainfall events,
visit the site to evaluate the performance of temporary erosion control
measures.
         (d)   Following each significant rainfall event, schedule a meeting
with the City Engineer or the City's Engineering representative to discuss the
performance, ongoing adequacy and required upgrades of the site's temporary
erosion control measures.
         (e)   During dry or windy conditions creating potential dust migration
off-site, must implement the dust suppression measures described in the
erosion/sedimentation plan.
      (5)   All drainage from potentially disturbed areas must drain through a
properly installed silt fence prior to exiting the site. Silt fences must be
constructed in strict compliance with design specification detailed in the City
of Austin's Environmental Criteria Manual. Silt fence construction must use
proper excavation and anchoring depth and minimal disturbance and complete
compaction of disturbed areas adjacent to the silt fence, as described in the
City of Austin Environmental Criteria Manual. Silt Fences must be properly
secured to steel posts and woven wire supports such that there are no openings
at the junctions of silt fence material. The contractor shall only use new or
completely intact silt fence material. No worn, torn, or punctured silt fence
material is permitted. When accumulated silt behind a silt fence exceeds six
inches in depth, it must be removed and properly disposed of. After completion
of the project and certification of complete stabilization of site vegetation,
the silt fence may be removed; however, the disturbed ground must be thoroughly
compacted such that there is no loose soil along the former path of the silt
fence.
   (E)   The following general standards shall apply to all development:
      (1)   Clearing of existing vegetation is prohibited unless the city
determines the clearing is pursuant to and in accordance with a released site
plan or a released subdivision construction plan;
      (2)   Limited clearing of existing vegetation or other specified
development activities necessary for surveying or geological testing is
authorized before release of a site plan or subdivision construction plans to
the minimum extent necessary to survey or conduct geological tests. Areas
cleared for surveying or testing purposes shall not exceed a width of 15 feet.
No tree with a diameter greater than four inches shall be removed in connection
with surveying or testing.
      (3)   Clearing of existing vegetation on land used for an agricultural
use is prohibited if an application for approvals required to develop that land
for other than an agricultural use is pending or such an approval has been
granted, including without limitation an application for approval of a
preliminary subdivision plan, a final subdivision plat, a site plan, or zoning
as a district where the agricultural use is not permitted. The city may waive
this prohibition if the applicant can show that the clearing has a bona fide
agricultural purpose and is unrelated to the proposed development or sale of
the land for nonagricultural uses.
      (4)   The location for clearing for temporary storage of spoils or
construction equipment shall be shown on the released site plan. Any such
location shall be in accordance with the City of Austin Environmental Criteria
Manual, as amended. Topsoil shall be protected against erosion during and after
the site grading operations. Where practical, the existing vegetation shall be
left in place.
      (5)   The length of time between rough-cutting and final surfacing of a
street shall not exceed 12 months. If an applicant does not meet this deadline,
the city shall provide written notice to the applicant and to the record owner
of the subject property that the city may complete the street or revegetate the
disturbed area at the applicant's expense unless the work is completed no later
than 60 days after the date of notice.
      (6)   Roadway clearing width shall not exceed the width of the dedicated
right-of-way.
      (7)   Vegetation within the critical water quality zone and the water
quality transition zone may not be disturbed except for purposes consistent
with development activity permitted by §§
150.328 and
150.329.
      (8)   All constructed and altered drainage channels shall be stabilized
and vegetated immediately after final grading.
      (9)   The city shall submit a copy of the erosion and sedimentation
control measures to the Barton Springs/Edwards Aquifer Conservation District
for review and comment.
§ 150.336 WATER QUALITY CONTROLS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Except as provided otherwise with regard to water quality controls
permitted pursuant to §
150.323(F) and §
150.323(G), water quality controls and the drainage systems to the controls
shall be designed, constructed and maintained at a minimum in accordance with
the specifications established by the City of Austin Environmental Criteria
Manual. Construction of water quality control facilities must begin not later
than 18 months after approval of a final site plan providing for such
facilities, except as otherwise required in the terms of a variance,
administrative approval or modified administrative approval. The applicable
watershed development permit shall expire if construction is not commenced
before such deadline to commence construction.
      (2)   Water quality controls shall be required according to the criteria
established by this section, except as provided otherwise with regard to water
quality controls permitted pursuant to §
150.323(F) and §
150.323(G), as evaluated for each development application. When water quality
controls are required, they shall be shown on the slope map, preliminary plats,
preliminary site plan, land use site plan, construction site plan and/or the
subdivision construction plans.
         (a)   For water quality controls located in series, the second or
later control following sedimentation, extended detention, sedimentation/
filtration or similar structure shall not require an impervious liner.
         (b)   Water quality controls shall be required for golf courses,
playfields and similar improved recreational uses where fertilizers,
herbicides, or pesticides are applied.
         (c)   Water quality controls are required for all development
regardless of the level of impervious cover. Except as provided otherwise with
regard to water quality controls permitted pursuant to §
150.323(F) and §
150.323(G), such controls will be designed to meet the standards of the City of
Austin Environmental Manual, as amended, provided that the design therein
achieves the greatest pollutant removal efficiency for the particular site
conditions.
         (d)   Vegetative buffers may be used to treat runoff from private
driveways and parking areas for single family residential use, or for
sidewalks, roof tops, golf courses, playfields, or landscaped areas receiving
applications of chemical pesticides or fertilizers. Vegetative buffers shall
not be used to treat public, commercial, or multi-family roadways, driveways,
or parking areas unless water quality pretreatment is provided. Vegetative
buffers shall be designed to meet the applicable standards of the City of
Sunset Valley, as well as applicable requirements of the Lower Colorado River
Authority (LCRA), City of Austin, and Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality, except as provided otherwise with regard to a particular application
of a vegetative buffer pursuant to §
150.323(F) and §
150.323(G) vegetative buffers must meet or exceed the standards set forth in §
150.340
   (B)   Design criteria. The interpretation of the requirements set forth in
this chapter shall be made by the City's Engineer or designate, unless
specified otherwise by the Council. Water quality controls shall be designed
and constructed in conformance with the City of Austin Environmental Criteria
Manual, as amended, except as provided otherwise with regard to water quality
controls permitted pursuant to §
150.323(F) and §
150.323(G), and be approved by the City's Engineer or other designate of the
Council.
      (1)   Water quality control facilities designed in the Water Quality
Transition Zone must be placed as close to the Upland Zone line as technically
practical.
      (2)   Plans are to be submitted to the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality for approval, where required pursuant to state statutes and
regulations.
      (3)   All commercial/office/multi-family construction and all single-
family and two-family developments with four lots or more consisting of less
than five acres per lot shall provide water quality controls that shall comply
with the City of Austin's Environmental Manual, as amended.
      (4)   (a)   Water quality control facilities required pursuant to §
150.336(B)(3) shall be situated and constructed to capture runoff from
residential, commercial and multi-family developments and associated streets
(including boundary streets).
         (b)   The water quality controls and drainage into the water quality
control basins shall be designed to capture and isolate the first flush of
runoff as required in §
150.336(A)(3). All subsequent runoff in excess of the design capacity of the
water quality basins shall bypass the water quality facilities and remain
segregated in a detention basin up to the designed capacity specified in the
City of Austin Drainage Criteria Manual, as amended.
      (5)   The design of all permanent water quality control sedimentation
basins shall allow an average residence time of 24 hours for the water quality
volume determined in section §
150.336(A)(3).
      (6)   All basins shall have impervious liners to prevent seepage to
groundwater, except as provided in §
150.336(A)(1) or except as provided otherwise with regard to rain gardens
permitted pursuant to §
150.323(F) and §
150.323(G).
      (7)   Input to and release from detention basins shall utilize grass-
lined swales and/or overland flow dispersion measures in conformance with §
150.344.
      (8)   No portion of a water quality control basin shall be located within
the critical water quality zone, except as provided otherwise with regard to
rain gardens permitted pursuant to §
150.323(F) and §
150.323(G).
   (C)   Maintenance and compliance.
      (1)   (a)   All water quality control facilities and their appurtenances
required for development of a commercial lot shall be maintained either by the
property owner, or by the city in accordance with a contractual agreement
between the city and the property owner. If the property owner will perform the
maintenance, a plan for operation and maintenance shall be submitted to the
city along with construction plans and must be approved by the City's Engineer
or designate.
         (b)   Water quality control facilities for a commercial lot
development shall also require an annual renewal permit in accordance with §
150.336(D)(2).
      (2)   (a)   All water quality control facilities and their appurtenances
required for single family and two family residential development shall be
maintained by the city after final acceptance, except where otherwise provided
in the terms of any variance given in connection with an approval, and except
as otherwise provided in divisions (F)(1) [development up to 14% impervious
cover in the WQTZ of single family residential property], (F)(5) [development
up to 14% impervious cover in the WQTZ of single family residential property
using other mitigation] and (G) [single family mitigation measures in the WQTZ]
of §
150.323. The city shall not be required to accept for maintenance any water
quality control facility which does not meet the criteria established in the
City of Austin Environmental Criteria Manual as amended.
         (b)   Water quality control facilities and their appurtenances to be
maintained by the city shall be dedicated to the city by easement or fee simple
as the city may require.
      (3)   All water quality controls and their appurtenances shall be
appropriately maintained in accordance with the maintenance standards
established by the City of Austin Environmental Criteria Manual, as amended,
except as provided otherwise with regard to water quality controls permitted
pursuant to §
150.323(F) and §
150.323(G).
      (4)   Duly authorized inspectors of the city shall have the right of
entry on the land or premises where property owners are required to maintain
drainage or water quality control facilities, at reasonable times, for the
purpose of inspection of the maintenance required. Where facilities are found
not to be in good condition, the city shall request in writing that the
property owner comply and shall specify the measures required to be taken. If,
within 30 days of the notice the maintenance required is not accomplished, the
city shall either:
         (a)   Cause the necessary maintenance to be accomplished and assess
the property owner for the city's actual cost; or
         (b)   Bring an action for mandatory injunction to require the property
owner to accomplish the necessary maintenance.
      (5)   All drainage easements across private property shall contain the
necessary language to permit the required water flow, allow and require the
maintenance set out herein, and permit the necessary access by the city for
inspection and maintenance. All these shall be properly noted on the site plan
and/or subdivision plat.
      (6)   (a)   The required maintenance on a commercial lot by a property
owner and the power of the city shall be noted in a restrictive covenant
agreement to be filed with the Travis County Deed Records.
         (b)   The applicant shall designate one person or legal entity, with a
current address, to which notice shall be given pursuant to this division.
      (7)   An inspection and renewal permit fee for water quality basins, as
specified in the fee schedules adopted by ordinance or resolution, shall be
paid at the time of development approval.
      (8)   A water quality facility located wholly on city property and
serving nothing but city property or a public works project shall be maintained
by the city.
      (9)   A water quality facility serving both city property and private
property zoned nonresidential or devoted to nonresidential use shall be
maintained by the owner of the private property served by the facility, unless
the city has otherwise entered into an agreement providing for maintenance of
the facility by the city.
   (D)   Inspection and renewal permit.
      (1)   At least once each year the city shall inspect the premises of each
water quality control required to be maintained by the owner, except that in
connection with a water quality control provided pursuant to §
150.323(F) and §
150.323(G), the city may, but shall not be required to perform such inspection.
      (2)   Any person or entity owning or operating commercial development in
the city or ETJ shall obtain and maintain in force an annual renewal permit for
the required water quality controls, unless the owner and the city have entered
into a contractual agreement whereby the controls will be maintained by the
city. A water quality control renewal permit shall be granted or renewed after:
         (a)   The applicant has filed with the city a maintenance plan in
accordance with the City of Austin Environmental Criteria Manual, as amended.
         (b)   The applicant has illustrated compliance with §
150.336(D)(2)(a) above.
         (c)   The applicant has paid the permit fee as established by city
ordinance and supplied the necessary information to verify that the controls
are in proper operating condition.
      (3)   Upon transfer of ownership of a commercial or multi-family
development, the new owners/operators shall obtain a new permit, accept
responsibility for the water quality controls at the time of transfer of the
development, and document the transfer of the permit on a form provided by the
city on or before the date of transfer of the development.
      (4)   No permit shall be granted or renewed until or unless the permit
fee has been paid and the facility is in operating condition as designed. The
city shall inspect and accept a report from a registered engineer verifying
that the water quality control is in operating condition as designed. The fee
shall be paid simultaneously with the filing of the application. No refund or
rebate of a permit fee shall be allowed based on denial of the permit,
suspension or revocation of the permit, or discontinuance of use of a water
quality control. The permit fee shall be sufficient to cover the cost of
inspection and review of the report from owner.
      (5)   Quarterly, beginning with the three-month anniversary of the
issuance of the water quality control facility operating permit, permittee must
submit documentation that the facility is in proper operating condition,
including photographs of the facility. The photos should be dated, and should
show, at a minimum, the inlet structure, outlet structures and the condition of
any vegetation. The fourth quarter documentation should be submitted together
with the annual report required for permit renewal.
      (6)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this division (D) regarding
permit renewals, the provisions of this division (D)(6) shall apply to renewals
of permits for water quality controls permitted pursuant to §
150.323(F) and §
150.323(G). A renewal permit shall be obtained on or before each anniversary
date of the initial permit on a form provided by the city for such purpose. At
the time of sale of the property on which such water quality control is
located, a new permit must be obtained, and in connection therewith, the city
shall perform an inspection for compliance with applicable design and
performance standards. It shall be the responsibility of both the selling and
purchasing owner to obtain such renewal permit and to accommodate such
inspection by the city.
   (E)   Fiscal security.
      (1)   Except with regard to water quality controls permitted pursuant to
§
150.323(F) and §
150.323(G), fiscal security shall be required for development in the city and
the ETJ to ensure that the water quality controls required are functioning
properly. Fiscal security shall be based on an estimate prepared by the
developers engineer and reviewed and approved by the city. The estimate shall
include, but is not limited to, the cost to construct the temporary and
permanent water quality control facilities for the particular site development.
      (2)   The fiscal security shall be returned to the applicant no earlier
than one year after completion of the development, and only upon the receipt of
a certified engineering concurrence letter verifying that the controls are
constructed in conformance with the approved design as verified after
inspection by the city.
      (3)   In the event the annual inspection required under this chapter
reveals that the water quality controls are not being properly maintained or
repaired, fiscal security shall be required in connection with the issuance of
the next annual inspection and renewal permit. The amount of the fiscal
security shall be 10% of the amount which had been required for the initial
construction of the water quality control facilities. This fiscal security
shall be retained by the city for a minimum of two years to a maximum of five
years; however, the city retains the right to extend or reimpose the
requirement for fiscal security at any time inspections reveal that the water
quality controls are not being maintained or repaired.
§ 150.337 ADDITIONAL POLLUTION REDUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   All development shall include the following additional pollution reduction
techniques:
   (A)   No untreated run-off arising from development shall be allowed to flow
over critical environmental features that are recharge features.
   (B)   No untreated run-off arising from development, shall be allowed in
defined channels containing recharge features provided that for single family
residential lots adjacent to transition zones, untreated run-off may be
discharged through the transition zone provided that the transition zone meets
the criteria in the City of Austin Environmental Criteria Manual, as amended,
for vegetative filter strips.
   (C)   Developments must provide detention for the two-year storm, unless it
is determined by the city that the development is a participant in a regional
stormwater detention facility, or centralized detention facility, or control of
the two-year storm will result in identifiable adverse flooding as determined
by a Registered Professional Engineer and confirmed by the City Engineer.
   (D)   Commercial development shall also include two of the following four
pollution reduction measures:
      (1)   Xeriscape with a fertilizer reduction element and an integrated
pest management plan;
      (2)   A street sweeping program or covered parking with parking drainage
isolated from stormwater;
      (3)   Construction restricted to 0% to 10% slopes;
      (4)   The design includes separation of roof run-off from other filtered
run-off volumes and reirrigates this on the site.
§ 150.338 LANDSCAPE.
   (A)   Landscape shall be preserved in its natural state to the greatest
extent feasible and shall comply with the requirements this Code, including
compliance with §§ 150.770 through 150.788 regarding natural areas protection.
   (B)   Proposed structures and landscaping shall relate harmoniously to the
terrain, to the natural landscape, and to existing buildings and roads in the
vicinity that have a visual relationship to the proposed structure.
§ 150.339 ECOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS.
   Development shall comply with the following standards, as well as other
provisions of this Code addressing ecological considerations:
   (A)   There shall be minimal impairment of the regenerative capacity of
aquifers and other ground water and surface water supplies. Plugging, filling,
or sealing any significant recharge feature, as that term is defined in this
Code, is prohibited.
   (B)   There shall be minimal adverse impact upon critical areas, such as
streams, slopes greater than 15%, highly erodible soils and mature stands of
native vegetation.
   (C)   No proposed structure shall impair creek flow or cause lateral back up
of water.
   (D)   Pesticide and fertilizer management plan.
      (1)   A pesticide and fertilizer management plan shall be submitted
providing information regarding proper use, storage, and disposal of pesticides
and fertilizers. The plan shall indicate likely pesticides and fertilizers to
be used. The plan shall include two lists of pesticides and fertilizers: (1)
those which, due to their chemical characteristics, potentially contribute
significantly to water quality degradation; and (2) those which, due to the
chemical characteristics, potentially would result in minimal water quality
degradation.
      (2)   Landscaped areas should use limited amounts of fertilizer. Nitrogen
within the fertilizer should be slow-release formulations: composted organic
mulches, urea formaldehyde (UF), methylene urea, isobutylidene diuriea (IBDU),
and sulfur coated urea (Pitt, 1994). The mass of nitrogen applied to each area
per year should not exceed the estimated nitrogen utilization rate of the
vegetation. The following table provides a guide of typical nitrogen
utilization rates for the Texas Hill Country:
 
Vegetation            Nitrogen Uptake (pound/acre/yr.) Reference
Lawn grass            130                              Leps & Duble (no date)
Ryegrass              200 - 280                        U.S. EPA (1981)
Coastal Bermuda Grass 400 - 675                        U.S. EPA (1981)
 
   (E)   Water conservation plan. As part of the requirements for development,
the applicant shall submit a water conservation plan. The water conservation
plan shall include as a minimum the following:
      (1)   Identify of all water users;
      (2)   Monitoring program to identify and repair water pipe leaks;
      (3)   Installation of water-efficient plumbing fixtures; and
      (4)   Description of a water-efficient landscape program, including
options for landscape irrigation using rooftop runoff (rainwater harvesting).
§ 150.340 STANDARDS FOR VEGETATIVE BUFFER WATER QUALITY CONTROLS.
   The following standards shall govern the design and implementation of
vegetative buffer water quality controls, except as otherwise provided with
regard to vegetative buffer water quality controls permitted pursuant to §
150.323(F) and §
150.323(G).
   (A)   Minimum soil depths in the vegetative filter zone must be 18 inches or
more. Soil depths shall be determined from hand or mechanical borings at
representative locations at a density of at least one per two acres in the
vegetative filter zone.
   (B)   The vegetative filter will be constructed along the entire length of
the contributing drainage area and shall receive runoff as sheet flow.
   (C)   Flows from impervious surfaces must be delivered to the vegetative
filter in an even, diffuse, shallow, overland flow manner. If necessary, a flow
spreader meeting the requirements of the City of Austin Environmental Criteria
Manual will be provided to distribute flow evenly across the top of the strip.
   (D)   The runoff flow path across the vegetative filter shall be as long as
possible, within topographic site constraints.
   (E)   Native, existing vegetation in the vegetative filter shall be
preserved to the greatest extent possible.
   (F)   Existing vegetation shall be supplemented with grasses and ground
cover as necessary to prevent erosion. Juniper trees must be trimmed and native
grasses established beneath. Supplemental vegetation should be selected to be
drought resistant, sturdy under short periods of inundation and shall require
minimum fertilization for vigorous growth.
   (G)   Fertilizer application to the vegetative filter at a rate greater than
75 pounds/acre per year must be preceded by an assessment of the nitrogen
requirements of the vegetation and the measurement of nitrogen concentration in
the soil.
   (H)   The maximum slope of the vegetative filter must be 5% or less.
Alternatively, a demonstration, sealed by a registered professional engineer,
may be presented to show that flow velocities through the filter during the 10-
year design storm will not be erosive.
   (I)   Flow velocities through the vegetative filter shall not exceed one
foot/second for the one-year design storm.
   (J)   The average annual hydraulic load to the vegetative filter shall not
exceed 20 inches per year.
   (K)   Vegetative filters shall not be used for construction-phase erosion
and sedimentation controls.
   (L)   Vegetative filter strips for commercial or multifamily development
will be operated and maintained either by the City of Sunset Valley or by the
owner. If maintained by the owner, an annual operating permit to ensure the
continued effectiveness of the flow spreader and that there is no erosion or
gullying, and the presence of adequate vegetation to prevent erosion shall be
required.
   (M)   Vegetative filter strips for residential development will be
maintained by the City of Sunset Valley.
   (N)   The vegetative filter strips shall be inspected visually by the owner
at least once each year and following every rainfall event of eight inches or
more within 24 hours. Inspection will include, at a minimum:
      (1)   Examination of vegetation for indications of distress.
      (2)   Examination of the soil and topography for indications of erosion
or flow channeling.
      (3)   Examination of the entire length of all diversion berms and level
spreaders.
   (O)   Any changes in vegetation which reduce the effectiveness of the
vegetative buffers strip will be repaired. If repeated channeling and erosion
of the vegetative filter occur, it may be necessary to supplement or replace
the filter with structural controls.
§ 150.341 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a water quality control
facility subject to the requirements of this subchapter without first obtaining
an annual operating permit.
   (B)   Any person to whom a water quality control facility operating permit
has been granted commits a violation of this subchapter if such person fails to
observe and perform any term or condition stated in the permit, approved
maintenance plan, or in any other document submitted in order to secure the
permit.
   (C)   The owner of any land or water quality control facility where anything
in violation of this subchapter is constructed or operated, and any architect,
builder, contractor, agent, laboratory, independent inspector, or any other
person employed in connection therewith commits a violation of this Division if
he or she knowingly aids, assists, or contributes to the Commission of such
violation.
§ 150.342 ADOPTING DRAINAGE CRITERIA MANUAL.
   (A)   The Drainage Criteria Manual, First Edition, January, 1977, and
amendments thereto, as published by the City of Austin, Engineering Department
is hereby designated and adopted as the drainage criteria and policy of and for
the City of Sunset Valley and within all areas subject to the City of Sunset
Valley's Extra-Territorial Jurisdiction.
   (B)   The following listed portions of the Drainage Criteria Manual are
deleted and shall not become a part of the drainage criteria and policy of the
City of Sunset Valley: Paragraph IX, p. 3 is deleted, and the Appendix shall be
and hereby is deleted.
   (C)   Whenever the standards and specifications of this chapter conflict
with another provision of the Land Development Code or city ordinance, the most
stringent or restrictive provision shall govern.
§ 150.343 DRAINAGE; GENERAL.
   (A)   The interpretation of the requirements set forth in this chapter shall
be made by the City's Engineer or designate, unless specified otherwise by the
Council. The developer shall be responsible for the conveyance of all storm
drainage flowing through or abutting the subject property, including drainage
directed to the property by prior development as well as that naturally flowing
by reason of topography.
   (B)   Where new drainage improvements are required along the boundary of a
site, the owner proposing development shall be responsible for designing and
constructing all the required improvements at or before the time of
development, including the dedication of all necessary rights-of-way or
easements necessary to accommodate the improvements. Where the developer
proposes to develop only a portion of the property, only the drainage
improvements for the portion being developed shall be required to be installed,
except as drainage improvements outside the portion being developed are deemed
necessary by the city for proper drainage of the portion being developed.
§ 150.344 OVERLAND FLOW.
   (A)   Drainage patterns should be designed to prevent erosion, maintain
infiltration and recharge of local seeps and springs, and attenuate the harm of
contaminants collected and transported by stormwater. Overland sheet flow and
natural drainage features and patterns shall be maintained to the greatest
extent reasonably possible and the dispersion of run-off back to sheet flow
shall be the primary objective of drainage design where possible, depending on
volumes and velocities of run-off for the development, as opposed to
concentrating flows in storm sewers and drainage ditches.
   (B)   Construction of enclosed storm sewers and impervious channel linings
are permitted only when the city on the basis of competent engineering
evidence, concludes that such storm sewers or impervious linings are protective
of water quality.
   (C)   If storm sewers are deemed necessary as specified above, the applicant
shall design the drainage system to mitigate its harmful impact on water
quality by using structural devices or other methods to prevent erosion and
dissipate discharges from outlets wherever practicable, and by loading
discharges to maximize overland flow through buffer zones or grass line swales.
§ 150.345 DRAINAGE FACILITIES.
   (A)   The responsibility of the developer shall extend to the provision of
adequate off-site drainage facilities and improvements to accommodate the full
effects of the development of said property.
   (B)   When the developer certifies by affidavit that a bona fide attempt to
acquire property rights to meet off-site drainage requirements was not
successful, the city may assist at its discretion in the acquisition of
necessary property rights to provide for the construction of off-site drainage
improvements. In such cases, the developer shall make adequate guarantees that
he will stand the full cost of acquiring said property rights and constructing
the off-site improvements and facilities.
§ 150.346 DESIGN CRITERIA.
   (A)   Unless otherwise specified herein, the design of all storm drainage
facilities shall at least meet the requirements of the City of Austin Drainage
Criteria Manual.
   (B)   Computation of runoff shall be based on a fully developed drainage
area, or watershed, in accordance with the minimum provisions of the City of
Austin drainage criteria. The drainage system shall be designed to convey the
theoretical two, ten and 25-year storm as predicted in the Drainage Criteria
Manual, as amended. The design shall further provide for system overflows from
larger storms up to the intensity of the 100-year storm without increasing the
risk of flood damages to development.
      (1)   Critical environmental features shall have a standard setback of
150 feet around said feature. An administrative variance may be granted by the
City Engineer for a 50 feet setback on the downstream side only of said
feature.
      (2)   The rate of runoff after construction shall not exceed the site's
runoff rate prior to construction. Rate of runoff shall be computed on a two,
ten and 25-year storm peak flow using the City of Austin Drainage Criteria
Manual, as amended.
      (3)   Surface drainage channels shall be designed to reduce velocity,
minimize potential erosion and to maximize the bottom width to flow depth
ratio, in accordance with the following criteria:
         (a)   Channel cross-sections shall be trapezoidal in configuration.
         (b)   Side slopes of channels shall be no steeper than four horizontal
to one vertical.
         (c)   For a six-month design storm assuming wet antecedent conditions,
channel bottom flow depth shall not exceed four inches and design flow velocity
shall be two and one-half feet per second.
         (d)   All constructed and altered drainage channels shall be
stabilized and vegetated immediately after final grading.
         (e)   The City Council may allow exceptions to the design flow
velocities or depths in the following situations:
            1.   On lands with greater than 15% slope, or less than 2% slope;
provided that the design flow velocity shall never be greater than three feet
per second or design depth greater than six inches.
            2.   In limited transitional channel sections (such as culverts,
culvert entries and exits, drop sections, sharp bends, and water quality
control entries).
§ 150.347 EASEMENTS.
   Public drainage easements shall include all drainage at least to the limits
of the 25-year flood as indicated on the floodplain maps or as determined on
the basis of the Drainage Criteria Manual, as amended. All drainage easements
across private property shall contain the necessary language to permit the
required unobstructed water flow, require maintenance of vegetation by the
property owner(s), and permit the necessary access by city officials for
inspection and repairs. The minimum drainage easement width shall be 25 feet.
All easements, 25 and 100-year floodplain boundaries and water quality zones
shall be clearly shown on drainage plans and the site plan.
§ 150.348 ROADWAY DRAINAGE.
   (A)   As a general rule, drainage carried in roadside channels shall be
minimized and off-roadway locations shall be used as the primary drainage
network whenever practicable.
   (B)   When roadside channels are required, they shall be contained within a
dedicated right-of-way or right-of-way easement. Channel sides lopes shall be
no steeper than four to one, except for curves and transitions where slope
stabilization acceptable to the City's Engineer may be allowed. Roadways shall
be designed for fordable driveway approaches whenever practical. All driveways
shall be designed such that drainage flow from a 100-year storm shall not
exceed a depth of 12 inches on any portion of the driveway. Should driveway
culverts be required, the culvert design, capacity, and general location shall
be shown on the construction plans. Minimum driveway culvert diameter shall be
12 inches. In no case shall driveway approaches constitute a blockage of
roadway drainage.
§ 150.349 MAINTENANCE AND COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   All drainage facilities located in the street rights-of-way shall be
maintained by the appropriate jurisdiction. All drainage facilities located on
private property shall be maintained by the property owner.
   (B)   Duly authorized inspectors of the city shall have the right of entry
on the land or premises where property owners are required to maintain drainage
facilities or detention facilities, at reasonable times, for the purpose of
inspection of the maintenance required. Where noncompliance is found, the city
shall request in writing that the property owner comply. This notice shall
describe the measures required to be taken. If, within three months of the
notice the maintenance required is not accomplished, the city shall either:
      (1)   Cause the necessary restoration to be accomplished and assess the
property owner for the city's actual cost; or
      (2)   Bring an action for mandatory injunction to require the property
owner to accomplish the necessary maintenance.
   (C)   The required maintenance by private landowners and the power of the
city shall be noted on the plat.
FLOOD LOSS CONTROL
§ 150.360 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control Insurance
Act, Tex. Water Code, § 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
These regulations are adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 150.361 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the City of Sunset Valley are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
§ 150.362 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and streets and bridges located
in floodplains;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area.
§ 150.363 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage;
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
§ 150.364 LANDS TO WHICH THIS SUBCHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the City of Sunset Valley.
§ 150.365 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report, entitled "Flood
Insurance Study for Travis County and Incorporated areas, Volumes 1 thru 6,"
dated September 26, 2008 with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Boundary-Floodway Maps (FIRM and FBFM) and any revisions thereto, and those
areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency through the National Flood Insurance Program as shown in the Flood
Insurance Rate Map 48453C0210E, panel 210 and 255 of 410 dated, September 26,
2008 and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to
be a part of this Code and are subject to the floodplain management regulations
of the City of Sunset Valley as set forth herein.
§ 150.366 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this chapter. This system will consist of a city-wide application
review procedure and the issuance of permits only for those developments
located within the identified flood hazard areas. Developments located outside
of identified flood hazard areas will be issued a development permit exemption
certificate stating that the proposed development is not located within an
identified flood hazard area and that the construction standards required in
this chapter are not applicable to the proposed development.
§ 150.367 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land located in the incorporated areas of the city shall
hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
§ 150.368 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
§ 150.369 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of
the city; and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.
§ 150.370 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 150.371 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATION FORM, DEVELOPMENT PERMIT FORM AND
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT EXEMPTION CERTIFICATE.
   The development permit application form, development permit form and
development permit exemption certificate form which shall be used to implement
this chapter are available at the city's municipal office. The City of Sunset
Valley may promulgate any additional forms as may be necessary for the
implementation of this chapter.
§ 150.372 ESTABLISHMENT OF FEES.
   The Sunset Valley City Council shall establish fees commensurate with the
service rendered by the city.
§ 150.373 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Mayor, City Administrator or his/her designee is hereby appointed the
Floodplain Administrator (Administrator) to administer and implement the
provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National
Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
§ 150.374 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE ADMINISTRATOR.
   Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
   (A)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Review permit application to determine whether proposed building sites
will be reasonably safe from flooding.
   (C)   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter.
   (D)   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required.
   (E)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
   (F)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State
Coordinating Agency, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse,
and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
   (G)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
   (H)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with §
150.375, the Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer the provisions of this chapter.
   (I)   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Administrator
must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A and AE on the
city's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community.
§ 150.375 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   A completed development permit application form must be submitted to
the City Administrator prior to the start of construction of development within
the corporate limits of the City of Sunset Valley, Texas.
   (B)   The Administrator will review all applications to determine whether
such construction or other development is proposed within the identified flood
hazard areas of the City of Sunset Valley. If a proposed development is not
within the identified flood hazard area, then the Administrator will issue a
development permit exemption certificate to the applicant.
   (C)   Application for a development permit shall be presented to the
Administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited
to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and
elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures,
and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
      (1)   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
      (2)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure shall be floodproofed;
      (3)   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing
criteria of this chapter;
      (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
      (5)   Maintain a record of all such information.
   (D)   Approval or denial of a development permit by the Administrator shall
be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant
factors:
      (1)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (3)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (4)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (5)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (6)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      (7)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      (8)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (9)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (10)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area.
§ 150.376 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Appeal Board which consists of the Sunset Valley City Council
shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements
of this chapter.
   (B)   The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
   (C)   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board
may appeal such decision to the courts of competent jurisdiction.
   (D)   The Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an
appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
upon request.
   (E)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the Recorded Texas Historic Landmarks, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
   (F)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre of less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in this chapter have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
   (G)   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
chapter.
   (H)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (I)   Prerequisites for granting variances:
      (1)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon, (i) showing a good and
sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and (iii) a determination that
the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws, Code provisions, or ordinances.
      (3)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation, and the cost of flood insurance will
be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
   (J)   Variances may be issued by the City of Sunset Valley for new
construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary
for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that (i) the criteria
outlined in §
150.375(D)(l) through (D)(10) are met; and (ii) the structure or other
development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base
flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
§ 150.377 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
   In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required
for all new construction and substantial improvements:
   (A)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
   (B)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
   (C)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage;
   (D)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding;
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters; and
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
§ 150.378 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has
been provided as set forth in (i) §
150.365, (ii) §
150.374(H), or (iii) §
150.379(C), the following provisions are required:
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement),
elevated to a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the Administrator that the standard of this division is satisfied.
   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this division. A record of such certification which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
   (C)   Enclosure. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
      (1)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
      (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
      (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exist of
floodwaters.
   (D)   Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either (i) be on
the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and (ii) be fully licensed and
ready for highway use; and (iii) meet the permit requirements of §
150.375(A), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured
homes" in this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it
is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions.
§ 150.379 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with findings, purposes
and methods of reducing flood losses upon which these regulations are based.
   (B)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions shall meet
development permit requirements of §
150.366; §
150.375; and §§
150.377 through
150.384.
   (C)   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development which are greater than 50 lots or five acres,
whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to §
150.365 or §
150.374(H).
   (D)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (E)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage.
§ 150.380 STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES).
   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in §
150.365 are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special
flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions
apply:
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the city's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures:
      (1)   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the city's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or,
      (2)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed
so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy.
   (C)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the Administrator that the standards of this section are
satisfied.
   (D)   Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
§ 150.381 FLOODWAYS.
   Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in §
150.365 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential
projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
   (A)   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   (B)   If division (A) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of §§
150.377 through
150.384.
   (C)   Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the
National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may permit
encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an
increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes
all of the provisions required by Section 65.12.
§ 150.382 NUISANCE.
   Any construction, modification, improvement, land cut or fill violation of
this chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance and the continuation of such
activity may be enjoined by a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 150.383 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this subchapter is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said
holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 150.384 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations.
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION
§ 150.395 PURPOSE.
   Subject to exemptions as provided in this chapter, this chapter requires the
issuance of a building permit by the Building Official before the commencement
of development within the City of Sunset Valley.
§ 150.396 BUILDING AND DEMOLITION PERMITS REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   Subject to exemptions from the requirement of a permit as provided in this
chapter, no person shall engage in development of real property, including the
erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, movement, removal,
conversion or demolition of any building, structure or improvement in the city,
or cause same to be done without first obtaining a separate permit for each
building, structure or other improvement. For purposes of this chapter, only
one building permit need be obtained for one building and parking lot(s) and
driveways serving such building.
§ 150.397 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   To obtain a building permit the applicant shall first file an
application, in writing, on a form promulgated by the city. An application
shall:
      (1)   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit;
      (2)   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be performed by
plat reference, if then platted, or by surveyed tract and street address, or,
as necessary, any similar description that is reasonably acceptable to the
Building Official which will adequately identify and definitely locate the
proposed site;
      (3)   State the proposed use and occupancy of all parts of any building
(s);
      (4)   Present plans and specifications for all new or modified
improvements as specified by application requirements;
      (5)   Indicate the location of all driveways or access points from the
proposed building site to any public street, road or alley;
      (6)   Be signed by the permittee, or an authorized agent, who may be
required to submit evidence to indicate such authority; and
      (7)   Give such other information as reasonably may be required for
review for compliance with this chapter as determined by the Building Official.
   (B)   Plans and specifications shall be drawn to scale upon substantial
paper and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of
the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of
this chapter and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. The
first sheet of each set of plans shall give the building, street address and/or
metes and bounds of the work and the name and address of the owner of the
property and person(s) who prepared the plans and specifications. Plans shall
include a plot plan showing the location of any proposed building or location
of construction activity, including all structures, parking lots, driveways and
any other improvements, and of every existing building or construction on the
property.
   (C)   Computations, stress diagrams and other supporting data sufficient to
show the correctness of the plans, shall be submitted when required by the
Building Official.
   (D)   Demolition application. To obtain a demolition permit the applicant
shall file an application, in writing, on a city approved demolition permit
application. Every such application shall:
      (1)   For structures in a district zoned other than residential and
formerly used for a purpose other than residential, provide an asbestos survey
of any structure or part thereof proposed to
be demolished;
      (2)   Provide a site plan showing the location of the structure to be
demolished and the location and size of structures and construction that are to
remain on the site or plot.
      (3)   Identify the extent of the demolition of the building;
      (4)   Indicate the purpose for the proposed demolition;
      (5)   Provide a written approval from the building owner, if different
from the applicant;
      (6)   Provide pictures of the building elevations in its current state,
if more than 50% of the building is to be removed;
      (7)   Prior to approval, provide a tax certificate showing no delinquent
taxes if more than 75% of the building is to be removed.
§ 150.398 PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The application, plans and specifications filed by an applicant for a
building or demolition permit shall be reviewed by the Building Official. Such
plans may be reviewed by other departments of the city to check compliance with
the laws and ordinances under their jurisdiction. If the Building Official is
satisfied that the work described in an application for permit and the plans
filed therewith conform to the requirements of this chapter and other
applicable laws and ordinances, the Building Official shall issue a permit to
the applicant. The Building Official shall approve or disapprove an application
for permit on or before 45 days after administratively complete application,
plans and specifications are submitted to the city. (See §§
150.012 through
150.020 for regulations pertaining to application submissions).
   (B)   When the Building Official issues the permit, the Building Official
shall endorse plans and specifications, in writing or stamp, "APPROVED". Such
approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified, or altered
without authorization from the Building Official and all work shall be done in
accordance with the approved plans. The Building Official shall have the right
to arrange for the inspection of all buildings or structures being erected or
altered as frequently as may be necessary to ensure compliance with this Code
and other city ordinances.
   (C)   The Building Official may issue a permit for the construction of a
part of a building or structure before the entire plans and specifications for
the whole building or structure have been submitted or approved; provided that
adequate information and detailed statements have been submitted that comply
with all pertinent requirements of this chapter, and any such partial
construction would, by itself, be in compliance with this chapter and other
applicable laws. Any such permit for a part of a bigger development shall not
constitute an approval of or a permit for any construction or development that
is not expressly approved in the issued permit.
§ 150.399 CONSTRUCTION PERMITS IN NEWLY ANNEXED AREAS WHICH HAVE TEMPORARY
ZONING.
   (A)   No building or structure within any territory annexed to the city
shall be altered, remodeled or constructed without a permit as required by this
section.
   (B)   No permit for the alteration, remodeling, or construction, or
demolition of a building or structure on which work has not commenced on the
date of annexation shall be issued by the city on a lot or tract which has
temporary zoning other than a permit which will allow the construction of a
building permitted to be constructed in a "SF" (Single Family Residential)
Zoning District.
   (C)   The owner, and any other person constructing or altering any building
or structure at the time of annexation of the property shall, before proceeding
any further with such construction, or alteration, apply for a permit
authorizing further work on said building or structure. The application for the
building permit shall be accompanied by the applicable fees.
§ 150.400 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following are exempt from the requirement of a building permit pursuant
to this §§
150.395 through
150.427 and §§
150.440 through
150.446 (but must comply with all other applicable requirements of this Code):
   (A)   One-story detached accessory structures not greater than 120 square
feet measured along exterior walls that are intended and used for storage and
similar uses;
   (B)   Retaining walls not located in the critical or transitional water
quality zones, which are not over four feet in height measured from the bottom
of the footing to the top of the wall and are not greater than 75% of a single
side of a single lot or separate tract in length and do not obstruct or alter
the flow of stormwater;
   (C)   Rainwater harvesting systems whose sole purpose is for the collection,
treatment, and/or storage of rainwater for on-site use that have the following
features: No tank exceeds 5,000 gallon capacity; no tank is pressurized; and
the area of all tanks collectively does not exceed 350 square feet;
   (D)   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, installation of cabinets,
counter tops, similar finish work, and minor repairs to existing structures;
   (E)   Swings and other playground equipment that are not located within any
easements or within a vegetative buffer and do not substantially obstruct the
flow of water;
   (F)   Prefabricated swimming pools that are unheated and are less than 24
inches deep;
   (G)   Decks not exceeding 200 square feet in area, that are no more than 24
inches above grade at any point, are not attached to a dwelling and do not
serve an exit door, are in compliance with setback requirements for structures
and are not located in any easements;
   (H)   Roof repair or replacement made with the same or similar materials to
be repaired or replaced.
(Ord. 250520, passed 5-20-2025)
§ 150.401 VALIDITY OF PERMITS.
   (A)   The issuance or granting of a permit of approval of plans and
specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of,
any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The issuance of a building permit based upon plans and specifications
shall not prevent the Building Official from thereafter requiring the
correction of errors in such plans and specifications or from preventing
building operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this Code
or of any other applicable law.
§ 150.402 EXPIRATION AND EXTENSION OF PERMIT.
   Every permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire by limitation and
become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not
commenced within 90 days from the date of such permit, or if the building,
construction, or demolition authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned
for a period of 30 days at any time after the work is commenced. Before such
work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained, and the fee for
such permit shall be one-half the amount normally required for a new permit for
such work; provided that no changes have been made or will be made in the
original plans and specifications for such work; and that the suspension or
abandonment has not exceeded 180 days.
§ 150.403 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   The Building Official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued
under the provisions of this chapter whenever the permit is issued in error or
on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any
ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this Code.
§ 150.404 STOP ORDER.
   The Building Official shall have the power to order all work stopped on
construction or alteration or repair or demolition of a building or structure
in the city when such work is being done in violation of any provision of this
Code or any ordinance relating thereto. A stop order shall be signed by the
Building Official. A stop order shall be presented to and explained to the job
foreman or other responsible individual on the work site, provided that if at
the time of delivery of the stop order by the Building Official, there is no
job foreman or other responsible individual present at the work site, then the
stop order shall be attached or affixed in a conspicuous place at the
particular work area which is the subject of the stop order. Work shall not be
resumed after the issuance of such an order except on the written permission of
the Building Official, or upon decision of the Board of Adjustment upon an
appeal of such stop order to the Board of Adjustment. The property owner or
contractor shall have the right to appeal any stop order, or any other decision
or ruling of the Building Official, to the Board of Adjustment which shall have
the authority to overrule any stop order or other decision or ruling of the
Building Official.
§ 150.405 TEMPORARY AND PERMANENT CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   No person or persons shall use or occupy any building or structure for
which a permit has been granted by the Building Official until a permanent
Certificate of Occupancy has been issued. A permanent Certificate of Occupancy
shall be on an official form as prescribed by the city and signed by the
Building Official.
   (B)   The Building Official may grant approval to use or occupy any building
or structure under the issuance of a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy
providing the Building Official finds that the building or structure meets all
applicable regulations and that no substantial hazard shall result from
occupying same. Such approval shall only be granted upon written permission of
the Building Official based on the nature and circumstances surrounding
request.
   (C)   The granting of a certificate of temporary or permanent occupancy
shall not be construed as a warranty or representation by the city that any
building or structure is free from defects or dangerous conditions, and the
city does not assume any liability or waive any immunity, on its own behalf or
on behalf of any of its officials, employees, or agents, by issuing such a
certificate.
§ 150.406 MINIMUM FEES.
   A separate fee for each building or demolition permit application shall be
paid with each application in accordance with a schedule of minimum fees set by
city ordinance.
§ 150.407 ADDITIONAL FEES.
   In addition to the minimum building permit fees, additional inspection fees
may be required by the city.
§ 150.408 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   The person or persons designated to serve the function of Building Official,
with the assistance of the City Engineer and such professional inspectors and
reviewers as authorized from time to time by the City Council, shall review and
act on all applications, perform such necessary inspections, and take
appropriate enforcement actions as provided in this §§
150.395 through
150.427 and §§
150.440 through
150.446 and the Codes adopted pursuant to §§
150.395 through
150.427 and §§
150.440 through
150.446.
§ 150.409 DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Building Official to require compliance
with all provisions of this Code relating to development of property and to
arrange for inspection of all buildings or structures being erected or altered,
as frequently as may be necessary to ensure compliance with this Code and other
applicable law.
   (B)   The Building Official shall review all applications for building and
demolition permits for administrative completeness and compliance with
applicable regulations and approve or disapprove same. The Building Official
shall be responsible for designating qualified persons to perform inspections
of the work. Inspections will be made on a reasonably prompt basis, within 24
hours following a request therefore by the owner or contractor whenever
practicable.
§ 150.410 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   Adoption.
      (1)   The International Building Code, 2015 Edition, including
Appendices, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted,
and designated as the Building Code of the City of Sunset Valley, and is made a
part hereof, as amended by division (B).
      (2)   Unless deleted, amended, expanded, or otherwise changed herein, all
provisions of such Code shall be fully applicable and binding. In the event a
conflict is determined to exist between said International Building Code as
adopted and the other provisions of the Land Development Code, the Land
Development Code provisions will prevail.
   (B)   Amendments. The adoption by reference of the International Building
Code as provided in division (A) is made subject to and modified by the
addition of the following provisions:
      (1)   The Board of Appeals shall be the Board of Adjustment of the City
of Sunset Valley.
§ 150.411 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE FOR ONE AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS.
   (A)   Adoption.
      (1)   The International Residential Code for One and Two-Family
Dwellings, 2015 Edition, including Appendices, as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted, and designated as the
Residential Building Code of the City of Sunset Valley, and is made a part
hereof, as amended.
      (2)   Unless deleted, amended, expanded, or otherwise changed herein, all
provisions of such Code shall be fully applicable and binding. In the event a
conflict is determined to exist between said International Residential Code for
One and Two-Family Dwellings as adopted and the other provisions of the Land
Development Code, the Land Development Code provisions will prevail.
   (B)   Amendments. The International Residential Code for One and Two-Family
Dwellings is hereby modified as adopted by the addition of the following
provisions:
      (1)   The Board of Appeals shall be the Board of Adjustment of the City
of Sunset Valley;
      (2)   No permit shall be required for minor roof improvements or repair
under 25% of the roof surface. Not more than 25% of the roof covering of any
building or structure can be replaced unless the entire roof covering is made
to conform to the requirements of this Code for new buildings and structures.
         New roof coverings shall not be installed without first removing
existing roof coverings where any of the following conditions occur:
         Where the existing roof or roof covering is water-soaked or has
deteriorated to the point that the existing roof or roof covering is not
adequate as a base for additional roofing.
         Where the existing roof covering is wood shake, slate, clay, cement or
asbestos-cement tile.
         Where the existing roof has two or more applications of any type of
roof covering.
         Where the existing shingles have been moderately or severely damaged
by hail.
      (3)   Section R105.2 Work exempt from permit is modified to add the
following:
         A one-story detached accessory structure that is no more than 120
square feet (11 m2) of floor area, does not create a dwelling, contains no
plumbing, and is not located within a flood hazard area.
§ 150.412 INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.
   (A)   Adoption.
      (1)   The International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, including
Appendices, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted,
and designated as the Mechanical Code of the City of Sunset Valley, and is made
a part hereof, as amended.
      (2)   Unless deleted, amended, expanded, or otherwise changed herein, all
provisions of such Code shall be fully applicable and binding. In the event a
conflict is determined to exist between said International Mechanical Code as
adopted and the other provisions of the Land Development Code, the
International Mechanical Code provisions will prevail.
   (B)   Amendments. The International Mechanical Code is hereby modified as
adopted by the addition of the following provision:
      (1)   The Board of Appeals shall be the Board of Adjustment of the City
of Sunset Valley.
§ 150.413 UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE.
   (A)   Adoption.
      (1)   The Uniform Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendices, as
published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical
Officials, is hereby adopted, and designated as the Plumbing Code of the City
of Sunset Valley, and is made a part hereof, as amended.
      (2)   Unless deleted, amended, expanded, or otherwise changed herein, all
provisions of such Code shall be fully applicable and binding. In the event a
conflict is determined to exist between said International Plumbing Code as
adopted and the other provisions of this Code of Ordinances, the most
restrictive of the conflicting provisions will prevail.
   (B)   Amendments. The Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby modified as adopted by
the addition of the following paragraph:
      (1)   The Board of Appeals shall be the Board of Adjustment for the City
of Sunset Valley.
§ 150.414 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
   (A)   Adoption.
      (1)   The International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendices, as
published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, and designated
as the Fire Code of the City of Sunset Valley, and is made a part hereof,
subject to the amendments of division (B).
      (2)   Except as expressly amended, all provisions of the International
Fire Code, 2015 Edition shall be fully applicable and binding. In the event a
conflict is determined to exist between said Fire Code as adopted and the other
provisions of this Code of Ordinances, the most restrictive of the conflicting
provisions will prevail.
   (B)   Amendments. The International Fire Code, 2015 Edition is hereby
amended as follows:
      (1)   Sections 25-12-171 and 25-12-172 of the City of Austin Land
Development Code in effect as of the effective date of the ordinance adopting
this section are adopted and incorporated herein by reference, subject to the
exception in division (B)(2) pertaining to Section 503.2.1 of the International
Fire Code, 2015 Edition. In addition, the 2011 National Fire Protection
Association Standard 58 and the 2012 National Fire Protection Association
Standard 54 are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
      (2)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in City of Austin Land
Development Code section 25-12-172, section 503.2.1 of the International Fire
Code, 2015 Edition is amended in its entirety to provide as follows:
         503.2.1 Dimensions. Except for streets and roads already in existence
on May 5, 2009, fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of
not less than twenty (20) feet (including ribbon curbing, if any), except for
approved security gates in accordance with Section 503.6 and the Fire
Protection Criteria Manual, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less
than fourteen (14) feet. Streets and roads already in existence on May 5, 2009
shall have an unobstructed width of not less than eighteen (18) feet (including
ribbon curbing, if any) and may be maintained, repaired, and reconstructed, so
long as their width remains no less than eighteen (18) feet. With the exception
of reconstruction in progress on the effective date of this amendment, any
existing street or road that is narrower than twenty (20) feet in width
(including ribbon curbing, if any) shall, if reconstructed, have a width of not
less than twenty (20) feet (including ribbon curbing, if any).
§ 150.415 NFPA 70 NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE (NEC).
   (A)   Adoption. The National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, including
Appendices, as published by the National Fire Protection Agency, is hereby
adopted, and designated as the Electrical Code of the City of Sunset Valley,
and is made a part hereof, as amended.
   (B)   Amendments. The National Electrical Code (NEC) is hereby modified as
adopted by the addition of the following provision:
      (1)   The Board of Appeals shall be the Board of Adjustment of the City
of Sunset Valley.
§ 150.416 INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
   (A)   Adoption. The International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition,
including Appendices, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby
adopted, and designated as the Energy Conservation Code of the City of Sunset
Valley, and is made a part hereof, as amended.
   (B)   Amendments. The International Energy Conservation Code is hereby
modified as adopted by the addition of the following provision:
      (1)   The Board of Appeals shall be the Board of Adjustment of the City
of Sunset Valley.
§ 150.417 INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE.
   (A)   Adoption. The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2015 Edition,
including Appendices, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby
adopted, and designated as the Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the City of Sunset
Valley, and is made a part hereof, as amended.
   (B)   Amendments. The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is hereby
modified as adopted by the addition of the following provision:
      (1)   The Board of Appeals shall be the Board of Adjustment of the City
of Sunset Valley.
§ 150.418 VACATION OF STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS.
   (A)   All persons desiring to have the City Council exercise its powers
under Tex. Transportation Code § 311.008 as may be amended regarding
abandoning, closing and vacating streets, alleys and other public ways and
portions thereof, shall file their petition with the city, in writing, directed
to the City Council. Such petition shall contain a description by metes and
bounds as surveyed on the ground of the street, alley, or portion thereof, as
the case may be, and attached to said petition shall be a list of all owners
abutting said street, alley or portion thereof, as the case may be and shall be
signed by all such owners.
   (B)   Upon the filing of such petition with the city as provided in §
150.418(A), an administrative fee shall be deposited with the City Secretary in
an amount established and fixed by the City Council. Such fee is non-
refundable.
   (C)   The City Council shall not act on such petition until such time as the
City Administrator has received an executed release from each of the abutting
property owners, releasing all claims arising out of the closing or vacation of
the affected street or alley.
§ 150.419 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ANY ALTERATION IN ANY STREET OR PUBLIC WAY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig any trench or make any excavation
or opening or any other alteration in or under any street, alley, public
highway, right-of-way or easement of the City of Sunset Valley, Texas without
first having obtained a permit to do so.
§ 150.420 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT TO ALTER STREET.
   The application for a permit to dig any trench or make any excavation or
opening or any other alteration in any of the streets, alleys, public highways,
sidewalks, rights-of-way, or easements of the city shall be made to the city
and state clearly the name of the street, highway, sidewalk or location of
easements or rights-of-way in which it is proposed to make such opening; the
purpose of making the opening; the name of the person or entity who proposes to
make such excavation or opening; and any other information required by an
application promulgated by the city for such purpose.
§ 150.421 PERFORMANCE BOND AND PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   The City Administrator or designee shall estimate the probable cost of
repairing such street, sidewalk, right-of-way, easement, or highway to the
required standard; and shall require the applicant to file a written bond in an
amount sufficient to cover such cost, with two or more sufficient sureties,
conditioned that the street, sidewalk, right-of-way, easement, or highway shall
be restored to as good or better condition than it was before the excavation or
alteration was made. Such bond shall contain a provision for at least 15 days
advance notice to the city prior to cancellation for any reason. Such bond is
subject to the approval of the City Attorney. An applicant may make a cash
deposit of such sum in lieu of the written bond.
   (B)   The conditions of the bond required in §
150.421(A) shall not be considered satisfied until the city shall have accepted
the street, sidewalk, highway, right-of-way, or easements as being restored in
good condition. In the event that the person making the opening shall fail to
leave the affected area in a good state of repair, satisfactory to the city,
then the city shall call upon the sureties to pay for the cost of repair;
provided however, that in the event of a cash deposit, the city may proceed to
have the street, sidewalk, right-of-way, easement, or highway put in good
condition, paying for same out of the deposit made by the applicant, and if
there be any remainder of said deposit after paying for such work, such
remainder shall be refunded to the person making the deposit.
   (C)   Before a permit may be issued hereunder, the applicant must comply
with all applicable provisions of this chapter pertinent to the issuance of
such a permit and must show proof of comprehensive general liability insurance
covering the work, including premises-operations and completed operations
coverage, in not less than the following limits:
 
   General Liability
$2,000,000 Each occurrence
$2,000,000 Aggregate
   Property Damage
$500,000   Each occurrence
$500,000   Aggregate
 
   (D)   Any policy providing for the above-required insurance shall name the
city as an additional named insured for the duration of the work and shall
contain a provision that the policy may not be cancelled, terminated or
modified without 15 days advance written notice thereof to the city.
   (E)   Cancellation of insurance will automatically cause the suspension of
the permit for 30 days unless reinstated or substitute insurance is furnished.
Suspended permits shall be automatically canceled at the end of 30 days.
   (F)   When the bond or deposit and insurance required by this chapter shall
have been accepted by the city, and all other applicable provisions relevant to
the granting of permits have been satisfied, the city shall issue a permit for
the excavation set out in the application, and the applicant may then proceed
with the work in the exact location named in its application, and in no other
place.
§ 150.422 APPROVAL FOR CLOSING OF STREETS, BARRICADES, WARNING LIGHTS, AND
WATCHMEN.
   (A)   The timing of all work of trenching, excavating or making any
character of opening in any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, highways,
rights-of-way, or easements of the city shall be coordinated in advance with
and subject to the approval of the City Administrator in order to allow for any
notice to affected residents and businesses and to allow for public safety
planning. The day(s) of closure of a street, sidewalk, alley or right-of-way
used for travel must be approved in advance by the City Administrator to
minimize disruption to the traveling public.
   (B)   The permit holder shall erect and maintain warning signs, barricades
and sufficient safeguards around all excavations, embankments, and
obstructions; shall provide yellow warning lights on or near the work and keep
them lighted at night or other times when visibility is limited; and shall
employ such watchmen as may be necessary for the protection of the public.
   (C)   Traffic lane closures must comply with the adopted standards of the
City of Austin Transportation Criteria Manual. Variations to these standards
may require submittal of an engineered traffic control plan.
§ 150.423 DUTIES UPON COMPLETION OF WORK.
   After the trenching, excavation or opening have been made, the permit holder
shall backfill the excavation with such materials and in such manner as to
comply with the adopted standards of the City of Austin Transportation Criteria
Manual.
§ 150.424 CERTIFICATE OF FINAL INSPECTION.
   After the making of such tests and inspections as may be necessary or
desirable by the city, and the satisfactory completion of the restoration work,
the city shall certify that the work has been completed in accordance with the
provisions of the permit and issue a Certificate of Final Inspection.
§ 150.425 TRENCH SAFETY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, the term "trench" shall have the meaning
assigned that term in the standards promulgated by the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration.
   (B)   On all construction projects contracted by the city within the
boundaries of the city or in its extraterritorial jurisdiction, in which trench
excavation will exceed a depth of five feet, the bid documents provided to all
of the bidders and the contract shall include:
      (1)   A reference to the requirements pertaining to trench safety of Tex.
Health and Safety Code Chapter 756 and the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration's standards for trench safety that will be in effect during the
period of construction of the project;
      (2)   A copy of any special shoring requirements imposed by the city with
a separate pay item for any such special shoring requirements based upon the
square feet of shoring used;
      (3)   A copy of any geotechnical information that was obtained by the
city for use by the contractor in the design of the trench safety system; and
      (4)   A separate pay item for trench excavation safety protection based
on the linear feet of the trench excavated.
   (C)   In connection with any trench excavation of a city street, sidewalk,
right-of-way, or easement that will exceed a depth of five feet, the owner of
the affected project and the contractor must execute a written contract
concerning trench safety. The project bid documents, if bids are used, and the
written contract must include:
      (1)   A reference to the Occupational Safety and Health Administration's
standards for trench safety that will be in effect during the period of
construction of the project; and
      (2)   A copy of any special shoring requirements imposed by the city.
   (D)   Each applicant for a permit on a project subject to the provisions of
§
150.426(C) shall certify in writing to the city that the bid documents, if bids
are used, and the written contract satisfy the requirements set forth in that
division. In addition to or in lieu of requiring the filing of such
certification, the city may, in its discretion, require the applicant to
produce for inspection or to file with the city a copy of the contract that
complies with that division. A permit shall not be issued to an applicant who
fails to comply with the provisions of this division.
   (E)   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the contractor and all of
its subcontractors subject to a requirement of this section to be familiar and
comply with all of the requirements of federal and state laws, including the
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (OSHA) and all amendments thereto,
and to enforce and comply with all the provisions thereof.
   (F)   For any work subject to the requirements of this section, the
contractor shall have a competent person or persons as required under the
Occupational Safety and Health Act on site to inspect the work and to supervise
the conformance of the contractor's operation with federal regulations. The
contractor shall make daily inspections of the trench safety systems to ensure
that the systems meet OSHA requirements. Daily inspections are to be made by a
competent person provided by the contractor.
   (G)   The contractor shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, its
employees and agents, from any and all damages, costs (including, without
limitation, legal fees, court costs, and the cost of investigation), judgments
or claims by anyone for injury or death to persons resulting from the collapse
or failure of the trenches constructed under a permit issued by the city.
   (H)   The contractor acknowledges and agrees that this indemnity provision
provides indemnity for the city in case the city is negligent either by act or
by omission in providing for trench safety, including, but not limited to
inspections, failure to issue stop work orders, and the hiring of the
contractor, if hired by the city.
§ 150.426 APPLICATION FOR CONSENT BY GAS CORPORATION, GAS UTILITY, ELECTRIC
UTILITY.
   (A)   A gas corporation or utility shall submit an application for consent
prior to disturbance of any city street, alley, right-of-way, or easement for
the location, re-location, or maintenance of a gas facility. The application
will disclose the proposed work to be performed, the location of the work, the
materials and specifications for restoration of disturbed areas, and the
proposed time for performance of the work. The timing of the proposed work
shall be subject to the approval of the City Administrator his designee, for
the purpose of minimizing the disruption to traveling public, and access to
residences and businesses. Restoration of all disturbed areas shall be in
compliance with design and materials standards required by §
150.424. No application fee shall be payable. The gas corporation or utility
shall be liable to pay to the city the reasonable cost to repair damage to a
public roadway, highway, street, alley, stream or other public way located in
and maintained by the city that is caused by the gas corporation or utility and
not repaired by the gas corporation or utility in compliance with the
applicable standards.
   (B)   An electric utility, as defined in Tex. Utilities Code § 181.041,
shall submit an application for consent prior to disturbance of any city
street, alley, right-of-way, or easement for the location, relocation, or
maintenance of a transmission line. The application will disclose the proposed
work to be performed, the location of the work, the materials and
specifications for restoration of disturbed areas, and the proposed time for
performance of the work. The timing of the proposed work shall be subject to
the approval of the City Administrator his designee, for the purpose of
minimizing the disruption to traveling public, and access to residences and
businesses. Restoration of all disturbed areas shall be in compliance with
design and materials standards required by §
150.424. No application fee shall be payable. The electric utility shall be
liable to pay to the city the reasonable cost to repair damage to a public
roadway, highway, street, alley, stream or other public way located in and
maintained by the city that is caused by the electric utility and not repaired
by the electric utility in compliance with the applicable standards.
§ 150.427 EXTENDING UTILITIES UNDER ANY STREET OR PUBLIC WAY.
   (A)   An applicant that proposes to alter an existing paved street, road, or
alley for the purpose of extending any utilities under such street, road or
alley shall be required to burrow under the street, road or alley for such
purpose. No alteration of the surface of a paved street, road or alley shall be
permitted for the purpose of extending any utility lines.
   (B)   Notwithstanding § 150.428(A), in the event that the City Council
determines that the pavement on the affected street, road or alley is of
insufficient depth, quality or condition to justify any additional expense
shown to be made necessary by the requirement of burrowing, the City Council
may authorize an alteration of the surface of a road, street or alley for the
purpose of extending utility lines.
UNDERGROUND UTILITY LINES
§ 150.440 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and laws of
the State of Texas, including but not limited to the general police powers
conferred on the city and Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 212.002.
§ 150.441 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter of the Code is to require builders and owners,
when developing any tract of land which is subdivided into four or more lots
after February 11, 1992, or when developing or re-developing any property zoned
for commercial, office or multifamily uses to place all utilities underground.
§ 150.442 VARIANCES.
   All requests for variances must be submitted in writing to the City Council.
The City Council may authorize a variance from these regulations when in its
opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance, or when
existing affected transmission lines make compliance impracticable.
§ 150.443 UTILITY LINE PLACEMENT.
   When any new development takes place on any property within the city which
either: (a) has been subdivided into four or more lots after February 11, 1992;
or (b) is zoned for commercial, office or multifamily use; the owner or
developer of any such lot shall refrain from constructing poles and installing
overhead wires and associated structures, and, instead shall place all utility
lines underground in accordance with sound engineering practices and in
conformance with all uniform building Codes adopted by the city.
§ 150.444 INTERVENING PROPERTY OR INTERVENING RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Whenever it shall be necessary for an owner or developer of property
described in §
150.442 to obtain an extension of existing utility lines across any intervening
property not described in §
150.443, or any intervening right-of-way in order that such utility lines
extend to the owner or developer's property, the requirements of §
150.443 shall apply to the placement of utility lines utility lines across such
intervening property or intervening right-of-way.
§ 150.445 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT OF INSTALLATION COSTS.
   All expenses for installation of utilities and for construction costs
related to placing utility lines underground shall be borne by the developer of
the property to which such utility lines are extended.
§ 150.446 UTILITY LINES.
   All utility lines that pass under a street or alley shall be at least three
feet beyond the edge of the pavement.
UNDERGROUND STORAGE FACILITIES
§ 150.460 AUTHORITY AND SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter, which is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and
Laws of the State of Texas, shall be known as the underground storage tank
regulations of the City of Sunset Valley, Texas.
§ 150.461 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The purpose of these regulations is to protect the public health, life,
property, natural resources and environment, to further the city's water
pollution control and abatement program, to protect ground and surface water
and the city's drinking water supply from contamination, to ensure fire
prevention and to safeguard the health and lives of fire, police and emergency
service personnel through the regulation of the construction of underground
storage facilities and the handling and storage of the hazardous materials
contained therein.
§ 150.462 RELATIONSHIP TO LAW AND REGULATIONS.
   The provisions set forth in these regulations are intended to be consistent
with and supplemental to the provisions of the Texas Water Code and the
regulations adopted pursuant thereto relative to standards for the design,
construction, installation or operation of underground storage facilities, and
provisions of the Texas Health and Safety Code and the regulations adopted
pursuant thereto relative to the storage, handling and use of flammable liquids
at retail service stations.
§ 150.463 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING RESTRICTIONS.
   No land or property in the City of Sunset Valley shall be developed, used or
operated as a retail service station, fuel outlet or other facility at which
hazardous materials regulated by this Code are stored in underground storage
tanks, and no such station, outlet or facility shall be constructed within the
city, except in those districts in which such stations, outlets or facilities
are authorized pursuant to the city's zoning regulations.
§ 150.464 COMPLIANCE WITH CODE REQUIRED.
   No land or property in the City of Sunset Valley shall be developed, used or
operated as a retail service station, fuel outlet or other facility at which
hazardous materials regulated by this Code are stored in underground storage
tanks, and no such station, outlet or facility shall be constructed or
substantially modified or repaired within the city, except in exact compliance
with the provisions of this Code and all other applicable local, state and
federal laws and regulations, or before all necessary approvals and permits
have been granted or issued by the City Council and any other regulatory body
from which an approval or permit must be obtained pursuant to any applicable
law or regulation.
§ 150.465 CONSTRUCTION PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person may construct or install or substantially modify or repair an
underground storage facility, tank system or component part thereof for the
storage of hazardous materials regulated by this Code unless the property owner
and/or operator of the facility or tank system or any part thereof has made
application to the city for and has been issued a construction permit in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. No construction permit shall be
issued or approval granted by the city unless the requirements and standards
set forth or referred to herein have been complied with in full. These
requirements and standards are considered the minimum necessary to protect the
public health, safety, welfare and environment.
§ 150.466 STORAGE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person may store, either temporarily or permanently, any hazardous
material regulated by this Code in an underground storage facility or tank
system unless the property owner and/or operator of the facility or tank system
has made application to and received approval from the city for an underground
storage tank storage permit in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
No storage permit shall be issued or approval granted by the city unless the
requirements and standards referred to herein have been satisfied or complied
with in full. These requirements and standards are considered the minimum
necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare and environment.
§ 150.467 UTILITIES.
   The city shall not sell or supply any water or sewage service or authorize
the connection of gas or electricity to any property for which the necessary
permits required by this chapter have not been secured nor with respect to
which the requirements and standards contained or referred to herein have not
been complied with in full.
§ 150.468 RELATED LIQUIDS.
   Any liquids with a toxicity, flammability, reactivity or contact hazard
rating of two or above as defined by
Appendix C of this Code, which are stored or contained in an underground
storage facility or tank system, shall be regulated by this chapter.
§ 150.469 MIXTURES.
   Mixtures shall be regulated based on the rating criteria in
Appendix A of this chapter.
§ 150.470 APPLICANTS.
   (A)   The owner of the property on which the underground storage facility or
tank system is to be installed or constructed shall apply for and sign the
construction permit application required by this chapter. If the facility or
system is to be owned or operated by a person other than the owner of the
property on which the facility or system is located, the construction permit
application shall also be signed by the person who will own and/or operate the
facility or system.
   (B)   If the application is for the substantial modification or repair of an
existing facility, tank system or component part thereof, and the facility or
system is owned and/or operated by a person other than the owner of the
property on which the facility or system is located, the construction permit
application shall also be signed by the person who owns and/or operates the
facility or system.
   (C)   The owner of the property on which the underground storage facility or
tank system is located and in which hazardous materials are to be stored shall
apply for and sign the storage permit application required by this chapter. If
the facility or system is owned and/or operated by a person other than the
owner of said property, the storage permit application shall also be signed by
the person who owns and/or will operate the facility or system.
§ 150.471 CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for a construction permit or storage permit required by
this chapter shall be filed on application forms provided by the city and shall
contain all the information called for therein.
   (B)   An application for a construction permit must be accompanied by the
following:
      (1)   Address and legal description of property;
      (2)   Name and address of owner of property;
      (3)   Name and address of owner and/or operator of the underground
storage facility or tank system, if different from owner of property;
      (4)   A statement indicating the intended contents of the tank(s) and the
projected life design of the system(s);
      (5)   A reference key for all symbols and abbreviations used;
      (6)   A site plan, drawn to an appropriate scale, showing the following:
         (a)   The location of the proposed tank installation on the site;
         (b)   The location of any structures adjacent to the tank
installation;
         (c)   The location of other underground tanks, septic systems, waste
oil sumps, etc., within 500 feet of the tank installation;
         (d)   The location of all utility service lines within 500 feet of the
tank installation sewer, water, electrical, air, etc;
         (e)   The location and depth and a description of any existing and
proposed supply, observation or monitoring wells on or adjacent to the site;
         (f)   The location of the oil-water separator required pursuant to §
150.484(D)(1).
         (g)   The location of all permanent or casual surface water bodies on
or adjacent to the site; and
         (h)   All information and plans required by the Texas Water Commission
under the "Edwards Rules", Tex. Water Comm'n., 31 Tex. Admin. Code §§ 313.1
through 313.27, including but not limited to:
            1.   Floodplain boundaries and drainage plan;
            2.   Geologic survey of the site and all areas adjacent thereto;
            3.   Recharge features mapped within a 500-foot radius of the site;
and
            4.   Geology and recharge features for a distance of at least one-
mile downstream of the property or to the boundary of the recharge zone.
      (7)   Plan elevation and cross-section drawings and specifications in
sufficient detail to allow the reviewer to evaluate the following design and
installation parameters:
         (a)   Tank description - including capacity, dimensions, product
compatibility, corrosion resistance, etc;
         (b)   Installation practices - excavation, tank placement,
backfilling, ballasting, final cover, etc;
         (c)   Piping, fittings, pumping and dispensing systems;
         (d)   Secondary and tertiary containment systems;
         (e)   Leak detection monitoring systems;
         (f)   Overfill protection and transfer spill prevention systems;
         (g)   Oil-water separator required pursuant to §
150.484(D)(1); and
         (h)   Tank, piping and secondary and tertiary containment integrity
testing specifications and procedures.
      (8)   The non-refundable application fee established by the city;
      (9)   Facility design plans and specifications which are stamped by a
registered professional engineer in accordance with division (B)(3) of this
section;
      (10)   The materials management plan required by §§
150.478 through
150.482; and
      (11)   Name and address of installer or on-site supervisor for storage
tank and/or system and state license number of such person(s);
   (C)   An application for a storage permit required by this chapter shall be
filed upon completion of construction of the underground storage facility or
tank system and shall include the following:
      (1)   Name and address of the facility and business phone number;
      (2)   Name of operator;
      (3)   Name, title, mailing address and business phone number of
responsible official;
      (4)   Name and emergency telephone number of primary emergency response
persons;
      (5)   A facility storage map showing the following:
         (a)   The location of all underground hazardous materials storage and
use areas and access to such facilities;
         (b)   The location of all emergency equipment related to each facility
(monitor wells, alarm box, absorbent); and
         (c)   The maximum hazardous materials storage capacity of hazardous
materials stored;
      (6)   A hazardous materials inventory showing the following:
         (a)   The name of each type of hazardous material stored;
         (b)   The capacity of each underground storage tank;
         (c)   The toxicity, reactivity and/or flammability rating of each
hazardous material to be stored; and
         (d)   The installation date of the underground storage tank; and
      (7)   The materials management plan required by §§
150.478 through
150.482.
   (D)   The city may require such additional information as it deems necessary
to properly evaluate the construction or storage permit application and whether
or not the applicant and the underground storage facility or tank system
satisfy the requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   All underground storage facility or tank system design plans and
specifications shall bear the stamp and certification of one or more
professional engineers, registered in the State of Texas, attesting to such as,
but not limited to, the following: structural soundness, seismic safety,
compatibility of construction materials with the surrounding environment and
the hazardous materials being contained, corrosion protection, mechanical
compatibility with the structural elements and conformity with minimum design
and installation plans, standards and specifications set forth in this chapter.
The certification shall bear the signature, seal and registration number of
said engineer(s).
§ 150.472 PERMIT APPROVAL.
   (A)   A permit shall be granted after:
      (1)   The applicant has filed with the city a permit application which
includes all information called for by this chapter;
      (2)   The applicant has submitted proof acceptable to the city that the
applicant is in compliance with all applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations and has been granted all permits and approvals required thereunder.
      (3)   The city, upon review of the application, has determined that the
applicant has fully complied with the provisions of this chapter and all other
applicable City Codes and Ordinances;
      (4)   The applicant has paid the non-refundable application or renewal
fee as established by the city;
      (5)   The storage tank excavation and trenches have been inspected and
approved by the Barton Springs/Edwards Aquifer Conservation District; and
      (6)   If the application is for a storage permit, the underground storage
facility or tank system has been inspected and approved by the City Engineer.
   (B)   The continued use of, and permit approval for, any underground storage
facility or tank system is subject to review and modification by the city
whenever the city has reason to believe that the provisions of this chapter
have been violated or whenever there has been any leak or release from the
underground storage tank system or any part thereof and each time the permit is
renewed. The permit is subject to modification, suspension, revocation or
termination by the city in accordance with §§
150.508 through
150.510.
§ 150.473 RENEWAL.
   (A)   A construction permit is valid for a period of six months.
   (B)   A storage permit is issued for a term of two years. Every application
for the renewal of a storage permit shall be made no later than 30 days before
expiration of the permit and shall be accompanied by payment of the appropriate
renewal fee as established by the city. However, if an underground storage
facility or tank system or any part thereof is substantially modified or
repaired, the owner and/or operator of the facility or system must renew the
storage permit upon completion of the modification or repairs. The existing
permit shall remain effective until the city makes a final decision either to
grant or deny the pending application for renewal. The city shall notify the
permit holder of the expiration date no later than 90 days before the permit
expires. No renewal shall be granted unless the city finds that the record of
the permit holder's compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with the
relevant rules and regulations of the Texas Water Commission and other state,
federal and local agencies warrants renewal, that the physical condition of the
facility, tank system and all parts thereof meet the minimum standards imposed
by this chapter, the Water Commission, and other state, federal and local
agencies.
§ 150.474 TRANSFER.
   A construction or storage permit may be transferred to a new owner or
operator of the same business at the same location only if the new owner or
operator signs the permit, accepts responsibility for all obligations under
this chapter at the time of the transfer of the business, and documents the
transfer and acceptance on a form provided by the city, no later than 30 days
after transfer of ownership or operation of the business. All permit transfers
shall be subject to the approval of the city.
§ 150.475 FEES.
   No construction or storage permit shall be granted, renewed or continued in
effect until or unless the non-refundable fee established by the city has been
paid. The fee shall be paid at the time an application is filed. No refund or
rebate of the fee shall be allowed.
§ 150.476 AMENDMENT.
   Any information required to be submitted by this chapter shall be amended or
supplemented no later than 30 days after the occurrence of any event that would
render the information contained therein untrue, misleading or incomplete.
§ 150.477 APPEAL.
   (A)   An applicant or permit holder aggrieved by any decision of the city
except a decision to modify, suspend or revoke a permit granted pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, shall have the right to appeal the decision to the
City Council. The appeal shall be perfected by giving written notice containing
the following information to the City Secretary no later than ten days after
receipt of notification of the city's decision:
      (1)   The name and address of the person making the appeal;
      (2)   The facts surrounding the particular ruling;
      (3)   The ruling of the city; and
      (4)   The technical reasons why the ruling should be set aside.
   (B)   As soon as practicable after the filing of the complete notice of
appeal, the City Council shall hear the appeal and make a decision either
affirming, modifying or reversing the decision. The person requesting the
appeal shall be notified of the decision in writing. The notification shall be
accompanied by a statement of the reasons for the decision.
   (C)   The procedures set forth in §§
150.508 through
150.510 shall govern the modification, suspension or revocation of a permit
granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 150.478 MATERIALS MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIRED.
   No construction or storage permit shall be granted unless and until the
applicant has filed with and received approval of the city of a materials
management plan, which plan shall include the information required by this
chapter.
§ 150.479 MAINTENANCE PLAN.
   The materials management plan shall include a plan for regular maintenance
of the underground storage facility and tank system, the water quality control
for stormwater runoff, and all parts thereof.
§ 150.480 MONITORING PLAN.
   The materials management plan shall include a monitoring plan which
describes in detail the methods and procedures used at the facility to prevent
and detect the release of any hazardous materials from the underground storage
facility or tank system and any part thereof. The plan shall be based on the
properties of the materials being stored, the type of containment system used
and the monitoring method involved and, at the very least, shall include:
   (A)   A description of the facility's or tank system's storage and
dispensing systems;
   (B)   A description of the facility's inventory control system, including a
copy of the inventory record forms and a description of how and when
reconciliations are performed;
   (C)   A description of the tank and line leak monitoring and detection
system(s) used at the facility; and
   (D)   With respect to equipment that can and will be visually inspected, a
description of the equipment being inspected and detailed explanation of what
the inspector will be looking for to ascertain if a release has occurred.
§ 150.481 CLOSURE PLAN.
   The materials management plan shall include a detailed closure plan which
describes procedures for terminating the storage of hazardous materials at the
underground storage facility or tank system and any part thereof, by either
closure in place or removal, in a manner that:
   (A)   Minimizes the need for further maintenance;
   (B)   Eliminates the threat to public health, safety or the environment from
residual hazardous materials at the facility;
   (C)   Demonstrates that hazardous materials that were stored in the
underground storage tanks will be removed, disposed of, neutralized or reused
in a manner which is permissible under applicable federal, state and local
laws;
   (D)   Provides that soil and/or water sample(s) from areas likely to have
the maximal amounts of contamination shall be obtained and analyzed for
residual hazardous materials by an independent laboratory acceptable to the
city and that information pertaining to the intended location of samples,
sampling methods and test procedures, as well as the test results, be provided
to the city in a timely manner; and
   (E)   Provides for the removal or decontamination of the facility and the
environment in order to minimize present and future hazards to public health,
life, property or the environment.
§ 150.482 CONTINGENCY PLAN.
   The materials management plan shall include an emergency release or leak
response plan which describes the procedures which must be followed in response
to any unauthorized discharge, spill or release of hazardous materials.
Simplified emergency procedures, which include a list of who to contact should
the leak detector or alarm be tripped or if an employee has reason to believe a
discharge or release has occurred and what measures are to be immediately
taken, shall be provided each employee at the facility and posted at
conspicuous locations at the facility.
§ 150.483 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No permit or approval for installation or construction of an underground
storage facility or tank system or any part thereof or for the substantial
modification or repair of any such facility, system or part thereof shall be
granted unless and until the applicant has submitted a permit application and
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city by the submission of appropriate
plans and other information that the design, construction and operation of the
underground storage facility or tank system in all respects complies with the
specifications contained in this chapter.
§ 150.484 SPECIFICATIONS FOR UNDERGROUND STORAGE FACILITIES.
   No person shall construct or install any underground storage facility tank
system or make any substantial modification or repair thereto, except in
accordance with the following requirements:
   (A)   Monitoring capability. All underground storage facilities and tank
systems must be equipped with monitoring systems and be monitored in accordance
with the following requirements:
      (1)   All underground storage facilities, including tanks and tank
systems, intended to be used or used for the storage of hazardous materials
shall be designed, constructed and operated with a continuous monitoring system
and an instant alert capable of detecting that the hazardous material stored in
the primary containment has entered the secondary containment. If water could
intrude into the secondary containment, a means of continuous electronic
monitoring for water intrusion shall also be provided unless water within the
secondary containment is part of the system design. The monitoring system shall
be capable of differentiating between water and the hazardous material
contained;
      (2)   An automatic telephone dialer or an audio-visual alarm system
designed to be activated by a release from the primary containment shall be
installed with alarm terminals at the underground tank site and at the Sunset
Valley City Hall;
      (3)   A minimum of three observation wells constructed of non-conductive
material, with a minimum diameter of four inches, shall be installed within
each underground storage tank excavation. The wells shall extend to a depth of
a least 12 inches below the level of the bottom of the tank(s) and shall be
lined with electronic hydrocarbon vapor sensors or be perforated in a manner so
as to be capable of detecting the presence of floating contaminants over the
entire length of the wells. At least one additional observation well shall be
installed in a location outside of and downdip of each storage tank excavation,
and shall be at least four feet deeper than the pit liner;
      (4)   Manways shall surround all turbine pumps and fill tubes to allow
inspection of fittings and to facilitate the containment of leaks or spills.
All manways shall be sealed to the storage tank in order to contain any leaks
or spills. Electronic sensors shall be located in the manways to monitor for
the presence of hydrocarbons and alert the operator of possible problems;
      (5)   Electronic hydrocarbon sensors, located at several locations along
the delivery piping, shall be installed to monitor the interstitial space and
to alert the operator of possible problems;
      (6)   Monitoring devices shall be installed between double-walled
delivery piping and the synthetic liner to monitor releases or leakage from the
piping;
      (7)   Monitoring systems and/or observation wells, and all component
parts thereof, shall be installed in accordance with any applicable codes and
shall be operated and maintained in good working order;
      (8)   Testing of monitoring equipment and emergency shut-off valves shall
be conducted by a certified technician at least once a year; the certification
record shall be maintained at the facility at all times and a copy thereof
provided the city within seven days of the annual certification.
      (9)   The permit holder shall conduct such self-monitoring inspections
and tests as the city may require and shall file reports attesting to the date
and time of each such inspection or test. These reports shall also contain a
description of the inspection or test performed, the results of each inspection
or test and the printed name and title and the initials of the inspector.
Failure to comply with the city's request pursuant to this section shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Containment requirements. Primary, secondary and tertiary levels of
containment shall be required for all underground storage tank systems. Such
systems shall meet the following specifications:
      (1)   All tanks or containers shall be highly resistant to the hazardous
materials they are designed to contain and shall also be resistant to the
particular environment in which they are stored and any physical handling they
may be subject to for their projected design life;
      (2)   All tanks or containers must bear labels certifying adherence to
appropriate specified construction methods and factory pressure testing for
tank integrity, and must be installed by a licensed underground storage tank
installer according to the manufacturer's specifications;
      (3)   All primary containment shall be product-tight;
      (4)   All secondary containment shall be external to and separate from
the primary containment and all tertiary containment shall be external to and
separate from the secondary containment. All secondary and tertiary containment
shall be constructed of materials of sufficient thickness, density and
composition so as not to be structurally weakened as a result of contact with
any discharged hazardous material and so as to be capable of containing any
hazardous material discharged from a primary container and preventing its
release into the environment for a period of time longer than the maximum
anticipated time sufficient to allow recovery of the discharged hazardous
material;
      (5)   In the case of an underground storage tank with one primary
container, the secondary and tertiary containment shall be large enough to
contain at least 110% of the volume of the primary container;
      (6)   In the case of an underground storage tank with multiple primary
containers, the secondary and tertiary containment shall be large enough to
contain 110% of the volume of the largest primary container placed in it, or
50% of the aggregate internal volume of all primary containers in the storage
tank, whichever is greater;
      (7)   Tertiary containment shall be provided by a liner system approved
by the city to meet the following standards:
         (a)   The liner must be capable of preventing migration of any stored
or leaked materials from the tank hold for a period of at least 50 years;
         (b)   The liner must be of sufficient strength and thickness to
prevent failure, including from static head and external hydrogeologic forces;
         (c)   The liner must be constructed of material that will maintain its
strength, impermeability and thickness even when in direct and long-term
contact with the stored or leaked materials;
         (d)   The liner must be placed on a foundation capable of supporting
the liner and preventing failure due to settlement, compression or uplift;
         (e)   The liner must be installed to the surface of the tank hold;
         (f)   The liner must be installed according to manufacturer's
specifications, and installation, field-seaming, and field-repair of any liner
must be performed only by qualified personnel properly trained and certified by
the liner manufacturer;
         (g)   The liner must be protected from puncture, abrasion, or other
damage during placement, and a protective layer of material is required where
the presence of any material could puncture or damage the liner;
         (h)   After installation, but before placing the tanks, the liner
shall be properly tested in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications.
      (8)   All tank excavation pits shall be equipped with liners which come
at least three feet up the sidewalls of the excavation, if the excavation is in
clay, and come at least to the top of the storage tanks if the excavation is in
limestone. The liners shall be of such design and material so as to be
impervious to and non-reactive with hydrocarbons and may be a custom-fitted
polyliner;
      (9)   An underground storage tank with a double-walled primary container
with a complete double shell shall be deemed to meet the primary and secondary
containment requirements set forth in this section if the outer shell is
constructed primarily of non-earthen materials, including but not limited to
concrete, steel and fiberglass, which provide structural support, and an
electronic leak detection system is located in the interstitial space (between
the shells) which is continuously monitoring the space for the entry of
hazardous substances from the inner container to the space and for the
detection of water intrusion into the space from the outer shell;
      (10)   Appropriately sized catch pans shall be installed under all
delivery pumps;
      (11)   All underground delivery piping must be of double-walled
fiberglass construction which provides secondary containment of any fuel
releases from the primary piping, and shall be surrounded by synthetic lining;
and
      (12)   In the case of readily visible portions of underground storage
tank piping, no secondary or tertiary containment is required, provided that it
is being regularly and periodically visually inspected in an approved manner.
   (C)   Overfill protection and transfer spill prevention. An approved means
of overfill protection and transfer spill prevention shall be required for all
underground storage facilities. At a minimum:
      (1)   An overfill prevention device shall be connected to the vent line
to restrict flow into an underground storage tank when the tank is 90% full;
      (2)   An overfill containment device shall surround the fill tube to
collect any residual drainage from the delivery hoses;
      (3)   A pressure loss indicator shall be installed on turbine pumps to
automatically shut the pumps down should a loss in pressure occur;
      (4)   A line leak detector shall be installed on submersible pumps to
automatically shut the pumps down in the event of a leak or release;
      (5)   The piping trench shall slope backwards to the line tank pit at an
angle sufficient to insure that any released or escaped hazardous materials
flow towards the tank pit;
      (6)   Collection pans shall be installed beneath each dispenser to
collect any small leaks or spills occurring during maintenance of the
dispensers; and
      (7)   Underpump emergency valves shall be installed on each fuel delivery
line beneath the dispensers to automatically shut off fuel flow in the event of
damage to the dispensers from collision, fire or any other cause.
   (D)   Drainage and sumpage removal. Drainage of precipitation and sumpage
from within an underground storage tank shall be controlled and disposed of in
accordance with all applicable state, federal and local laws and regulations
for the containment and disposal of hazardous liquids so as to prevent
hazardous materials from being released into the environment in an unapproved
manner. No drainage or sumpage removal system shall be approved unless the said
system meets the following minimum requirements:
      (1)   Site surface drainage shall be designed so that runoff from the
areas around the pump islands and storage tanks is collected and routed to a
water quality control.
      (2)   The water quality control shall be designed to treat the first one-
half inch of runoff from the collection area to achieve at least the following
removal efficiencies: 95% TSS removal and 99% removal of oil and grease or
chemical oxygen demand.
      (3)   The water quality control shall be designed to bypass water to
prevent scouring of the collecting material.
      (4)   The water quality control, including any gaskets, shall be
constructed of materials that will not degrade during long-term exposure to the
stored materials.
      (5)   The water quality control shall be installed according to
applicable manufacturer's recommendations.
      (6)   The water quality control shall include an electronic hydrocarbon
sensor to alert the operator of the need to remove hydrocarbons from the
separator.
   (E)   Flammable liquids. In addition to any other requirements of this
chapter, no person shall construct or install any new underground storage tank
intended for the storage of flammable liquid or make any substantial repair or
addition to or modification of an existing underground storage tank system
containing flammable liquid, unless and until said tank system is designed and
constructed to meet, at a minimum, the standards provided by the State of Texas
"Rules for the Safe Storage, Handling, and Use of Flammable Liquids at Retail
Service Stations" (28 TAC 27.601-27.620).
§ 150.485 REPLACEMENT OF TANKS.
   Each underground storage tank shall be replaced every ten years from the
date on which its initial installation was approved by the city.
§ 150.486 NEW UNDERGROUND STORAGE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Upon receipt of any underground storage tank at the site, and prior to
lifting the tank into the tank excavation, each tank shall be soap tested in
accordance with Section 2-7 of the Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code,
adopted by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA 30).
   (B)   After installation of the underground storage tank into the tank
excavation and before being completely covered, each tank shall be air tested
with a gauge pressure not to exceed five pounds per square inch. Product piping
shall also be tested, but with a minimum gauge pressure of 30 pounds per square
inch. Any primary piping shall be tested at a minimum gauge pressure of 30
pounds per square inch. Any secondary or tertiary containment piping shall be
tested at a minimum gauge pressure of five pounds per square inch. If the
underground tank meets the requirements of the air test then the tank shall be
ballasted with water or fuel until placed into service.
   (C)   Manual monitoring of secondary and tertiary containment shall begin
when tanks are ballasted. Continuous monitoring shall begin when tanks are
placed in service. Results of all monitoring prior to placing tanks in service
shall be submitted to the city before or during final inspection. A precision
test may be used in lieu of manual monitoring, if accomplished before the tanks
are placed into service.
   (D)   The owner of the tank may elect to not ballast underground storage
tanks with water upon installation if the tank is air tested when installed and
backfilled, and, prior to being placed into service, the tank is tested in the
operating condition using the precision test defined by the National Fire
Protection Association Pamphlet 329, "Recommended Practices for Handling
Underground Leakage of Flammable Combustible Liquids," as amended, for proving
the integrity of an underground storage tank.
§ 150.487 EXISTING UNDERGROUND STORAGE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Storage tanks. The tank shall be tested using a precision test which
is capable of measuring a quantitative leak rate and which controls,
eliminates, measures or otherwise takes into account changes in the coefficient
of expansion of the liquid due to temperature changes, containment system
deformations due to pressure changes, evaporative losses, and other relevant
variables during the course of the test, as discussed in the National Fire
Protection Association Pamphlet 329, "Recommended Practices for Handling
Underground Leakage of Flammable and Combustible Liquids," as amended. Such
testing shall prove the integrity of an underground storage tank according to
the following schedule:
 
Tankage           Test Frequency
0 to 5 years old  On the fifth year
6 to 10 years old Every two years
 
   (B)   Piping. The piping shall be tested using a precision test method
capable of detecting both pressure and volume changes during testing and in
accordance with the following:
      (1)   Suction and gravity flow piping systems shall be tested using a
precision test method capable of detecting a leak rate of at least 0.05 gallons
per hour;
      (2)   Pressure pumped piping systems fitted with approved continuous line
pressure leak sensors capable of restricting the flow of product in the
delivery system when a leak is detected shall be precision tested on the same
schedule as the tank to which they are attached. Pressure pumped piping systems
shall be tested using a precision test method capable of detecting a leak rate
of at least 0.01 gallons per hour; and
      (3)   Pressure pumped piping systems fitted with approved continuous line
pressure leak sensors capable of completely shutting down the delivery system
when a leak rate of at least 0.05 gallons per hour is detected shall be
precision tested every three years. Pressure pumped piping systems shall be
tested using a precision test method of detecting a leak rate of at least 0.01
gallons per hour.
§ 150.488 CONDUCT OF TESTS.
   (A)   The permit holder shall insure that any precision test required by
this chapter is performed by a testing company licensed by the Texas Natural
Resource Conservation Commission or its successor and which is not the owner,
operator or employee of the facility to be tested.
   (B)   Installation tests, air tests and precision tests required by this
chapter shall be conducted only in the presence of an inspector from the city.
No such test shall be conducted unless and until a complete permit application
is on file with the city. The fact that a required test result is not filed
with the city shall constitute prima facie evidence that such test was not
performed.
   (C)   No later than 20 working days after any test required by this chapter
is performed, the underground storage facility or tank owner, permit holder,
and/or testing company shall provide copies of the results of such test(s) to
the city. In the event a system or component part thereof fails such a test,
this information shall be provided to the city by the owner, permit holder,
and/or testing company no later than three days after the date of the test(s).
§ 150.489 GENERAL.
   (A)   No underground storage tank system or part thereof shall be abandoned.
   (B)   Underground storage facilities which are temporarily out of service,
and are intended to be returned to use, shall be safeguarded in an approved
manner and must continue to be monitored and inspected.
   (C)   Any underground storage tank which is not being monitored and
inspected in accordance with this chapter must be closed or removed in a manner
approved by the city as provided for herein and as specified in the materials
management plan.
§ 150.490 APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL.
   The permit holder shall apply for approval to close an underground storage
tank and pay the closure fee as established by City Council no less than 30
days before closing the facility. Such closure shall be performed by a person
holding a current license as an underground tank installer or on-site
supervisor in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the Texas
Water Commission or its Successor, and shall be in accordance with the closure
plan included in the materials management plan for the facility, unless an
addition to or modification of the closure plan is necessary, in which case the
application for closure shall contain such addition(s) or modification(s). This
30-day period may be waived by the city for good cause. The final stage of the
underground storage tank closure shall be witnessed by an inspector from the
city. If reinspection is necessary due to improper closure, a reinspection fee
as established by City Council shall be paid.
§ 150.491 SOIL CONTAMINATION.
   If the soil and/or water samples required by the closure plan indicate soil
or subsurface contamination, the permit holder shall be required to demonstrate
to the city that the condition no longer presents a threat of harm to the
public health, life, property or the environment as a condition of approval to
close the facility.
§ 150.492 OBSERVATION WELLS.
   The city may require the installation of an observation well in the tank pit
backfill area prior to the taking of any closure action.
§ 150.493 TANK REMOVAL STANDARDS.
   The owner or operator who is removing, or has removed, any regulated storage
tank must demonstrate that no materials stored in, leaked, or spilled from the
tank remain within the soils or groundwater. Such a demonstration will consist,
at a minimum, of four samples collected from locations with the greatest
likelihood of residual materials and analyzed for chemicals that are most
likely to identify residual material. The owner or operator must obtain advance
approval from the city of a tank removal plan that includes the proposed number
of samples to be collected, their anticipated locations, and the chemicals for
which the samples will be analyzed.
§ 150.494 PREVENTION OF LEAKS, RELEASES, SPILLS AND OVERSPILLS.
   All owners, operators and/or permit holders of underground storage tank
facilities, systems and/or component parts thereof shall ensure that the
facilities, systems and component parts are constructed, operated, maintained
and managed in a manner that will prevent releases of hazardous materials
regulated by this chapter, and further, that spills and overfills of such
materials do not occur.
§ 150.495 INITIAL RESPONSE TO LEAKS OR RELEASES.
   Upon discovery or identification of any leak or release, the owner, operator
and/or permit holder of the underground storage tank facility or system shall
take immediate action to prevent any further release into the environment of
the hazardous material regulated by this chapter, including shutting down the
leaking underground storage tank system or any component part thereof as
determined necessary.
§ 150.496 REPORTING OF LEAKS OR RELEASES.
   (A)   Any leak or release from the primary containment which the storage
permit holder is able to clean up within eight hours, and which does not escape
from the secondary containment, does not increase the hazards of fire or
explosion, and does not cause any deterioration of the secondary containment,
shall be recorded on the permit holder's monitoring reports and reported to the
city within seven days of its occurrence.
   (B)   Any leak or release from the primary containment which increases the
hazard of fire or explosion, or causes any deterioration of or escapes from the
secondary containment, shall be reported by the storage permit holder to the
City Fire Department or Police Department immediately upon detection. The
reporting party shall provide information relating to the ability of the permit
holder to contain and dispose of the hazardous material, the estimated time
required to complete containment and disposal operations and the type and
degree of hazard created.
§ 150.497 REQUIRED TESTING AND CORRECTIVE ACTION.
   If there has been a leak or release from an underground storage facility or
tank system or any part thereof which presents a potential threat to public
health, safety or the environment or where there is any suspicion of soil or
subsurface contamination, soil and/or groundwater samples from areas likely to
have maximal amounts of contamination shall be obtained and analyzed for
residual hazardous materials by an independent laboratory in a manner
acceptable to the city. Information pertaining to the location of samples,
sampling methods, test procedures, and test results shall be provided to the
city no later than 15 days after the testing is completed. If there is any
indication of soil or subsurface contamination, the permit holder shall be
required to immediately initiate cleanup or decontamination operations and to
demonstrate to the city that the condition no longer presents a threat of harm
to the public health, safety or environment. If test results indicate the
material is a hazardous waste, the matter will be referred to the Texas Natural
Resource Conservation Commission and the city may take such other action as is
authorized by this chapter or any other regulation or statute.
§ 150.498 CORRECTIVE ACTION FOR UNKNOWN SOURCES OF POLLUTION.
   When an unknown source of pollution from the release of materials regulated
by this chapter is discovered, the owner or permit holder of any underground
storage tank determined by the city to be a potential source of the release
shall, upon written request from the city:
   (A)   Submit inventory records for the preceding 12-month period to the city
for review;
   (B)   Submit records of repairs performed on the facility for the preceding
three years to the city for review;
   (C)   Cause each facility to be precision tested within five days of receipt
of the written request from the city. The underground storage facility owner,
permit holder or testing company shall provide copies of the results of the
tests to the city no later than ten working days after the date the tests were
performed;
   (D)   If an underground storage tank fails the above mentioned precision
test(s), the owner or permit holder shall install one or more approved
monitoring wells adjacent to the underground storage tank and shall have an
independent laboratory acceptable to the city perform analyses on soil, core
and/or water samples extracted from these wells to determine if any
contamination exists. The city and/or its designated agent, including but not
limited to the Barton Spring/Edwards Aquifer Conservation District, shall
determine which samples shall be extracted from these wells. The results of
these analyses shall be provided to the city no later than ten working days
after the date the tests were performed; and
   (E)   All costs for such precision tests, well installations, sampling, and
lab analyses shall be borne by the owner or permit holder of the underground
storage tank system.
§ 150.499 PERMIT REVIEW.
   The city shall review the storage permit when there has been a leak or
release or when it determines that an underground storage tank system or any
part thereof is unsafe, and may modify, suspend or revoke the permit in
accordance with the provisions of §§
150.508 through
150.510. In determining whether to suspend, terminate or modify the permit, the
city shall consider the age of the underground storage tank system or part
thereof, the condition of the primary, secondary and tertiary containment, the
leak detection monitoring methods employed, the feasibility of any required
repair or modifications, the concentration of the hazardous materials involved,
the severity of any potential leaks or unauthorized releases and the
suitability of any other long term preventative measures which meet the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 150.500 CORRECTIVE ACTION BY CITY.
   (A)   The city may undertake corrective action in response to a release or
threatened release if:
      (1)   The owner or operator of the underground storage tank facility,
system or component part is unwilling or unable to take the corrective action
necessary to protect the public health or safety and/or the environment;
      (2)   The owner or operator cannot, after reasonable attempts to do so by
the city, be located; or
      (3)   The city determines that immediate action is necessary to protect
the public health and safety and/or the environment.
   (B)   In the event the city undertakes corrective action in response to a
release or threatened release as authorized by division (A) above, the city may
charge the owner or operator for the reasonable costs incurred in connection
therewith, and may use all legal means to secure payment of said costs. Nothing
herein is intended to limit or preclude the city from taking any other action
authorized by law or this chapter to secure compliance with the terms hereof or
to preserve and protect the public health and safety and the environment.
§ 150.501 REPAIRS.
   (A)   If there has been a leak or release of hazardous materials from an
underground storage facility or tank system or any part thereof not under
pressure, the owner or permit holder may repair the tank once by an interior
coating process if the tank meets all of the following criteria:
      (1)   An inspector qualified to check tank interiors for possible damage
shall enter the tank and inspect the entire surface and certify that the shell
will provide structural support for interior lining;
      (2)   The material used to repair the tank by an interior coating process
is approved by the city as compatible with the hazardous materials to be stored
in the tank;
      (3)   The material used to repair the tank by an interior coating process
is applied by a person holding a valid underground tank installer or on-site
supervisor license issued by the State of Texas and in accordance with
nationally recognized engineering practices, such as American Petroleum
Institute Publication #1631;
      (4)   Each interior lined steel tank shall be protected from corrosion
through the use of an engineered, properly maintained and installed cathodic
protection system;
      (5)   Before the tank is placed back in service following the repair, the
tank is tested in operating condition using a precision test method. The
precision test shall not be performed by the owner or operator of the tank or
by an employee of the owner or operator; and
      (6)   The permit holder shall notify the city of his or her intent to
interior line an underground storage tank and shall apply for authorization on
forms provided by the city. No work shall commence prior to the city's approval
of such application. The permit holder shall submit documentation of interior
lining and cathodic protection to the city no later than 30 days after the tank
has been interior lined.
   (B)   If there has been no leak or release from an underground storage tank
containing hazardous materials not under pressure, the permit holder may line
the interior of the tank as a preventative measure in accordance with the
requirements in division (A)(6) above.
   (C)   Damaged piping shall not be repaired, but shall instead be replaced.
§ 150.502 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.
   Copies of the construction or storage permit applications, the permits,
inspection check sheets, monitoring logs, inventory records and all other
records required by this chapter shall be maintained by the permit holder for a
period of not less than three years. Said records shall be made available to
the city during normal working hours and on reasonable notice.
§ 150.503 PUBLIC RECORDS.
   (A)   The permit, permit application, materials management plan, and any
other documentation maintained pursuant to this chapter are public records
except as provided in §
150.504. Any request for a public record hereunder shall be submitted in
writing to the City Secretary.
   (B)   In the event of an emergency, the city may disclose pertinent
information maintained pursuant to this chapter to appropriate fire, police and
emergency medical services personnel. Said fire, police and emergency medical
services personnel shall protect the disclosure of such information coming into
their possession from release to the public.
§ 150.504 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   In the event that any information required by this chapter constitutes a
trade secret, or if its disclosure would give advantage to competitors, or if
for any other reason its disclosure is not required under the Texas Open
Records Act, Article 6252-17a V.A.T.S., that information shall be identified in
a coded manner (with key) such that it cannot be revealed to any person other
than city personnel, provided that the applicant requests that of such
information be kept confidential in accordance with §
150.506
§ 150.505 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The city shall protect from disclosure any and all information
required to be so protected under the Texas Open Records Act. Permit applicants
or permit holders are encouraged but not required to comply with the following
procedures to assist the city in maintaining confidentiality:
      (1)   At the time such information is submitted in writing to the city, a
written claim of confidentiality should be simultaneously submitted, specifying
each piece of information for which confidentiality is claimed. An assertion of
confidentiality for the entire document shall not be sufficient;
      (2)   The confidential information sought to be protected should be
submitted to the city on a separate form or forms, clearly and conspicuously
marked or labeled as containing confidential information; and
      (3)   A letter or legal memorandum, signed by legal counsel for the
permit holder or permit applicant, supporting the asserted confidential status
and setting forth the reasons why each piece of information should be given
confidential status under the Texas Open Records Act, should accompany each
piece of information for which a claim of confidentiality is asserted.
   (B)   The city shall not protect from disclosure any information which in
the written opinion of the City Attorney or the Attorney General of Texas is
required to be disclosed under the Texas Open Records Act.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require any person to
disclose to the city any information the disclosure of which would violate any
federal law or contract with the United States Government.
§ 150.506 CITY INSPECTION.
   (A)   The city shall conduct inspections for the purpose of ascertaining
compliance with this chapter and causing to be corrected any conditions which
would constitute any violation of this chapter.
   (B)   No new underground storage tank, or substantial modification or repair
of an existing underground storage facility or tank system or any part thereof,
shall be covered without approval by an inspector from the city and/or the
Barton Springs/Edwards Aquifer Conservation District to confirm compliance with
the applicable provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to hold the city or the
Barton Springs/Edwards Aquifer Conservation District or any officer, employee,
or representative thereof, responsible for any damage to persons or property by
reason of making or failing to make an inspection required or authorized by the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 150.507 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   Whenever necessary for the purpose of investigating or enforcing the
provisions of this chapter, or whenever any officer of the city or his or her
designate, including but not limited to, an inspector from the Barton Springs/
Edwards Aquifer Conservation District, has reasonable cause to believe that
there exists at any underground storage tank system conditions which constitute
a violation of this chapter, said officer may enter such facility at all
reasonable times to inspect the facility or to perform any duty imposed on any
of said officers by law; provided that if such facility be occupied, the
officer shall first present proper credentials and request entry, and further
provided that if such facility is unoccupied, the officer shall first make a
reasonable effort to contact a responsible person from such facility and
request entry. If entry is refused, the officer seeking entry shall have
recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry, including fines and
excavation, if necessary.
   (B)   Any permit applicant shall agree in writing to allow entry by an
officer of the city or his or her designate to the facility or underground
storage tank system which is the subject of the application for the purpose of
inspection of conditions during the approval stage and during construction.
   (C)   Any permit holder shall agree to allow entry to the facility or
underground storage tank system which is the subject of the permit for the
purpose of inspection by city officials or their designates.
§ 150.508 PERMIT MODIFICATION, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION; GENERAL.
   If the city determines that there has been a failure to comply with any term
or condition of the permit and associated documents, or with any provision of
this chapter, or if there has been a leak or release or the city has determined
that an underground storage tank system or any part thereof is unsafe, the city
may modify, suspend or revoke the permit in accordance with the procedures set
forth herein.
§ 150.509 NONCOMPLIANCE.
   For purposes of this chapter, non-compliance shall mean and include any one
or more of the following:
   (A)   The failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions this
chapter;
   (B)   The failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions of any
relevant City Code or ordinance other than the underground tank storage
regulations, or with any applicable rule, regulation or law of any other
federal, state or local agency;
   (C)   The failure to the permittee to comply with any term or condition
imposed by the city in connection with the issuance of the permit;
   (D)   The making of any material misrepresentation or false or misleading
statement by the permit applicant or one acting on his behalf in connection
with or on the permit application;
   (E)   The failure of the permittee to timely commence the work required or
authorized by the permit as approved by the city; or
   (F)   The failure of the permittee to timely complete the work required or
authorized by the permit as approved by the city.
§ 150.510 MODIFICATION, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permit may be modified, suspended or revoked for:
      (1)   Non-compliance as that term is defined in §
150.509;
      (2)   The occurrence of any leak or release from the underground storage
tank system or any component part thereof;
      (3)   The hazardous or unsafe condition of the underground storage tank
system on any component thereof; or
      (4)   Any other reason allowed by law.
   (B)   In determining whether a permit should be modified, suspended or
revoked, the city shall consider, among other factors, those matters identified
in §
150.499.
   (C)   If the city determines that a permittee is in noncompliance, as that
term is defined herein, or that a permit should be modified, suspended or
revoked for any other reason set forth in §
150.510(A), the city shall give written notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the permittee and, if not he same person, the property
owner, which notice shall:
      (1)   State the nature of the noncompliance or other condition warranting
modification, suspension or revocation;
      (2)   Direct the specific action be taken to correct the noncompliance or
other condition warranting modification, suspension or revocation within 30
days of the receipt of the notice;
      (3)   Advise that a hearing may be requested before the City Council to
determine whether or not the permittee is in noncompliance, and whether or not
the permit should be modified, suspended or revoked;
      (4)   Advise that to request a hearing, a written application therefor
must be filed with the City Secretary within ten days of receipt of the notice
provided for herein; and
      (5)   Advise that if no hearing is requested within said ten days, and if
the required corrective work is not completed within the 30-day period
specified in the notice, the permit shall be modified, suspended or revoked as
appropriate.
   (D)   If no hearing is requested and if the required corrective action is
not completed within the time specified by the city, the permit shall be
modified, suspended or revoked, and no work shall be done on or hazardous
materials stored or handled in the facility, system or a component part thereof
except as thereafter expressly directed or authorized by the city.
   (E)   If a hearing has been requested within ten days of receipt of the
notice by the filing of a written application therefor with the City Secretary,
the City Council shall, no later than 30 days after receipt of said request,
hold a hearing to determine whether the permittee is in noncompliance or if
some other reason exists which would warrant the modification, suspension or
revocation of the permit and whether such action should be taken. Written
notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be given to the
permittee and, if not the same person, the owner of the property.
   (F)   If, after hearing, the City Council determines that the permittee is
in noncompliance or that such other condition exists that would warrant
modification, suspension or revocation of the permit, and that the permit
should be modified, suspended or revoked, it shall order, if appropriate, that
the necessary corrective action be completed within such time as the Council
directs. If the work is not so completed, the permit shall be modified,
suspended or revoked, and no further work shall be done or hazardous materials
stored or handled except as thereafter expressly directed or authorized by the
city.
§ 150.511 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning the property on which an
underground storage tank facility or tank system or part thereof is located, or
any person owning or having physical control of an underground storage tank
system or part thereof, to receive, produce or store, or to allow the receipt,
production, or storage of, any material or materials regulated by this chapter
without first obtaining and having a current hazardous materials underground
storage permit and except in strict compliance with the terms of this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or
substantially modify or repair any underground storage tank facility, system or
component part thereof subject to the requirements of this chapter without
first obtaining a construction permit and except in strict compliance with the
terms of this chapter.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning the property on which an
underground storage facility or tank system or any part thereof is located or
any person having physical control of an underground storage tank facility or
system or any part thereof to close or to allow closure of such facility,
system or part thereof without first obtaining approval from the city pursuant
to §
150.484.
   (D)   Any person to whom a hazardous materials underground facility
construction or storage permit has been granted commits a violation of this
chapter if such person fails to observe and perform any term or condition
stated in the permit, materials management plan, or in any other document
submitted in order to secure the permit.
   (E)   The owner of any land or underground storage tank where anything in
violation of this chapter is constructed, installed, placed or used, and any
architect, builder, contractor, agent, laboratory, independent inspector, or
any other person employed in connection therewith commits a violation of this
chapter if he or she knowingly aids, assists, or contributes to the Commission
of any such violation.
§ 150.512 REMEDIES.
   Nothing in this section shall limit in any manner the authority of the city
to seek any other relief, including, but not limited to, injunctive or other
civil relief available under the law.
§ 150.513 RECOVERY OF COSTS.
   (A)   The city may, upon notice to the permittee, retain such experts,
including but not limited to engineers, hydrologists and attorneys, to advise
and represent the city in connection with its determination that a permittee is
in non-compliance, or that such other condition exists that would warrant
modification, suspension or revocation of the permit. In the event that the
city does determine that action should be taken with respect to the permit, the
permittee shall reimburse the city for the reasonable costs incurred in
connection with the retention of such experts.
   (B)   In addition to any other method allowed by law pursuant to which the
city can recover the costs it incurs in connection with the permit
modification, suspension or revocation proceedings, including those authorized
by division (A) above, the city may, at its discretion, collect on any bond or
letter of credit required of the permittee.
   (C)   Nothing in this section is intended to limit the remedies available to
the city.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING
§ 150.525 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations for outdoor lighting
that will:
   (A)   Permit the use of outdoor lighting that does not exceed the minimum
levels recommended for night-time safety, utility, security, productivity,
enjoyment, and commerce;
   (B)   Curtail light pollution, reduce sky glow, and improve the nighttime
environment;
   (C)   Reduce the adverse ecological impact of night lighting to wildlife;
   (D)   Protect against light trespass onto adjacent properties which may
negatively affect occupants of adjacent properties and protect against glare
onto public rights of way which may impair vision of motorists; and
   (E)   Conserve energy and resources to the greatest extent possible.
§ 150.526 LIGHTING ZONES.
   The lighting zones shall determine the limitations for lighting as specified
in this chapter. The lighting zones shall be as follows (Figure A):
   (A)   Open space lighting zone: This applies to all sites zoned Park (P),
Greenspace/Preservation (G), and Conservation Area (C). This also includes
areas zoned Planned Unit Development (PUD) that are owned by the city.
   (B)   Residential lighting zone: This applies to all sites zoned as Single
Family Residential (SF) and Planned Unit Development not owned by the city.
   (C)    Non-residential lighting zone: This applies to all sites zoned as
Government, Utilities, and Institutional (GUI), Conditional Overlay Development
(COD), Highway Commercial (HC), Neighborhood Commercial (NC), and Neighborhood
Office (NO).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/79c532003de10fc6987b7b2a233f3f572d8a6a80/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2051.png]
§ 150.527 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   All outdoor lighting shall be installed in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter as well as applicable electrical, energy, and
building codes adopted pursuant to §§
150.395 through
150.427 and §§
150.440 through
150.446.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   This chapter applies within the city limits.
      (2)   Nothing herein shall be construed as preventing or limiting the
city from applying this chapter to the extraterritorial jurisdiction ("ETJ") by
agreement with an affected property owner.
      (3)   Except as described below, all outdoor lighting installed after the
effective date of this chapter shall comply with these requirements. This
includes new light fixtures and replacement light fixtures.
   (C)   Exemptions. The following are exempt from the application of the
regulations of this chapter:
      (1)   Lighting equipment required by law to be installed on motor
vehicles;
      (2)   Lighting by a governmental entity within the public right-of-way or
easement for the principal purpose of illuminating roads, highways, sidewalks,
and trails. No exemption shall apply to any street light and to any lighting
within the public right-of-way or easement when the purpose of the light
fixture is to illuminate outside of the public right-of-way or easement;
      (3)   Lighting for public monuments and statuary on public property;
      (4)   Lighting solely for signs which is regulated by and in compliance
with §§
150.700 through
150.736;
      (5)   Temporary lighting for theatrical, television, performance areas
and construction sites;
      (6)   Underwater lighting in swimming pools and other water features;
      (7)   Temporary lighting and seasonal lighting with individual bulbs less
than ten watts and 70 lumens;
      (8)   Lighting that is only used for emergency conditions;
      (9)   Lighting approved for a special event in connection with a special
use permit; and
      (10)   Lighting required by federal or state laws and regulations.
   (D)   Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to do
the following:
      (1)   Install lighting that is not in compliance with this chapter;
      (2)   Fail to comply with any terms or conditions set forth in a permit
issued under this chapter;
      (3)   Use nonconforming lighting after the time or the event described in
division (E)(3) demonstrates that such use is prohibited;
      (4)   Install any mercury vapor fixture or bulb for use as outdoor
lighting;
      (5)   Install any wall pack style fixture for use as outdoor lighting
unless the fixture is rated by the manufacturer as full cutoff;
      (6)   Install bulbs with a color temperature above 3,000 Kelvin;
      (7)   Install any barn-light style fixture for use as outdoor lighting
unless the fixture includes a full opaque reflector instead of the standard
translucent lens; or
      (8)   The operation of searchlights for advertising purposes is
prohibited.
   (E)   Existing lighting.
      (1)   All existing outdoor lighting that was legally installed before the
enactment of this chapter that does not conform to the standards specified and
imposed by this chapter shall be considered nonconforming. Nonconforming
outdoor lighting is allowed to remain until required to be replaced pursuant to
the terms of this chapter.
      (2)   If more than 50% of the residential or non-residential structure
has been destroyed, demolished, or will be remodeled, the nonconforming status
expires and the nonconforming outdoor lighting on the property must be removed
and may only be replaced with lighting that conforms to the standards of this
chapter.
      (3)   Nonconforming outdoor lighting shall be discontinued or brought
into conformance with this chapter as follows:
         (a)   Non-residential lighting zone: Existing outdoor lighting that is
not in compliance with the regulations of this §§
150.525 through
150.535 shall no longer have an allowed nonconforming status and must be
discontinued within 90 days after the issuance of any of the following for the
subject property:
            1.   Watershed development permit;
            2.   Zoning changes;
            3.   Subdivision approval; or
            4.   Building permit for exterior changes or additions.
         (b)   For areas within the non-residential lighting zone all existing
nonconforming lighting must be discontinued within ten years after the
enactment of this chapter.
         (c)   Residential lighting zone: Issuance of a building permit for
improvement(s) that include moving or adding one or more exterior wall(s) shall
terminate the nonconforming status of all existing non-compliant lighting on
the affected wall(s) on the affected property; within 90 days after issuance of
such permit non-complying lighting shall be removed, no longer used, or brought
into compliance.
         (d)   Abandonment of nonconforming status. If the structure remains
vacant for a continuous period of six months, the nonconforming status of
outdoor lighting on the property expires and use of the nonconforming outdoor
lighting must be discontinued.
§ 150.528 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Automatic switching requirements. All lighting shall have an automatic
control or device that will extinguish outdoor lighting when sufficient
daylight is available. This can be done through a photoelectric switch,
astronomic time switch or equivalent functions from a programmable lighting
controller, building automation system or lighting energy management system,
all with battery or similar backup power or device.
   (B)   Architectural/landscape lighting. Architectural lighting used to
illuminate the wall of a building or landscape lighting used to illuminate
trees or other landscape elements is permitted subject to the following:
      (1)   Architectural and landscape lighting that is directed downward onto
a wall, tree or other landscape feature shall be included in the total lumen
limits per site standards.
      (2)   In residential lighting zones, architectural and landscape lighting
that is directed upward onto a wall, tree or other landscape feature shall be
partially shielded and shall be included for the purpose of measuring total
lumens for partially shielded fixtures.
   (C)   Flagpole lighting. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit or apply
to any flagpole lighting in existence prior to the adoption of this chapter.
For flagpole lighting installed after the adoption of this chapter, the
following shall apply:
      (1)   Flagpoles illuminated from below are limited to a height of 25 feet
aboveground level. Only a single spot-type fixture whose maximum initial output
is 75 lumens per foot, measured from the light fixture to the top of the
flagpole is permitted. The fixture shall be mounted so that the lens is
perpendicular to the flagpole.
      (2)   Flagpoles illuminated from above may utilize a light fixture
attached to the top of the flagpole or a fixture mounted above the top of the
flagpole on a structure within 15 feet of the flagpole, each of which must
direct light to the ground and shall not exceed 800 lumens.
      (3)   Lighting used for flagpole illumination shall be included in the
total outdoor light output calculation for non-residential lighting zones.
§ 150.529 NON-RESIDENTIAL LIGHTING ZONE STANDARDS.
   For non-residential property all outdoor lighting shall be fully shielded
and shall comply with the following standards:
   (A)   Total site lumen limit. The total installed initial light fixture
lumens of all outdoor lighting shall not exceed the total site lumen limit. The
total site lumen limit shall be determined using either the parking space
method (Table A) or the hardscape area method (Table B). Only one method shall
be used per permit application, and for sites with existing lighting, existing
lighting shall be included in the calculations of total installed lumens. The
total installed lumens are calculated as the sum of the initial lumens for all
light fixtures.
   (B)   Parking space method. Allowed lumens per site for non-residential
outdoor lighting calculated using the parking space method. This method may
only be applied to properties with a maximum of ten parking spaces including
handicap accessible spaces.
 
TABLE A: PARKING METHOD
LZ-2: Non-Residential
630 lumens per parking space
 
   (C)   Hardscape area method. Allowed total lumens per site for non-
residential outdoor lighting calculated using the hardscape area method. This
method may be used for any project. When lighting is provided at an
intersection of a site driveway or entrance and a public street, a total of 600
square feet of hardscape for each such intersection may be added to the total
hardscape for purposes of determining total lumens allowed. Total hardscape
shall calculated as the total of all on-site parking lots, drives, entrances,
curbs, ramps, stairs, steps, medians, walkways, and non-vegetated landscaping
that is ten feet or less in width.
 
TABLE B: HARDSCAPE METHOD
LZ-2: Non-Residential
2.0 lumens per square foot of hardscape*
*Maximum 100,000 lumens per acre
 
   (D)   Allowances for special site features. Table C can be used for specific
site features that may require additional lighting.
 
TABLE C: ADDITIONAL ALLOWANCE FOR SPECIAL SITE FEATURES
Non-Residential Special Site Features
Additional allowances for sales and service facilities. No more than two
additional allowances per site
Maximum lumens per acre with additional        150,000
allowances.
Outdoor Sales Lots. This allowance is lumens
per square foot of uncovered sales lot used
exclusively for the display of merchandise for
sale and may not include the driveways,        8 lumens per square foot
parking or other non-sale areas. Light
fixtures must be within 40 feet of the sales
area to use this allowance.
 
Outdoor Sales Frontage. This allowance is for
linear feet of outdoor sales frontage and
unobstructed for its viewing length. A corner
lot may include two perpendicular outdoor      800 lumens per linear foot
sales frontage areas. In order to use this
allowance light fixtures must be located
between the building and the outdoor sales
frontage area.
Drive Up Windows. In order to use this
allowance light fixtures must be within 20     4,000 lumens per drive-up window
feet horizontal distance of the center of the
window.
 
   (E)   Additional requirements.
      (1)   Parking lot illumination. All parking lot lighting fixtures shall
be fully shielded and have no light emitted above 90 degrees above nadir,
unless it is covered by a canopy as listed below in division (E).
      (2)   All lighting elements including but not limited to wall packs and
sconces shall be fully shielded with no light emitted above 90 degrees above
nadir.
      (3)   The source of light (bulb) shall not be visible from other
properties.
      (4)   Limits to off site impacts. All light fixtures shall be rated and
installed according to Table D. Maximum allowable backlight, uplight, and glare
(BUG-backlight, uplight, and glare) ratings may be used for any project. A
light fixture may be used if it is below or meets the standards found in Table
D.
      (5)   Outdoor uplighting is prohibited, except as provided in division
(E).
 
TABLE D: MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE UPLIGHT, AND GLARE (BACKLIGHT, UPLIGHT, AND GLARE
(BUG)) RATINGS
                                                  Non-Residential
Allowed backlight rating                           B1
Allowed uplight rating for street or area lighting UO
Allowed glare rating                               G1
 
   (E)   Lighting under canopies and overhangs.
      (1)   All outdoor light fixtures located under canopies, under building
overhangs, or under roof eaves must conform to all provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Outdoor light fixtures located under canopies, under building
overhangs, or under roof eaves where the center of the light fixture is located
at least five feet, but less than ten feet from the nearest edge of the canopy
or overhang are to be included in the total outdoor light output as though they
produced only one-quarter of the bulb's rated lumen output.
      (3)   Outdoor light fixtures located under canopies, under building
overhangs, or under roof eaves where the center of the bulb or light fixture is
located ten or more feet from the nearest edge of a canopy, building overhang,
or eave are to be included in the total outdoor light output as though they
produced only one-tenth of the bulb's rated lumen output.
      (4)   The total light output used for illuminating under canopies or
building overhangs, defined as the sum of all under canopy initial bulb outputs
in lumens, shall not exceed 20 lumens per square foot under the canopy area.
All lighting mounted under the canopy, including but not limited to light
fixtures mounted on the lower surface of the canopy and auxiliary lighting
within signage or illuminated panels under the canopy, is to be included in the
total.
   (G)   Outdoor recreational facilities. Lighting for outdoor recreational
facilities is allowed between one hour prior to sunset and 10:30 p.m., unless
it is needed to complete a specific organized activity or event already in
progress at 10:30 p.m. Field lighting is required to be extinguished outside of
event operations generally.
§ 150.530 RESIDENTIAL LIGHTING ZONE STANDARDS.
   Each lot within the residential lighting zone is limited to the following
standards:
 
TABLE F: RESIDENTIAL LIGHTING ZONE STANDARDS
Lumen Limit per Lot: 10,000 total lumens
Fully shielded (bulbs over 600 lumens Up to 10,000 total lumens
permitted.)
                                      Up to 4000 lumens per lot included in the
Partially shielded or semi cut-off-   total lumen calculation. No residential
bulbs up to and including 600 lumens  lot can be over 10,000 total lumens
                                      including fully shielded and partially
                                      shielded lighting.
 
§ 150.531 OPEN SPACE LIGHTING ZONE.
   No permanent lighting is allowed within this zone. These areas are dedicated
for wildlife habitat and the use of lighting is restricted. Lighting can be
used on a temporary basis under emergency conditions and approved management
activities.
§ 150.532 SUBMISSION OF PLANS AND EVIDENCE OF COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   All non-residential lighting zone building permit applications must
include an outdoor lighting plan which includes the following information:
      (1)   The location of all existing and proposed light fixtures (may be
included on-site plan).
      (2)   A lumen calculation sheet to determine lumens per acre. It must
include the total area to be illuminated, the fixture descriptions, bulb types
(i.e., incandescent, low pressure sodium, compact fluorescent, LED, etc.),
wattages, number of bulbs, bulb initial lumens and mounting height of all
existing and proposed bulbs.
      (3)   Specification sheets for all existing and proposed light fixtures.
      (4)   Acknowledgement that the applicant has reviewed the provisions of
this chapter.
   (B)   Upon receipt of residential building permit applications, city staff
shall provide the homebuilder and/or applicant with educational materials about
this chapter.
   (C)   Verification that a residential or commercial construction project
requiring a building permit application has complied with the requirements of
this chapter shall occur during the final electrical inspection by the city
building inspector.
   (D)   Additional guidance for compliance with this chapter can be found in
the city's outdoor lighting guides.
§ 150.533 VARIANCES AND ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The City Council may authorize a variance from these regulations when,
in its opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In
making the required findings, the Council shall take into account the nature of
the proposed use of the land involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity,
and the probable effect of such variance upon traffic conditions and upon the
public health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity. No variance
shall be granted unless the Council finds:
      (1)   That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the
land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this
chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land;
      (2)   That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment
of a substantial property right of the applicant; and
      (3)   That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area.
   (B)   Alternative equivalent compliance. A lighting plan which is an
alternative to strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter may be
approved by the City Council, if the Council finds that such plan is as good or
better than a strictly compliant plan because it conforms to one or more of the
following three standards:
      (1)   Latest adopted version of U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC)
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Sustainable Site Credit 8.
      (2)   Latest adopted version of Illuminating Engineering Society (IES) -
International Dark Sky Association (IDA) Model Lighting Ordinance (MLO).
      (3)   Latest adopted version of Austin Energy Green Building (AEGB)
Commercial Rating Light Pollution Reduction section. Documentation for
demonstrating compliance is as follows: Documentation establishing compliance
with the selected method of alternative equivalent compliance shall be
submitted with a request for approval of alternative equivalent compliance
(USGBC LEED, IES MLO, or AEGB program). In addition, for non-residential
lighting zones the applicant shall submit an affidavit sealed by a registered
architect or engineer certifying the proposed plan's compliance with the
selected method of alternative equivalent compliance.
§ 150.534 ADMINISTRATIVE GUIDANCE.
   The City Administrator or his/her designee may promulgate educational
materials to aid in the administration of, and compliance with, this chapter.
Such documents shall be educational only and shall not constitute regulations,
amendments, or exceptions.
§ 150.535 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this subchapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   ARCHITECTURAL LIGHTING. Lighting designed to reveal architectural beauty,
shape and/or form and for which lighting for any other purpose is incidental.
   ASTRONOMIC TIME SWITCH. An automatic lighting control devise that switches
outdoor lighting relative to time of solar day with time of year correction.
   BACKLIGHT. For an exterior light fixture, lumens emitted in the quarter
sphere below horizontal and in the opposite direction of the intended
orientation of the light fixture. For luminaries with symmetric distribution,
backlight will be the same as front light.
   BUG. A light fixture classification system that classifies backlight (B),
uplight (U), and glare (G). This system is designed by the Illuminating
Engineering Society (IES).
   BULB. A generic term for a source of optical radiation (i.e. "light), often
called a "bulb", "tube", or "lamp". Examples include incandescent, fluorescent,
high intensity discharge (HID) bulbs, and low pressure sodium (LPS) bulbs, as
well as light-emitting diode (LED) modules and arrays.
   CANOPY (IN REGARDS TO LIGHTING). A covered, unconditioned (no heat or air
conditioning) structure with at least one side open for pedestrian and/or
vehicular access.
   COMMON OUTDOOR AREAS. One or more of the following: a parking lot; a parking
structure, or covered vehicular area, a common entrance or public space shared
by all occupants of the domiciles.
   EMERGENCY CONDITIONS. Generally, lighting that is only energized during an
emergency; lighting fed from a backup power source; or lighting for
illuminating the path of egress solely during a fire or other emergency
situation; or lighting for security purposes used solely during an alarm.
   FOOTCANDLE. The unit of measure expressing the quantity of light received on
a surface. One  footcandle is the illuminance produced by a candle on a surface
one foot square from a distance of one foot. One footcandle is equivalent to
approximately 10.76 Lux.
   FORWARD LIGHT. For exterior light fixture, lumens emitted in the quarter
sphere below horizontal an in the direction of the intended orientation of the
light fixture.
   FULLY SHIELDED LIGHT FIXTURE. A light fixture constructed and installed in
such a manner that all light emitted by the light fixture, either directly from
the bulb or a diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from
any part of the light fixture, is projected below the horizontal plane through
the light fixture's lowest light emitting part.
   GLARE. Lighting entering the eye directly from light fixtures or indirectly
from reflective surfaces that causes visual discomfort or reduced visibility.
   HARDSCAPE. Permanent hardscape improvements to the site including parking
lots, drives, entrances, curbs, ramps, stairs, steps, medians, walkways, and
non-vegetated landscaping that is ten feet or less in width.
   HARDSCAPE AREA. The area measured in square feet of all hardscape. It is
used to calculate the total site lumen limit.
   HARDSCAPE PERIMETER. The perimeter measured in linear feet used to calculate
the total site lumen limit.
   LANDSCAPE LIGHTING. Lighting of trees, shrubs, or other plant material as
well as ponds and other landscape features.
   LED. Light Emitting Diode.
   LIGHT POLLUTION. Any adverse effect of artificial light including but not
limited to glare, light trespass, sky-glow, energy waste, compromised safety
and security, and impacts on the nocturnal environment.
   LIGHT TRESPASS. Light that falls beyond the property it is intended to
illuminate.
   LIGHTING. "Electric" or "man-made" or "artificial" light. See LIGHTING
EQUIPMENT.
   LIGHTING EQUIPMENT. Equipment specifically intended to provide gas or
electric illumination,  including but not limited to bulb(s), light fixture(s),
ballast(s), poles, posts, lens(es), and related structures, electrical wiring,
and other necessary or auxiliary components.
   LIGHT FIXTURE. The complete lighting unit (fixture), consisting of a bulb,
or bulbs and ballast(s) (when applicable), together with the parts designed to
distribute the light (reflector lens, diffuser) to position and protect the
bulb(s), and to connect the light fixture to the power source.
   LIGHT FIXTURE LUMENS. For light fixtures with relative photometry per IES,
it is calculated as the sum of the initial bulb lumens for all bulbs within an
individual light fixture, multiplied by the light fixture efficiency. If the
light fixture efficiency is not known for a residential light fixture, it is
assumed at 70%. For light fixtures with absolute photometry per IES LM-79, it
is the total light fixture lumens. The lumen rating of a light fixture assumes
the bulb or light fixture is new and has not depreciated in light output.
   LIGHTING ZONE. An overlay system based on zoning classifications that
establish legal limits for lighting for particular parcels, areas, or districts
in a community.
   LOW VOLTAGE LANDSCAPE LIGHTING. Landscape lighting powered at less than 15
volts and limited to luminaries having an initial light fixture lumen output of
525 lumens or less.
   LUMEN. The measure used to quantify the amount of light produced by a bulb
or emitted from a light fixture (as distinct from "watt", a measure of power
consumption).
   LUX. The SI unit of illuminance. One lux is one lumen per square meter. One
lux is a unit of incident illuminance approximately equal to one-tenth of a
footcandle.
   MOUNTING HEIGHT. The height of the photometric center of a light fixture
above grade level.
   NADIR. The direction directly below an object. In terms of light fixtures it
is the area pointing directly below the fixture to the ground.
   NEW LIGHTING. Lighting for areas not previously illuminated; newly installed
lighting of any type except for replacement lighting or lighting repairs.
   ORNAMENTAL LIGHTING. Lighting that does not impact the function and safety
of an area but is purely decorative, or used to illuminate architecture and/or
landscaping, and installed for aesthetic effect.
   OUTDOOR LIGHTING. Lighting equipment installed within the property line and
outside of building envelopes, whether attached to poles, building, structures,
the earth, or any other location; and any associated lighting control
equipment.
   OUTDOOR SALES FRONTAGE. The portion of the perimeter of an outdoor sales
area immediately adjacent to a street, road, or public sidewalk.
   PARTLY SHIELDED LIGHT FIXTURE. A light fixture with opaque top and
translucent or perforated sides, designed to emit most light downward.
   PHOTOELECTRIC SWITCH. A control device employing a photocell or photodiode
to detect daylight and automatically switch lights off when sufficient daylight
is available.
   REPLACEMENT LIGHTING. Lighting installed to specifically replace existing
lighting that is sufficiently broken to be beyond repair.
   SEASONAL LIGHTING. Temporary lighting installed and operated in connection
with holidays or traditions.
   SEMI-CUTOFF LIGHT FIXTURE. Light fixture designed to allow light intensity
at or above 90° (horizontal) no more than 5% of lamp lumens and no more than
20% at or above 80°.
   SHIELDED DIRECTIONAL LIGHT FIXTURE. A light fixture that includes an
adjustable mounting device allowing aiming in a direction and contains a
shield, louver, or baffle to reduce direct view of the bulb.
   SKY-GLOW. The brightening of the nighttime sky that results from scattering
and reflection of artificial light by moisture and dust particles in the
atmosphere. Sky-glow is caused by light directed or reflected upwards or
sideways and reduces one's ability to view the night sky.
   TEMPORARY LIGHTING. Lighting installed and operated for periods not to
exceed 60 days, removed and not operated again for at least 30 days.
   TIME SWITCH. An automatic lighting control device that switches lights
according to time of day.
   TRANSLUCENT. Allowing light to pass through, diffusing it so that objects
beyond cannot be seen clearly (not transparent or clear).
   UNSHIELDED LIGHT FIXTURE. A light fixture capable of emitting light in any
direction including downwards.
   UPLIGHT. For an exterior light fixture, light radiated in the hemisphere at
or above the horizontal plane.
WATER AND WASTEWATER
§ 150.545 RULES GOVERNING.
   The rules and regulations of the Texas Natural Resource Conservation
Commission as published and adopted shall govern the installation and
regulation of wastewater systems in the City of Sunset Valley, Texas. Pursuant
to the Wholesale Wastewater Service Agreement executed on or about December 27,
1985 and amended on February 27, 2003 between the City of Sunset Valley and the
City of Austin, all public water facilities must be constructed according to
City of Austin water and wastewater utility standards and specifications in
effect on the effective date of this chapter. The City of Austin's water and
wastewater utility standards and specifications shall include those regulations
contained in the following chapters of the City of Austin Code of Ordinances:
Chapter 15-2 Drainage Facility; Chapter 15-3 Fire Hydrant Regulation; Chapter
15-7 Use of city-Owned Infrastructure; Chapter 15-9 Utility Service
Regulations; Chapter 15-10 Wastewater Regulations; and Chapter 15-9, Article 1
Utility Service. All public wastewater facilities must also be constructed
according to the City of Sunset Valley Master Water Line Plan in effect on the
effective date of this chapter. The City of Sunset Valley's Utility
Requirements and Specifications, included in this chapter, govern construction
of the facilities listed therein. Whenever there is a conflict between the
requirements of the City of Austin Water and Wastewater Utility standards and
those of the City of Sunset Valley's utility requirements and specifications,
the more stringent or restrictive provision shall govern.
§ 150.546 DESIGN.
   Such installations shall be designed by a licensed professional engineer or
a registered sanitarian. The engineer or sanitarian shall supply the City of
Sunset Valley, Texas with a letter certifying that the completed construction
of the wastewater system meets the minimum standards.
§ 150.547 INSPECTION, CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY AND APPEAL.
   (A)   The Inspector for the City of Sunset Valley shall inspect the system
before it is covered with soil. The inspector shall have authority to approve
or disapprove the wastewater system.
   (B)   In the case of new construction of residential or commercial buildings
the Certificate of Occupancy shall not be granted until the letter certifying
that the wastewater system is constructed according to the minimum standards of
the State of Texas and the minimum standards of Travis County, Texas, whichever
are more restrictive, is received by the city, and the inspector for the city
has approved the system.
   (C)   An appeal may be made to the City Council of a decision by the
inspector for the city to reject a request for a Certificate of Occupancy
within ten days of the rejection of a certificate request. The appeal will be
acted upon at a meeting of the Sunset Valley City Council.
§ 150.548 PERMITS.
   (A)   A permit for the construction of wastewater systems shall be required.
   (B)   Three copies of the plans for the system including a plat showing the
location of the system shall be required. The plans shall show the seal of the
engineer or the sanitarian responsible for the design.
§ 150.549 FEES.
   A fee shall be required as shown in the City of Sunset Valley permit fee
schedules adopted by ordinance or resolution the time the application for the
permit is made.
§ 150.550 REVIEW, PERMIT AND ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY DELEGATED TO CITY
ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT OR OTHER DESIGNEE OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   All actions to be taken by the "city" in this chapter shall be the
responsibility of the City Administrative Assistant or other person that the
City Council may from time to time designate for such purpose, unless the
context requires otherwise or unless the action is specifically assigned to a
different person or entity. In fulfilling any responsibilities in this chapter
that require technical or other expertise, the City Administrative Assistant or
designee of the Council shall rely on the assistance of the City Engineer or
his or her delegate for such expertise.
   (B)   If the City Administrative Assistant or designee of the City Council
is unavailable, the Mayor may act in his or her place.
§ 150.551 CONNECTION REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   An owner of improved real property within the zoning jurisdiction of
the City of Sunset Valley shall insure that every domestic sewage facility on
the property is connected with the city's wastewater collection system on or
before the date the property is sold to a new owner.
   (B)   An owner of improved real property within the zoning jurisdiction of
the City of Sunset Valley shall insure that every domestic sewage facility on
the property is connected with the city's wastewater collection system on or
before any water service is extended and connected to serve an accessory
structure.
   (C)   No person acquiring an interest in improved real property within the
jurisdiction of the City of Sunset Valley after the effective date of this
chapter shall occupy such property for residential, commercial, or any other
purpose until the domestic sewage facility on the property is connected with
the city's wastewater collection system.
   (D)   Each day that a property is not connected as required by this section
shall be a separate violation.
§ 150.552 WAIVER.
   An owner of improved real property is excused from compliance with this
chapter if the owner has received a written determination from the City Council
that it is not physically possible for the domestic sewage facilities on the
owner's property to be connected with the city's wastewater collection system.
ON-SITE SEWAGE FACILITIES
§ 150.565 NUISANCES AND ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   (A)   Any and all of the following conditions are hereby specifically
declared to be nuisances dangerous to the public health:
      (1)   All sewage, human excreta, wastewater, garbage, or other organic
wastes deposited, stored, discharged, or exposed in such a manner that makes it
a potential instrument or medium in the transmission of disease to or between a
person or persons;
      (2)   Any vehicle or container used in the transportation of human
excreta or other organic material which is defective and allows leakage or
spilling of contents;
      (3)   Any overflowing septic tank or similar device, including surface
discharge from or groundwater contamination by a component of a private on-site
sewage facility or a blatant discharge from such a facility;
      (4)   The maintenance of any open or over-flowing private on-site sewage
facility which permits access to waste by insects or other possible carriers of
disease;
      (5)   The deposit, storage, discharge, or disposal of sewage in a manner
that emits noxious odors; or
      (6)   The failure to promptly investigate and pump out or repair any
private on-site sewage facility after its warning device, alarm or monitoring
system has been activated or has indicated that the facility is likely to
overflow or is leaking or malfunctioning.
   (B)   Every person possessing any place in or on which there is a nuisance
shall, as soon as its presence comes to his knowledge, proceed at once and
continue to abate said nuisance.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from taking
appropriate action to abate any nuisance that poses a threat to public health,
safety or welfare as authorized by state law or other city ordinance.
§ 150.566 APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS.
   (A)   All applications for permits under this chapter shall be upon forms
provided by the city, which forms shall be available at City Hall.
   (B)   The application form shall be completed, verified by the applicant and
filed with the City Secretary. The applicant shall provide such information,
statements and representations and execute such agreements as may be required
by the city.
   (C)   All permit fees shall be collected by the city at the time the
application is filed.
   (D)   The city may, by ordinance, establish permit fees to cover the cost of
applications, inspection and other costs incurred by the city in the
administration of this chapter.
§ 150.567 PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION OR INSTALLATION OF NEW PRIVATE ON-SITE SEWAGE
FACILITIES.
   (A)   Permit required.
      (1)   Any person desiring to install, construct, operate or maintain a
new private on-site sewage facility within the City of Sunset Valley shall be
required to obtain a permit from the city before any construction work is
begun. In no event shall the installation or construction of a new private on-
site sewage facility be initiated within the city until a construction permit
therefor has been issued.
      (2)   No permit shall be issued until an application for a permit to
install or construct a new private on-site sewage facility has been filed and
approved by the city.
      (3)   No permit shall be issued for the installation or construction of a
new private on-site sewage facility unless the proposed facility is one
expressly authorized under the provisions of §
150.568.
   (B)   The city may require such additional tests and inspections as it
considers appropriate to determine whether the proposed installation or
construction will comply with the provisions of this chapter. It shall require
that the proposed installation or construction and the private on-site sewage
facility as installed or constructed be approved by the city. All tests and
inspections shall be at the expense of the owner.
   (C)   The city shall have the right to select and engage sanitarians and
engineers, or engineers, or any combination thereof, to conduct investigations,
tests, examine plans and specifications, present evidence, advise and represent
the city, and assist the applicant in the development of a private on-site
sewage facility in accordance with and to comply with the provisions of this
chapter, and the applicant shall be required to reimburse the city for
reasonable costs of such services.
   (D)   The city shall have access to the property during the installation or
construction of any new private on-site sewage facility for the purpose of
verifying compliance with this chapter. After the installation or construction
is completed, but before the facility is buried, a final inspection shall be
made by a City Inspector. The inspector shall inform the city whether or not
the facility is in compliance with this chapter.
   (E)   No permit shall be issued to install or construct a private on-site
sewage facility within the city unless the city finds, on the basis of such
tests, inspections, and reports as it deems appropriate, that the nature of the
soil and the drainage of the property will permit the use of and is appropriate
for the proposed facility. In making such determination, the city shall
consider the following:
      (1)   The location of the property;
      (2)   The location (or proposed location) of the private on-site sewage
facility on the property;
      (3)   The nature of the use (or proposed use) of the property;
      (4)   The total proposed maximum area of impervious surfaces;
      (5)   The probable population density of the development and the adjacent
area;
      (6)   The anticipated sewage load (daily sewage flow per capita);
      (7)   The soil absorption capacity;
      (8)   The location of intermittent springs;
      (9)   If applicable, the proposed subsurface system;
      (10)   The depth of and characteristics of subsurface impervious strata;
      (11)   The ground water table;
      (12)   The quantitative geologic description of soil and rock encountered
by core tests;
      (13)   Topographic or ground slope and drainage characteristics in the
area of the proposed facility;
      (14)   The volume of soil removed or relocated during construction;
      (15)   The holding or septic tank capacity and whether the proposed
facility requires one or more compartment tank(s);
      (16)   The distance from floodplains, wells, lakes, creeks, aquifers,
faults, and water lines;
      (17)   The possible contamination of streams, lakes, creeks, aquifers,
ground water, or water lines;
      (18)   The land usable and available for the primary and any alternate
absorption fields;
      (19)   Whether alternative methods would be more suitable; and
      (20)   Other relevant factors.
   (F)   Upon satisfactory evidence that a new private on-site sewage facility
has been properly constructed in compliance with this chapter, and that all
other applicable federal and state laws and local regulations have been
complied with, the city shall issue a final permit to maintain and operate said
facility, and if appropriate, authorize the connection of the property to the
city's water distribution system.
   (G)   Should ownership of any property served by a private on-site sewage
facility installed or constructed under the provisions of this chapter be
transferred, the new property owner, within 30 days of the change of ownership,
shall renew either the construction permit or the maintenance and operation
permit; the terms and conditions of said permits shall be binding upon all
successors in interest to the property.
§ 150.568 AUTHORIZED SYSTEMS.
   (A)   The installation or construction of any new private on-site sewage
facility of a type not expressly authorized by division (B) of this section is
hereby prohibited.
   (B)   The installation and construction of new private on-site sewage
facilities is limited to the following:
      (1)   Evapotranspiration system. A facility utilizing an
evapotranspiration system that:
         (a)   Is designed, constructed, installed, operated and maintained in
accordance with the standards and specifications of the State of Texas
governing the construction of on-site sewage systems in effect at the time the
construction permit is issued by the city;
         (b)   Is designed and sealed by a registered professional sanitarian
authorized to practice in the State of Texas;
         (c)   Is equipped with impervious liners approved by the city;
         (d)   Has a separate monitoring system approved by the city installed
in each bed in a manner that will facilitate the collection and sampling of
effluent leakage from a ruptured liner, and which is designed to detect liner
failure through periodic sampling; the entire monitor system must be assembled
and ready for approval during a single inspection, and no sand shall be put in
place as a cushion until the monitor system has been inspected and approved by
the city; and
         (e)   Has been found by the city to be appropriate for its proposed
use and for the nature of the property on which it is to be located.
      (2)   Holding tank system. A facility consisting of a holding tank or
tanks that:
         (a)   Is designed and sealed by a registered professional sanitarian
authorized to practice in the State of Texas;
         (b)   Is equipped with an alarm system approved by the city that will
give notice when the tank or tanks need to be emptied, and that has sufficient
capacity to prevent overflow after the alarm activates, as may be determined by
the city, on the basis of the size of the tank and its proposed use;
         (c)   Is located, designed, sized and installed in accordance with
specifications approved by the city; and
         (d)   Has been found by the city to be appropriate for its proposed
use and for the nature of the property on which it is located.
      (3)   Pressure dosing system. A facility utilizing a pressure dosing
system that:
         (a)   Is located, designed, constructed, installed, operated and
maintained in accordance with the standards and specifications of the State of
Texas governing the construction of on-site sewage systems in effect at the
time the construction permit is issued by the city;
         (b)   Is designed and sealed by a registered professional sanitarian
authorized to practice in the State of Texas;
         (c)   Is equipped with a high water alarm, on an electric circuit
separate from the pump, and has an effluent holding tank with a remaining
capacity of at least 500 gallons, if serving a single family residence, and at
least 1,000 gallons, if serving a commercial or other user, after the alarm
activates; and
         (d)   Has been found by the city to be appropriate for its proposed
use and for the nature of the property on which it is located.
   (C)   Each unit of a multiple unit residential structure must be served by a
separate private on-site sewage facility as follows:
      (1)   If the facility consists of an evapotranspiration system or a
pressure dose system, each residential unit must have its own septic tank(s)
and evapotranspiration bed(s) or soil absorption bed; and
      (2)   If the facility consists of a holding tank, each residential unit
must have its own tank(s).
§ 150.569 RESTRICTIVE COVENANT AND OTHER CONDITIONS.
   (A)   In connection with and as a condition for the issuance of a permit for
the installation or construction of one of the private on-site sewage systems
authorized by §
150.568, the property owner shall execute an agreement with the city, entitled
"Restrictive Covenant," to be filed among the Property Records of the Travis
County Clerk, wherein the property owner covenants and agrees that:
      (1)   Within 90 days of the date on which the city notifies the property
owner in writing that the city wastewater collection line or any extension
thereof runs within 300 feet of the property line, the owner shall, at his
expense, connect his sewer line to the city system;
      (2)   If the property owner fails to connect his sewer line to the city's
wastewater collection system as provided above, the property owner agrees that
the city may perform any work necessary to accomplish the connection; in this
regard, the owner agrees that the city's employees, officers and agents, upon
reasonable notice to the property owner and presentation of proper credentials,
are authorized to enter upon his property and complete the connection;
      (3)   If the city performs the connecting work described above, the
property owner agrees to pay the reasonable costs thereof and a reasonable
administrative fee, which expenses, if not paid as directed by the city, shall
constitute a lien upon the property to be established in accordance with state
law; and
      (4)   The covenant shall be binding upon the property owner and any
successors in interest to said property.
   (B)   In connection with and as a further condition for the issuance of a
permit for the installation or construction of one of the private on-site
sewage facilities authorized by §
150.568, the property owner shall agree that, in the event an alarm or monitor
required under the provisions of §
150.568 indicates that the facility should be emptied or is leaking or
otherwise malfunctioning, the property owner shall promptly have the facility
pumped out to avoid any overflow or agrees to take whatever corrective action
is necessary to remedy the malfunction or leakage, and that, should the
property owner fail to do so, the property owner agrees that:
      (1)   He will cause the disconnection or interruption of his water
service until such time as the necessary corrective action has been taken;
      (2)   If he fails to disconnect or interrupt his water service, after due
notice and an opportunity for hearing, the city may:
         (a)   Disconnect said service;
         (b)   Perform the necessary corrective work and bill the property
owner for the reasonable costs thereof and a reasonable administrative fee,
which expenses, if not paid, shall constitute a lien upon the property to be
established in accordance with state law;
         (c)   Prosecute the property owner for violation of this chapter; or
         (d)   Take any other action authorized by state law or local
ordinance.
   (C)   In connection with and as a further condition for the issuance of a
permit for the installation or construction of one of the private on-site
sewage facilities authorized by §
150.568, the property owner agrees that, should ownership of the property be
transferred, the property owner has a duty to and shall advise the person to
whom ownership is transferred of the terms and conditions of any permit or
agreement required or entered into pursuant to this chapter.
   (D)   The terms and conditions set forth in divisions (A), (B) and (C)
above, and any agreements required to be executed thereunder, shall be
incorporated into and made a part of the maintenance and operation permit
issued by the city.
   (E)   The city may impose such other reasonable restrictions and conditions
in connection with the issuance of a permit required hereunder as it deems
necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 150.570 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permit may be revoked for failure to comply with the requirements
for the issuance of such permit.
   (B)   If it is determined that a permittee is not in compliance, the city
shall notify the person(s) in possession and/or the property owner of the
nature of the non-compliance.
   (C)   The permittee shall have 30 days after notice of non-compliance to
correct the defects except as provided herein. If the permittee has made a
reasonable effort to correct the defects within the 30-day period, but fails to
complete the work, the city may extend the period for a period or periods not
to exceed an additional 30 days.
   (D)   If non-compliance has not been corrected within the period allowed for
its correction, the city shall revoke the permit and notify the property owner
in writing.
   (E)   A permit which has been revoked is void and of no effect as if the
permit had never been issued.
§ 150.571 RESPONDING TO ALARMS.
   (A)   In addition to any other duty imposed by this or any other Code
provision or state or federal statute or regulation upon a property owner to
maintain a private on-site sewage facility in good working order and in such a
manner that no nuisance is created or permitted, it shall be the duty of any
owner whose facility is equipped with a warning device, alarm or monitoring
system to promptly pump-out or repair his facility after the warning device,
alarm or monitoring system has been activated or has indicated that the
facility is likely to overflow or is leaking or malfunctioning.
   (B)   Should a property owner fail to promptly cause his private on-site
sewage facility to be pumped out to avoid any overflow or to take whatever
corrective action is necessary to remedy the leakage or malfunction, the city
shall give him notice, which notice shall comply with the provisions of §
150.573, directing him to perform the necessary pumping or take the necessary
corrective action.
   (C)   If the property owner fails to comply with the notice and fails to
request a hearing in accordance with the provisions of this §
150.572, the city may:
      (1)   Disconnect or interrupt the owner's water service;
      (2)   Perform the necessary corrective work and bill the property owner
for the reasonable costs thereof and a reasonable administrative fee, which
expenses, if not paid, shall constitute a lien upon the property to be
established in accordance with state law;
      (3)   Prosecute the property owner for violation of this chapter; or
      (4)   Take any other action authorized by state law or local ordinance.
§ 150.572 APPEAL.
   An owner may appeal the rejection of an application for a permit, the denial
of a permit, the revocation of a permit, a determination of non-compliance or a
directive to pump out or repair his system by filing a written request for
hearing with the city within ten days of receipt of the notice. The city shall
provide such hearing within a reasonable time after receipt of the request.
§ 150.573 NOTICE.
   (A)   Notice under this chapter shall be written notice delivered by
personal service or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the property owner. Each notice shall identify the violation or non-
compliance and advise the property owner of the corrective action he is
required to take, the time within which said action must be taken, his rights
to appeal the directive and the possible consequences should he fail to act.
   (B)   When the action or inaction of the property owner may result in the
imposition of a lien upon the property, notice shall also be given to any
lienholders of record.
   (C)   Notice shall be deemed given when deposited in the United States mail.
§ 150.574 REPAIR OF EXISTING SYSTEMS.
   Nothing herein shall prevent the repair, extension or alteration of any
existing private on-site sewage system which was installed or has received a
permit from the city prior to the effective date of this Code; provided,
however, that in the event the cost of the repair, extension or alteration to
any existing system exceeds $500, the city may, in its discretion, require the
property owner to install one of the three private on-site sewage systems
authorized herein and to otherwise comply with the provisions hereof.
§ 150.575 OFFENSES.
   A person commits an offense if he knowingly:
   (A)   Installs or constructs a new private on-site sewage facility without a
permit;
   (B)   Operates or maintains a private on-site sewage system installed or
constructed under the provisions of this chapter without having been issued a
maintenance and operation permit by the city;
   (C)   Permits sewage and/or effluent to flow on adjoining public or private
property;
   (D)   Possesses a premises on which there is a nuisance and fails to abate
the nuisance within a reasonable time after notice.
PARKING
§ 150.585 PARKING REGULATIONS, IN GENERAL.
   These regulations require off-street parking and loading facilities
proportional to the need created by each use in order to ensure functionally
adequate, aesthetically pleasing, and secure off-street parking and loading
facilities. Development regulations and design standards are intended to ensure
the usefulness of parking and loading facilities, protect the public safety,
and, where appropriate, to mitigate potential adverse impacts on adjacent land
uses.
§ 150.586 BASIC REGULATIONS; VEHICLE PARKING.
   (A)   Off-street parking facilities shall be provided for any new building
constructed and for any new use established. Off-street parking facilities
shall be provided for any addition or enlargement of an existing building or
use, or any change of occupancy or manner of operation that would result in
additional parking spaces being required, provided that the additional parking
shall be required only for such addition, enlargement, or change.
   (B)   Existing facilities being used for off-street parking shall not be
reduced in capacity to less than the number of spaces then required by this
Code, or altered in design or function to less than the minimum standards then
prescribed by this Code.
   (C)   Parking facilities constructed or substantially reconstructed, whether
or not required, shall conform to the Design Standards in effect at the times
as set forth in §
150.593 as amended from time to time.
   (D)   All required parking facilities shall be maintained for the duration
of the use requiring such areas. Such facilities shall be used exclusively for
the temporary parking of passenger automobiles, motor vehicles, or light trucks
not exceeding one ton in capacity, and shall not be used for the sale, display,
or storage of merchandise, or for the storage or repair of vehicles or
equipment.
   (E)   All required parking facilities shall be located on the same site as
the use for which such facilities are required.
   (F)   No use shall be required to provide more spaces than prescribed by
these regulations.
   (G)   Except for residential areas, head-in parking adjacent to a public
street or driveway is prohibited. In addition, head-in parking shall be
prohibited where, in the judgment of the city, it may endanger the public
health, safety and welfare.
   (H)   No parking facility shall be located and no parking shall be permitted
between the front and side of the building and the front and side setback lines
on property located in an O-Neighborhood Office District.
   (I)   Parking next to or against buildings is prohibited.
§ 150.587 SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Parking facilities for each use shall be provided in accord with the
minimum requirements prescribed in Table 1.
      (1)   Where the application of Table 1 results in a fractional
requirement, a fraction of one-half or greater shall be resolved to the higher
whole number.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, requirements shall be based on gross
floor area unless specific designations exist based on rooms, units, seat or
person capacity, but shall not include enclosed or covered areas used for off-
street parking or loading.
      (3)   Where requirements are established on the basis of seats or person
capacity, the Uniform Building Code provisions applicable at the time of
determination shall be used to define capacity.
 
TABLE 1: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
(all requirements based on gross square feet)
Zoning Districts                     Minimum Off-Street Parking
SF                                   2 spaces per dwelling unit plus 0.5
                                     parking space per bedroom
O                                    1 space per 300 square feet of floor area
                                     1 space per 250 square feet of floor area
                                      
                                      

                                     1 space for each 300 square feet of floor
NC and HC except medical-related     area
services, veterinary services,       1 space per teacher, administrator and day
restaurants, and day care facilities care support and staff
Medical-related services             For the 50 rooms, a minimum of 1.25
Day Care Services                    parking spaces per room. Each room
Residential Inn                      thereafter must provide a minimum of 1
                                     space per room. In the event the
                                     Residential Inn includes a restaurant,
                                     bar, and/or assembly room(s), off street
                                     parking as specifically outlined for such
                                     use shall be in addition to the parking
                                     requirements outlined above.
Veterinary services                  1 space per 500 square feet of floor area
Restaurants                          1 space per 3 person capacity
                                     
GUI:                                  
Government building                  1 space per 300 square feet of floor area
Schools                              1 space per teacher, administrator, and
Churches                             support staff
                                     1 space per 3 person capacity
 
§ 150.588 PARKING FOR COMPACT CARS.
   In each parking facility of 30 or more spaces, a maximum of 10% of the
spaces may be designed and reserved for small or compact cars. Spaces for
compact vehicles shall be located in a manner affording desirability and use
ability equivalent to standard spaces. Compact parking spaces shall be located
in groups of not less than five contiguous spaces, and shall be identified by
appropriate directions and markings.
§ 150.589 HANDICAPPED FACILITIES.
   In each parking facility, a portion of the total parking spaces should be
specifically designed, located, and reserved for vehicles licensed by the state
for use by the handicapped, according to the following schedule:
 
Total Spaces   Minimum Number of Handicapped Spaces Required
19 or less 1   1
20 - 50        2
51 - 100       3
101 - 150      4
151 or greater 2% of total in excess of 50 or ADA requirements, whichever are
               more restrictive
 
§ 150.590 BICYCLE PARKING.
   (A)   Off-street parking for bicycles for each use except residential shall
be provided with a minimum 5% of vehicle parking spaces.
   (B)   Type, size and location of spaces.
      (1)   Bicycle spaces shall be racks or lockers anchored so that they
cannot be easily removed. Each space allocated for this kind of parking shall
be a minimum of two feet wide and six feet long. Bicycle parking facilities
shall be a bike rack with the ability for the user to lock one wheel and the
frame, with the user providing the chain and lock.
      (2)   The location of the bicycle facility shall be at least as
convenient as the most convenient auto parking and as close to the desired
entrances as possible without interfering with pedestrian traffic.
§ 150.591 BASIC REGULATIONS; OFF-STREET LOADING.
   (A)   Off-street loading facilities shall be provided for any new building
constructed and for any new use established. Off-street loading facilities
shall be provided for any addition or enlargement of an existing use, or any
change of occupancy or manner of operation that would result in additional
loading space being required, provided that the additional loading space shall
be required only for such addition, enlargement, or change.
   (B)   Facilities being used for off-street loading on the date of this
chapter is adopted shall not be reduced in capacity to less than the number of
spaces prescribed, or altered in design or function to less than the minimum
standards prescribed.
   (C)   All required loading facilities shall be maintained for the duration
of the use or building requiring such facility, and shall be used exclusively
for the purpose of loading and unloading goods, materials, and supplies, and
shall not be used for the sale, display, or storage of merchandise, or for the
storage or repair of vehicles or equipment.
§ 150.592 SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Off-street loading facilities for each use shall be provided in accord
with the minimum requirements prescribed in Table 2.
 
TABLE 2
Square Feet Floor Area Off-Street Loading Spaces (min. 12 by 45)
Under 10,000           0
10,000 - 50,000        1
 
   (B)   (1)   For purposes of this section, requirements shall be based on
gross floor area, but shall not include enclosed or covered areas used for off-
street parking or loading.
      (2)   Where mixed uses or multiple occupancies are located in the same
building, or are situated on the same site in such a manner that all uses can
be equally and conveniently served by a common loading space, the schedule may
be applied to the entire building and to the combination of buildings or uses
so situated, in lieu of application of the schedule to each individual use or
occupancy. For this purpose, the schedule applicable to the use having the
greatest requirement shall be utilized.
      (3)   For purposes of this section, each two square feet of exterior site
area used by commercial uses shall be considered equivalent to one square foot
of enclosed area.
§ 150.593 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Standards. Design standards are established by this section to set
basic minimum dimensions and guidelines for design, construction, and
maintenance of parking and loading facilities.
   (B)   Parking and loading space dimensions. The following basic dimensions
shall be observed for parking spaces and loading spaces.
      (1)   Each standard parking space shall consist of a rectangular area not
less than nine feet wide by 18.5 feet long. Each compact parking space shall
consist of a rectangular area not less than seven and one-half feet wide by 15
feet long. Each space shall have a vertical clearance of not less than seven
and one-half feet. Each space shall be independently accessible.
      (2)   Each parking space designated for use by the handicapped shall
consist of a rectangular area not less than 13 feet wide by 18.5 feet long,
with a vertical clearance of seven and one-half feet, shall be located in an
area not exceeding a 2% slope, and shall be located near and convenient to a
level or ramped entrance accessible to handicapped persons. Parking spaces for
the handicapped shall be signed and restricted for use by the handicapped only.
      (3)   Each off-street loading space shall consist of a rectangular area
not less than 12 feet wide and 45 feet long, with a vertical clearance of not
less than 15 feet.
      (4)   Each parking and loading space shall have adequate drives, aisles,
and turning and maneuvering areas for access and usability, and shall at all
times have access to a public street or alley.
      (5)   Each loading zone shall have a minimum design outside turning
radius of 45 feet and a minimum inside turning radius of 19 feet and two
inches.
   (C)   Parking facility design. Minimum parking facility design standards are
illustrated in Table 3. Additional supplemental guidelines and standards for
parking facility design, internal layout, acceptable turning radii and pavement
slope, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, and other design features may be
adopted by ordinance of the Council.
TABLE 3: MINIMUM PARKING FACILITY STANDARDS
A         B        C              D              E              F
Angle of  Width of Depth of Stall                Width of Stall
Parking   Stall    90 Degrees to  Width of Aisle Parallel to    Module Width
(Degrees)          Aisle                         Aisle
TABLE 3: MINIMUM PARKING FACILITY STANDARDS
A         B        C              D              E              F
Angle of  Width of Depth of Stall                Width of Stall
Parking   Stall    90 Degrees to  Width of Aisle Parallel to    Module Width
(Degrees)          Aisle                         Aisle
Standard Parking Spaces
30        9.0      17.3           12.5           18.0           47
30        9.5      17.8           12.5           19.0           48
30        10.0     18.3           2.5            20.0           49
45        9.0      17.5           12.5           12.7           48
45        9.5      17.5           12.5           13.4           48
45        10.0     17.5           12.5           14.1           48
60        9.0      19.0           16.0           10.4           54
60        9.5      19.0           15.0           11.0           53
60        10.0     19.0           15.0           11.6           53
75        9.0      19.5           23.0           9.3            62
75        9.5      19.5           22.0           9.8            61
75        10.0     19.5           22.0           10.3           61
90        9.0      18.5           26.0           9.0            63
90        9.5      181.5          25.0           9.5            62
90        10.0     18.5           25.0           10.0           62
Compact Parking Spaces
30        7.5      14.0           12.5           15.0           41
45        7.5      15.9           13.0           10.6           45
60        7.5      16.7           18.0           8.7            52
75        7.5      16.4           18.0           7.8            51
90        7.5      15.0           18.0           7.5            48
Parallel Parking Spaces
0         8.5      8.5 (width)    12.5           22.0           30 (length
 
   (D)   Parking facility standards. In accordance with the landscaping
provisions of this Code, planting zones shall be provided which utilize design
and landscaping concepts within the area where vehicles are parked to enhance
the visual attractiveness of the parking area and to reduce the amount of heat
and other adverse conditions which occur in parking lots.
   (E)   Parking lots.
      (1)   For Districts zoned O, NC, or HC, all parking lots for ten or more
cars shall provide for safe pedestrian access from car to destination, and vice
versa. Parking lots shall be designed and constructed with origin-destination
routes and sensible pedestrian pathways. Parking areas up to two parking bays
(maximum of ten cars per bay) deep shall be located perpendicular to the final
destination. If additional parking bay sets (up to two bays per set) are
required, they shall be positioned at an angle (minimum of 20 degrees) to
adjacent bays. Sidewalks shall be installed between parking bays.
      (2)   All parking lots for ten or more cars shall have sidewalks or
planter strips to lead pedestrians from their cars to shopping or business
areas. Sidewalks or planter strips shall be placed in front of all parking
spaces.
      (3)   If sidewalks are provided, they shall be a minimum of five and one-
half feet wide or meet minimum ADA requirements, whichever are more
restrictive, and allow for auto overhang of 15 inches on each side. Parking bay
sidewalks shall contain attractive bench or seating/resting areas (minimum of
one bench or seating/resting area per 50 parking spaces). Bench or seating/
resting areas shall contain shade trees or other vegetation meeting the city's
landscape code. Bench/seating areas shall contain litter receptacles and shall
be continuously maintained by the owner.
      (4)   In lieu of parking lot sidewalks, planter strips shall be provided
as informal pedestrian walkways and to shade and screen cars. Planter strips
shall be a minimum of five and one-half feet wide, shall be planted with trees
meeting the landscape provisions of this Code, and shall contain bench or
seating/resting areas (minimum of one bench or seating/resting area per 50
parking spaces).
      (5)   Parking lot sidewalks and planter strips shall be designed to
integrate with lighting requirements to provide for pedestrian safety and
visual appearance.
   (F)   Paving and drainage. The following basic standards shall be observed:
      (1)   In all districts, parking and loading facilities shall be surfaced
and maintained with asphaltic, concrete, or other permanent hard surfacing
material sufficient to prevent mud, dust, loose material, and other nuisances.
Materials may be pervious.
      (2)   All parking and loading facilities shall be graded and provided
with permanent storm drainage facilities, meeting the construction
specifications set by the city. Surfacing, curbing, and drainage improvements
shall be sufficient to preclude free flow of water onto adjacent properties or
public streets, and to provide adequate drainage.
   (G)   Safety features. Parking and loading facilities shall meet the
following standards:
      (1)   Safety barriers, protective bumpers or curbing, and directional
markers shall be provided to assure safety, efficient utilization, protection
to landscaping, and to prevent encroachment onto adjoining public or private
property.
      (2)   Visibility of and between pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorists
shall be assured when entering individual parking spaces, when circulating
within a parking facility, and when entering and exiting a parking facility.
      (3)   Internal circulation patterns, and the location and traffic
direction of all access drives, shall be designed and maintained in accord with
accepted principles of traffic engineering and traffic safety.
   (H)   Lighting. Lights provided to illuminate any parking facility or paved
area shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be designed to reflect away from
any residential use. See Table B in §
150.105.
   (I)   Fencing and screening. A parking facility in any nonresidential
district which adjoins or abuts property in a residential district shall have a
wall or fence or vegetation screen not less than four feet in height located
for the length of the common boundary.
   (J)   Noise. Areas used for primary circulation, for frequent idling of
vehicle engines, or for loading activities shall be designed and located to
minimize impacts on adjoining properties, including provisions for screening or
sound baffling. See Table C following in §
150.105.
   (K)   Maintenance. All parking and loading facilities shall be maintained to
assure desirability and usefulness of the facility. Such facilities shall be
maintained free of refuse, debris, or other accumulated matter and shall at all
times be available for the off-street parking or loading use for which they are
required or intended.
   (L)   Adjustments. For a use or a site subject to site plan review or a
special use permit, the minimum requirements of this section may be adjusted in
their application, provided such change is determined by the Council to provide
improved design, usability, attractiveness, and protection to adjoining uses,
in a manner equal to or greater than the specific requirements of this section.
   (M)   Striping. Crosswalk lines shall be painted on the surface of the
parking lot from handicapped parking areas to the building. Crosswalk lines
shall be solid white lines, marking both edges of the crosswalk. They shall be
not less than six inches in width and should be spaced less than six feet, but
more than four feet apart. For added visibility, the area of the crosswalk may
be marked with white diagonal lines at a forty-five degree angle or with white
longitudinal lines at a ninety degree angle to the line of the crosswalk. These
lines should be approximately 12 inches to 24 inches wide and spaced 12 inches
to 24 inches apart. Warning signs should be installed to notify drivers that
the crosswalk areas may be used by persons with disabilities.
FIRE LANES
§ 150.605 PURPOSE.
   The requirement that fire lanes be established in certain parking areas and
the enforcement of restrictions on parking in such fire lanes established in
this chapter are designed to ensure adequate access to commercial, office,
multi-family, and other high density use facilities by fire-fighting and other
emergency vehicles.
§ 150.606 BASIC REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A fire lane shall be provided in any off-street parking facility
constructed or reconstructed subsequent to the effective date of this chapter,
when such parking facility is required by the zoning provisions of this Code to
include five or more parking spaces.
   (B)   Whenever a person or entity applies for a building or construction
permit for construction that will necessitate the provision of a fire lane
according to the terms of this chapter, such person or entity shall include in
all plans and specifications submitted to the City Council the location and
dimensions of all proposed fire lanes required by this chapter.
   (C)   City Council approval of any proposed fire lane required by this
chapter shall be based on the adequacy of access to structures on the subject
property provided by the proposed fire lane. A fire lane may be provided in an
off-loading roadway on the subject property in lieu of providing a fire lane in
a parking facility, if the City Council, in its discretion, determines that the
off-loading roadway provides adequate access by emergency vehicles to
structures on the subject property.
   (D)   All required fire lanes shall be delineated by a red stripe on the
pavement marking the outside boundary from the curb of the fire lane. In
addition, signs shall be conspicuously placed along the curb nearest the fire
lane indicating the existence of the fire lane, and indicating that parking
therein is prohibited.
§ 150.607 VARIANCES.
   All requests for a variance from the requirements of this chapter must be
submitted in writing to the City Council. The City Council may authorize a
variance from the requirements imposed by this chapter when, in its opinion,
undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance or when alternative
compliance will satisfy the purpose of this chapter.
BLASTING PERMITS
§ 150.620 GENERAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use explosives within the city limits
for the purpose of preparing building sites, loosening rock, demolition of any
building or structure and for other purposes without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the Council or Council designate.
§ 150.621 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   To obtain a blasting permit, the applicant shall first file an application
therefor in writing. Each such application shall include the following:
   (A)   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is made. The application shall designate the maximum capacity of
the explosives to be used and number of charges to be set off at one time, the
proposed date and time(s) of use, the location(s) where such explosives are to
be used and stored, and a safety plan to protect property and lives.
   (B)   Name of the licensed blaster who will engage in the use of explosives.
   (C)   Applicant's signature, or authorized agent, who may be required to
submit evidence to indicate such authority.
   (D)   Other such reasonable information as may be required by the Council or
Council designate.
§ 150.622 APPROVAL BY CITY.
   It is hereby determined that unsafe blasting is dangerous to life, health or
property and that the public health, safety, and welfare requires regulation.
Blasting permits can only be approved by the City Council of Sunset Valley.
§ 150.623 DENIAL OF PERMIT WHICH ENDANGERS LIFE, HEALTH OR PROPERTY.
   (A)   When in the opinion of the Council or Council designate there exists
the potential for danger to life, health, real property, personal property,
water wells, roadways and/or utility lines or structures in the immediate area
exposed to the blasting for which a permit has been requested or issued, said
permit may be denied or revoked. Should Council or Council designate determine,
however, that a reduced scope or blasting plan could be accommodated without
the apparent potential for danger to life, health or property as described
above, then Council or Council designate may request that said permit
application be amended.
   (B)   In no case shall a permit be granted or issued for any blasting
activities to be located within the critical water quality zone (CWQZ) of any
streams in the city as defined in the provisions of the Code regulating the
city's watershed.
   (C)   If said permit application is amended in accordance with the request
and comments of the Council, then the amended permit may be approved and issued
by Council.
§ 150.624 COMMENTS FROM ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS AND UTILITIES.
   The Council or Council designate may request written comments on each permit
application from the various affected utilities, adjacent property owners, or
franchise holders. When in the opinion of the Council or Council designate,
such utility or adjacent property owner or franchise holder has a valid
objection to the issuance of a permit, no permit shall be approved until such
objection has been resolved to the satisfaction of the Council.
§ 150.625 NO SMOKING IN VICINITY OF BLASTING.
   No person shall smoke or carry matches, lighters or other such combustible
materials while handling explosives or while in the vicinity thereof. "No
Smoking" signs shall be posted in areas where explosives are being handled. The
signs shall be visible for at least 50 feet.
§ 150.626 BLASTING MAT.
   When blasting is done in a congested area or in close proximity to a
building, structure, highway, vehicle, conveyance or any other installation
that may be damaged by material being thrown into the air, the blast shall be
covered with an adequate blasting mat or shield. Proof that any such building
structure, highway, vehicle, conveyance or other installation was damaged to
any degree by material which was so thrown into the air shall raise a
rebuttable presumption that said blast was not covered with an adequate
blasting mat or shield. For purposes of this section, an otherwise adequate
blasting mat used improperly shall not be considered to be an adequate blasting
mat or shield.
§ 150.627 REMOVAL OF BLASTING CAPS, ETC.
   All exposed blasting cap lead wires in the ground from previous blasts shall
be removed at the end of each working day.
§ 150.628 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the use of explosive materials within the
City of Sunset Valley unless that person is a licensed blaster or is under the
direct supervision of a licensed blaster.
   (B)   Any person engaging in the use of explosives who is not a licensed
blaster or working under the direct supervision of a licensed blaster shall be
fined $200.
§ 150.629 NO BLASTING ON HOLIDAYS AND WEEKENDS.
   No blasting shall be permitted on Saturdays, Sundays, or legal holidays or
before 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. on any other day.
§ 150.630 BLASTING.
   (A)   The applicant shall comply with all laws, codes, ordinances,
applicable safety code requirements and regulations relative to the handling,
storage and use of explosives and the protection of life and property.
   (B)   The applicant shall be responsible for all damage caused by his
blasting operations.
   (C)   The applicant shall erect signboards of adequate size stating that
blasting operations are taking place in the area and such signs shall be
clearly visible at all points of access to the area. The applicant shall
utilize a reliable audible warning system to ensure that any personnel in the
area are forewarned of the impending detonation of explosives.
   (D)   Appropriate precautions shall be taken during thunderstorms to prevent
unintentional firing of charges due to static electricity.
   (E)   The applicant shall space his production blasting drill holes and
schedule the delays of caps so that all shots break toward a free-face. Lifters
shall not be used.
   (F)   Controlled blasting shall be performed in such a manner as will result
in a minimum of overbreakage. Excavation of the tunnel and faces of cut slopes
through rock shall be performed by presplitting, cushion blasting, line
drilling or other approved methods.
§ 150.631 BLASTING PLAN.
   A site specific blasting plan shall be prepared and submitted by a licensed
blaster for any multiple charge blasting work. The proposed blasting plan shall
show the location of shots relative to nearby structure(s) and water wells,
type explosive used, number of holes, pounds per hole, depth of hole, and total
pounds per shot.
§ 150.632 SAFETY OF PERSONS AND PROPERTY.
   (A)   The applicant shall take all reasonable precautions for the safety of,
and shall provide all reasonable protection to prevent damage, injury or loss
to:
      (1)   All employees on the work and all other persons who may be affected
thereby;
      (2)   All the work and all materials and equipment to be incorporated
therein, whether in storage or off the site, under the care, custody or control
of the applicant or any of his subcontractors or sub-subcontractors; and
      (3)   Other property at the site or adjacent thereto, including trees,
shrubs, lawns, walks, pavements, fences, roadways, water wells, structures and
utilities not designed for removal, relocation or replacement in the course of
construction.
   (B)   The applicant shall comply with all applicable laws, codes,
ordinances, rules, regulations and lawful orders of any public authority having
jurisdiction for the safety of persons or property or to protect them from
damage, injury or loss. The applicant shall erect and maintain, as required by
existing conditions and progress of the work, all reasonable safeguards for
safety and protection, including posting danger signs and other warnings
against hazards, promulgating safety regulations and notifying owners and users
of adjacent utilities.
   (C)   When the use or transportation of explosives or other hazardous
materials or equipment is necessary for the execution of the work, the
applicant shall exercise the utmost care and shall carry on such activities
under the supervision of properly qualified personnel. No overnight storage
will be permitted within the city limits of Sunset Valley or its ETJ.
   (D)   All blasting, including methods of transporting and handling
explosives and highly inflammable materials, shall conform to federal, state,
and local laws and ordinances. All city codes and ordinances shall be adhered
to even though some or all of the blasting is done outside the city limits
unless the applicable Code provision or ordinance is in conflict with the law
of the jurisdiction where the action is being taken.
§ 150.633 BLASTING RECORDS AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   The applicant shall maintain accurate records throughout the blasting
operations showing the location of shots relative to nearby structure(s), type
explosive used, number of holes, pounds per hole, depth of hole, total pounds
per shot, date and time of blast and initials of the Inspector. Ground
vibrations shall be measured by appropriate instrumentation adjacent to side of
structures nearest the shot location and shall not exceed one inch per second
peak particle velocity. The applicant is fully responsible for all claims from
the blasting operation and shall promptly repair or replace all items known to
be damaged as a result of blasting.
§ 150.634 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Prior to the issuance of a permit for blasting and including
activities requiring the above ground storage of explosive materials and/or
products above ground, a general liability insurance policy shall be exhibited
to said Council or Council designate in an amount of not less than $100,000;
provided however, in the event in the opinion of the Council or the Council
designate that a larger policy should be required by reason of the quantity
and/or location for the proposed explosion, a larger policy amount may be
required.
   (B)   In the event explosives are to be used in an undeveloped area, the
Council or Council designate may waive the requirement of the liability policy,
and such fact may be noted on the permit.
§ 150.635 POLICY.
   An applicant for a permit required by this chapter shall deposit the amount
set forth by the City Council by ordinance or resolution. If an independent
review of the blasting permit and associated information is required by Council
or Council designate to determine the merits of issuing or denying a permit,
applicant shall reimburse the city for said independent review. Once issued,
blasting permits shall be valid for a period of 60 days from the date of
issuance.
§ 150.636 PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   In the event the Council or Council designate determines that such
explosives can be used as specified in the application for a permit under the
provisions of this chapter with safety to property and lives, and upon the
compliance by the applicant with all other provisions of this chapter, the
Council or Council designate shall issue the permit applied for to utilize such
explosives as set forth in the application.
§ 150.637 APPEAL.
   Any applicant whose application for a permit under the provision of this
chapter has been refused may appeal such refusal to the City Council.
DISEASED TREES AND OAK WILT REGULATIONS
§ 150.650 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the Oak Wilt Diseased
Tree and Firewood Regulations.
§ 150.651 PURPOSES.
   The provisions of this subchapter are deemed to be necessary to promote the
health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the City of Sunset
Valley, Texas.
§ 150.652 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Any tree or part thereof (including but not limited to firewood) which is
infected by a lethal communicable disease that is likely to spread to other
trees is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
§ 150.653 DUTY OF OWNER TO REMOVE OR CONTROL NUISANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or occupant having supervision or
control of any lot, tract, parcel of land or portion thereof, occupied or
unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the corporate limits of the city to
knowingly permit or maintain on any such lot, tract or parcel any tree or part
thereof which is a nuisance, and it shall be the duty of such person, owner or
occupant to promptly abate the nuisance of otherwise control such condition.
§ 150.654 RIGHT OF ENTRY BY URBAN FORESTER; INSPECTION.
   The Urban Forester is charged with enforcement of this chapter. The Urban
Forester may enter upon private property after making a reasonable effort to
locate the owner or other persons who have charge or control of the premises
and during normal business hours or by prearranged appointment made with the
specific landowner. Entry shall be for purposes of inspecting trees or plants
and parts thereof, and the Urban Forester may remove such specimens as are
required for the purposes of analysis to determine whether the same are
infected. In the event entry is refused, the Urban Forester or any authorized
representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure
entry.
§ 150.655 NOTICE TO OWNER TO ABATE.
   (A)   The Urban Forester shall serve to the owner of the premises where a
public nuisance as herein defined is found, written notice of the existence of
such nuisance and an order detailing the requirements of abatement to be
completed within a reasonable time to be specified in such notice. The
requirements of abatement may include, but not be limited to, the use of
cultural, mechanical, biological or chemical methods to abate the nuisance. In
the case of oak wilt epidemics property owners may be required to participate
in an Oak Wilt Management Program as described in §
150.656. The order shall advise the owner of a cost sharing program and fund
availability offered by the city as described in §
150.657.
   (B)   The owner of the premises for purposes of this article means a person
who has title to the property, possession of the property, whether lawful or
not, or a greater right to possession of the property than all but the titled
owner. The notice of abatement shall be served by registered mail or personally
on the owner. If such owner cannot be found, a copy of said notice shall be
placed upon said infected tree or plant or part thereof. Failure of the owner
to correct the violation within the specified time shall constitute a
misdemeanor.
§ 150.656 ESTABLISHING AN OAK WILT MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.
   (A)   The City of Sunset Valley Environmental Services Division will
establish an Oak Wilt Management Program consisting of three areas:
      (1)   Identification and assessment of oak wilt centers;
      (2)   Public education to inform citizens about oak wilt and to help
identify diseased trees;
      (3)   Treatments to suppress oak wilt; and
      (4)   Diversified plantings to restore and mitigate damage to affected
areas.
   (B)   The City Council shall establish funds each fiscal year to administer
the program.
   (C)   A city wide treatment plan will be established by the Urban Forester
in association with the Texas Forest Service and the City of Austin Forestry
Department. Priority for management will be based on:
      (1)   Available funding;
      (2)   Ability to control spread of disease centers;
      (3)   Tree sizes, values, and locations; and
      (4)   Size and location of disease centers.
§ 150.657 COST SHARING PROGRAM.
   (A)   The City of Sunset Valley Environmental Services Division will
establish a cost share program to reimburse property owners for costs to
suppress oak wilt. The program will follow the guidelines of the Texas Forest
Service (TFS) Cooperative Oak Wilt Suppression Project. Property owners will be
eligible for reimbursement of costs for oak wilt suppression (50% from the TFS
and 50% from the City of Sunset Valley with a limit of $10,000 per legal parcel
or property owner). In addition to costs for oak wilt suppression the City of
Sunset Valley will reimburse property owners 50% of the costs for replacement
trees purchased through the "Adopt a Tree" program and up to $10 per tree for
laboratory analysis to determine the presence of oak wilt.
   (B)   Project priority and reimbursements will be:
      (1)   In accordance with the city wide treatment plan (§
150.656);
      (2)   Dependent upon available funding; and
      (3)   In accordance with the Texas Forest Service (TFS) guidelines.
   (C)   Information regarding the Texas Forest Service Cooperative Oak Wilt
Suppression Project operational policies and technical guidelines is available
through the City of Sunset Valley Environmental Service Department and the
Texas Forest Service.
   (D)   The City of Sunset Valley Environmental Services Department shall
maintain a ledger which will be an accounting of funds encumbered for projects
awaiting Texas Forest Service plan approval and actual reimbursement payments
made to each property owner. All unexpended funds due to cancellations or cost
savings shall be returned to the Reimbursement Fund Balance and utilized to
reimburse pending applications where possible.
§ 150.658 TREE TRIMMING PERSONNEL.
   (A)   A governmental entity, private, utility company or public works
contractor, shall hire a person to supervise the trim or cut operation of oak
tree species (Quercus spp.) which have the trunk and/or limbs in the public
right-of-way, who is a registered, certified, or licensed Urban Forester or
Arborist familiar with the identification and control of oak wilt disease. The
trimming and cutting of oak trees (Q. spp.) shall be conducted in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. The name, address, and telephone number of
the above described person will be given to the City Administrative Section for
record keeping purposes. The Urban Forester shall determine when an Urban
Forester or Arborist is required for tree cut or trim operation. Factors to be
used in this determination are:
      (1)   Site location in relation to known areas of oak wilt;
      (2)   Scope or size of trim or cut project - numbers of affected trees;
      (3)   Economic, safety, or aesthetic welfare of owner;
      (4)   Time of year - dormant versus growing seasons;
      (5)   Current land usage at site; and
      (6)   Urgency or justified deadline to complete the project.
   (B)   Residential property owners or renters are exempted from the
requirement to utilize an Urban Forester or Arborist in the trim or cut
operation on their land. However, they are encouraged to utilize the above six
factors when contemplating the trimming of oak trees (Q. spp.). When in doubt,
contact the Urban Forester for guidance.
§ 150.659 TIME TO TRIM AND SEALING OF WOUNDS.
   The trimming or cutting of oak tree species (Quercus spp.) for purposes
other than protecting public safety should not be conducted between February 1
and June 1 to avoid transmission of the disease by insects. The resulting cut
shall be treated immediately with commercial pruning paint to seal the exposed
surface from contamination. Any wounds, whether made by trimming, construction,
or accident, shall be treated immediately with commercial pruning paint to seal
the surface from contamination. The Urban Forester may conduct unannounced
inspections to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter.
§ 150.660 DISINFECTION OF EQUIPMENT.
   Equipment used for pruning or cutting of oak species (Quercus spp.) in
public projects will be disinfected after each tree is completely cut and
before proceeding to the next tree. A solution of nine parts water to one part
bleach is recommended for disinfection of all pruning and cutting equipment,
however spray disinfectants or a solution of four parts water to one part
isopropyl alcohol are also suitable. Tool surfaces that contact any part of the
tree should be thoroughly coated with the disinfecting solution. On chain saws
the drive sprocket and interior surfaces should also be disinfected. This
disinfection procedure is highly recommended for private projects.
§ 150.661 HANDLING OF FIREWOOD.
   Wood from red oak varieties (Spanish Oak and Blackjack Oak), suspected of
being infected with oak wilt should be disposed of property by either removal
to a sanitary landfill or by burying. Firewood from other trees known or
suspected of being infected with oak wilt shall not be stacked near healthy
trees, and shall be covered with clear plastic and edges held securely by soil.
LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS
§ 150.670 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the landscaping regulations are to provide standards that
will protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public, preserve
property values, and improve the appearance of the community by preserving
natural resources and maintaining ecological balance. These regulations will
establish procedures for the design, installation, and maintenance of the
community's public and private landscapes through water efficient landscaping
with the least degradation or disruption to the ground, water, and air. These
regulations will preserve Sunset Valley's unique character and enhance
development and redevelopment by quality landscape design that:
   (A)   Reinforces the identity of the community, enhancing Sunset Valley's
nature based values;
   (B)   Provides tree canopies within parking areas to reduce heat island
effects;
   (C)   Anchors development within the landscape;
   (D)   Is environmentally sensitive by preserving and replenishing existing
native plant communities, using water conservation techniques, and enhancing
valuable habitat.
§ 150.671 APPLICATION.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the following, except as
otherwise provided below:
      (1)   The owners of all land located within the corporate limits of the
City of Sunset Valley. Such landscaping requirements shall become applicable as
to each individual lot at such time as an application for a site plan or
watershed development permit on such lot is made.
      (2)   A common development which includes more than one lot shall be
treated as one lot for the purposes of satisfying the landscaping requirements
of this chapter. Split ownership, planning in phases, construction in stages
and/or multiple building permits for a project shall not prevent it from being
a common development as referred to above. Each phase of a phased project shall
comply with the requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   A development or redevelopment of more than two legal lots by the
same developer.
   (B)   Requirements for single family residences. Section 150.684 applies to
building permits for single family residences where only one such structure is
constructed per lot.
   (C)   This chapter shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Building permits for the substantial restoration within a period of
12 months of a building which has been damaged less than 50% by fire,
explosion, flood, tornado, riot, act of the public enemy, or accident of any
kind.
      (2)   Building permits for remodeling as long as the exterior walls of
the building remain in the same location.
§ 150.672 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Landscape site plan information requirements. When an application is
made for a building permit on any land where the landscaping requirements of
this chapter are applicable, such building permit application, including site
plans, shall be accompanied by a landscape site plan containing the information
listed in divisions (A)(1) through (A)(15) below. In the event that a
preliminary or final building site plan is amended or finalized, an amended or
finalized landscape site plan containing the information listed in divisions
(A)(1) through (A)(15) below shall be submitted simultaneously with the amended
or finalized building site plan.
      (1)   The date, scale, north arrow, title and name of owner.
      (2)   The location of existing boundary lines and dimensions of the
tract.
      (3)   The approximate center line of existing water courses; the
approximate location of significant drainage features; and the location and
size of existing and proposed streets and alleys, existing and proposed utility
easements on or adjacent to the lot, and existing and proposed sidewalks
adjacent to the street.
      (4)   The location, size, species, type (tree, shrub, groundcover, or
grass), spacing, and quantity of proposed landscaping in proposed landscaped
areas; and the location and size of proposed landscaped areas.
      (5)   The location and species of all existing trees having trunks four
inches or larger diameter at breast height (DBH) and the approximate size of
their crowns.
      (6)   An inventory and location of the site's existing plant communities
including common plant names and approximate number of plants.
      (7)   An indication of whether understory vegetation is present under the
tree canopy of all existing trees, and the identity of all dominant species
constituting such understory vegetation.
      (8)   Information necessary for verifying whether the required minimum
percent of landscaped area has been met under §
150.674 and whether a particular area qualifies for 125% credit under §
150.677 hereof.
      (9)   Plans and details illustrating of how the applicant plans to
protect the existing trees and understory vegetation, which are proposed to be
retained, from damage during construction, including but not limited to: a
showing of critical root zones, required work space, location of fences during
construction, and permeable paving areas, if applicable. Protection during
construction shall be provided by fencing and lumber wraps on the trunks and
lower branches of trees. No storage of materials or vehicular traffic is to be
permitted in this area in order to prevent compaction of soil. Tree removal
requests, protection plans, and replacement plans are required in accordance
with §§
150.770 through
150.788.
      (10)   The proposed irrigation system as required by §
150.674 below.
      (11)   Plans and specifications including the location, material used,
and height of any walls or fences.
      (12)   All plans necessary to show compliance with the applicable
provisions of the sign provisions of this Code (§§
150.700 through
150.736) which are in effect at the time of submission of the landscape site
plan.
      (13)   The certification of a landscape architect, registered in the
State of Texas, or a certified landscape professional that the plans satisfy
the requirements of this chapter. Provided, however, that for a common
development or project which is greater than one acre in size, such plans and
certification shall be made by a landscape architect only.
      (14)   Information necessary for verifying how landscape buffering is to
be accomplished under §
150.683
      (15)   The City Council approved plan shall specifically note in chart
form elements which have been granted alternative compliance.
   (B)   Plan approvals. Landscaping site plans approved by the City Council
during the final site plan and landscape site plan review process shall not
require further approval if the site plan approved contains all information
listed in division (A) above, unless the accompanying final site plan is later
amended, in which case a landscape site plan, amended as necessary, shall be
provided for the City Council's review and approval. Minor amendments may be
considered and approved administratively if they do not require a variance to
this Code and do not affect the final approved buffering requirements in each
category.
   (C)   Review and inspection fee. A review and inspection fee in an amount to
be set by the City Council from time to time shall be collected at the time of
submittal of the landscape plan. Fees shall cover plan review, installation
monitoring, initial inspection for Certificate of Occupancy, and a final
inspection within one year or the next growing season.
   (D)   Inspection/fiscal posting. Fiscal posting is required prior to the
issuance of the site development permit. All landscape installation must be
completed prior to the landscape inspection. The city or its designated agent
shall inspect each site to insure compliance with this chapter. Prior to final
landscape inspection, a sealed letter of concurrence shall be provided to the
city from a State of Texas registered landscape architect or certified
landscaping professional, which letter shall verify that the project has been
implemented in accordance with the city approved plans. Calculation will be
based on the criteria established in the landscape site plan application.
§ 150.673 INSPECTIONS.
   The city or its designated agent may inspect each site annually to insure
continued compliance with the approved landscape plan. Sites found to be out of
compliance may be subject to fines as described in §§
150.021 and
150.999.
§ 150.674 STREET YARD LANDSCAPE.
   (A)   Landscape minimum. At least 25% of the area of the street yard shall
be landscaped area.
   (B)   Tree requirements. For areas within the street yard, trees of not less
than one and one-half inches in caliper and six feet in height (either existing
or planted) shall be required as per the ratios found in
Table 13.1. A minimum of five different species must be planted if more than 50
caliper inches of trees are required. A minimum of 75% of all required trees
shall be large canopy trees. All provisions of §§
150.770 through
150.788 apply regarding replacement tree plantings.
 
TABLE 13.1 STREET YARD TREE REQUIREMENTS
Total Street Yard Area       Required Trees
Less than 10,000 square feet 2 trees per 1000 square feet or fraction thereof
Over 10,000 square feet      20 trees, plus 2 trees per 2,500 square feet or
                             fraction thereof over 10,000 square feet
Quantity of trees required shall be rounded up
 
   (C)   Shrub requirement. A maximum of 20% of the 25% required landscaped
street yard area shall consist of shrub plantings and should be more or less
evenly distributed throughout the street yard so as to not create a geometric
alignment. Hedgerows and straight lines of plantings are discouraged.
   (D)   Plant selection. All required vegetation shall be plants included in
the Sunset Valley Recommended Plant List. Should an approved plant not be
available at time of installation, a plant within the same category in the
Sunset Valley Recommended Plant List may be substituted with the approval of
the City Landscape Architect or other designated City Agent.
   (E)   Landscaping credits. The following may receive credits toward
landscaping and buffering requirements:
      (1)   Existing preserved tree credit. An existing surveyed or planted
tree which is at least four inches shall be considered as two trees for
purposes of satisfying requirements of this division. Up to one third of the
required trees may be Juniperus virginiana or Juniperus ashei, the native
eastern and western cedars, respectively; and/or Prosopsis glandulosus, the
native mesquite. Trees that are excluded from protection per §§
150.770 through
150.788 cannot be considered for credit.
      (2)   Drip line credit. The impervious cover within the area encompassed
by the drip line of any existing tree in a required landscaped area may not
exceed 50% of such area. Each square foot of permeable surface below the drip
line of the existing preserved tree shall count as 125% square feet of
landscape credit. Trees for which extra credit is being applied shall be
inspected prior to, during and at time of final inspection for healthiness and
probability of survival. Credit shall be subject to the following limitations:
         (a)   Overlapping drip line cannot be counted twice.
         (b)   No credit will be given where damaging grade changes within the
drip line of a tree has occurred.
         (c)   No storage of materials or vehicular traffic is to be permitted
in this area in order to prevent compaction of soil.
         (d)   The total credit for the tree drip line cannot exceed the total
footage within the drip line. The total credit must be equal or less than 100%
of the area within the drip line
      (3)   Pedestrian amenities. For each square foot of publicly accessible
special pedestrian facilities and features such as plazas, covered walkways,
fountains, lakes and decorative water ponds, seating areas and outdoor
recreation facilities; such areas will reduce the amount of required landscaped
area of the site by an equivalent square footage up to only 10% of the required
landscaped street yard.
      (4)   Berm credit. Landscape areas incorporating berms a minimum of three
feet in height will be given 5% additional credit toward reducing square
footage requirements for landscaped areas. Berms must have no greater than
three to one slope.
      (5)   Proposed trees credits. Newly planted trees of at least four
caliper inches and at least twelve 12 feet tall shall be considered as one and
one-half trees for purposes of satisfying the requirements of this chapter. All
newly planted trees shall be planted in a permeable area whose minimum
dimension is no less than 15 feet wide measured from the back of the curb
   (F)   In no case shall the actual landscaped area of a lot be less than 80%
of the required minimum area of the street yard.
§ 150.675 TURF LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   General. Traditional grass areas are not required in Sunset Valley.
The city invites innovative and environmentally appropriate alternatives to
turf grass monocultures. Such areas may be established in native diverse
species which have low water requirements. A major portion of water demand used
for landscape purposes is required for the irrigation of turf areas. Portions
of landscaped areas that have been customarily designed as lawns should be
designed instead as:
      (1)   Natural plant communities;
      (2)   Redeveloped native areas including native grasses;
      (3)   Traditional mixes of trees, shrubs and groundcovers. Properly
managed non-grass landscape developments of site specific plantings will
typically be able to survive on a reduced water requirement and survive drought
conditions better than turf areas.
   (B)   Maximum allowable turf areas. No more than 25% of the required
landscape area shall be planted in turf grass. Grasses must be drought-tolerant
species and when possible allowed to seed to encourage to natural reseeding.
Right-of-way adjacent to development will not be included in this calculation.
   (C)   Turf selection. Turf selection shall be made from those grasses found
on the Sunset Valley Recommended Plant List.
§ 150.676 VEGETATIVE BUFFER REQUIREMENT.
   Vegetative buffer requirement. There shall be a vegetative buffer zone of 25
feet next to the right-of-way lines of all streets and roadways.
   (A)   No improvements, including parking areas, water quality ponds, and
fences, shall be allowed in the vegetative buffer zone. Driveways will only be
allowed within the vegetative buffer when perpendicular (center line of
driveway) to the right-of-way thus allowing access from a public street to a
parking facility.
   (B)   Except for clearing necessary to provide utilities access and site
line visibility to the site, no clearing of vegetation shall be permitted
within the vegetative buffer zone. Indiscriminate clearing regulations are
found within §
150.785.
   (C)   In cases where the buffer area has previously been substantially
disturbed, it shall be restored to provide a varied landscape buffer utilizing
trees, shrubs, and grasses in accordance with the other provisions of this
chapter.
§ 150.677 LANDSCAPING IN PARKING AREAS.
   (A)   Vehicular use areas, parking areas, service areas, parking lots and
their parked vehicles shall be required one point of landscape buffering (refer
to §
150.683) for each linear foot of required landscaping along the property line.
If non-residential vehicular use areas, parking area, service area, or parking
lot are adjacent to residential property, compatibility and buffering standards
shall apply. These standards are separate and apart from the landscaping
regulations and found in §
150.105.
   (B)   A minimum total area of 120 square feet of landscaped islands,
peninsulas and medians is required for each 12 parking spaces anywhere on the
site, including the street yard. Concrete curbs shall not be counted in the
required landscape areas.
   (C)   The number, size, and shape of islands, peninsulas, and medians in
both street yards and non-street yards shall be at the discretion of the owner;
however, no parking space shall be located further than 50 feet from a
permeable landscaped island, peninsula, or median. This distance should be
measured from the back of curb of the landscaped island, median or peninsula
and should encompass the entire parking space. All islands, peninsulas and
medians required in the areas stated above shall be more or less evenly
distributed throughout such parking areas, respectively; however, the
distribution and location of landscaped islands, peninsulas, and medians may be
adjusted to accommodate existing trees or other natural features so long as the
total area requirement for landscaped islands, peninsulas, and medians for the
respective parking areas above is satisfied.
   (D)   Only landscaped islands, peninsulas, and medians in the street yard
shall count toward fulfilling the requirements of §
150.674(A) above, as applicable.
   (E)   Each parking aisle shall be terminated with an end island whose
minimum dimension is 15 feet wide from the inside of the curb.
   (F)   Each parking island is required to have at least one tree.
   (G)   Special provisions for large parking lots.
      (1)   The above division (C) does not apply if this division (G) is
required. For parking lots with more than three parking modules, a 15 foot
minimum width median (measured from back of curb) will be required for every
third parking module. Trees within the median must be located so that one tree
shall be located within 25 feet of each parking space adjacent to the median.
This distance should be measured as the distance from the center of the tree to
the edge of each parking space. No additional islands shall be required to
satisfy §
150.674 except for end islands for each parking module.
      (2)   A pedestrian walkway shall be provided within the boundaries of
each fifteen foot wide (minimum) median. The walkway shall provide pedestrian
access connecting the parking lot and the commercial establishment's entry
(ies). The walkway shall meet all accessibility requirements.
§ 150.678 PRESERVATION OF NATURAL CHARACTER.
   (A)   Preservation of natural character. The natural landscape character
(especially native trees, grasses and geology) shall be preserved or restored
to the extent reasonable and feasible. In determining whether there is
compliance with this division the City Council designate shall consider
topographical constraints on design, drainage, access and egress, utilities,
and other factors reasonably related to the health, safety and welfare of the
public which necessitated disturbance of the existing natural landscape
character; economic usefulness of the property without disturbance of its
natural character; the nature and quality of the landscaping installed to
replace it; and such other factors as may be relevant and proper.
Indiscriminate clearing or stripping of the natural vegetation on a lot is
prohibited as per §§
150.770 through
150.788.
   (B)   When existing natural plant communities occur on a parcel of land to
be developed, at least 20% of the required landscape area shall be in the form
of preserved native plant communities.
§ 150.679 WATER-EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE DESIGN.
   (A)   Xeriscape principles. It is the intent of this chapter to assist the
city in achieving water conservation through proper plant selection,
installation and maintenance practices. The following Xeriscape principles
serve as the primary means of achieving water conservation:
      (1)   Appropriate planning and design;
      (2)   Limiting turf areas to locations where it provides functional
benefits;
      (3)   Efficient, low water use irrigation systems;
      (4)   The use of soil amendments to improve water holding capacity of the
soil;
      (5)   The use of mulches to maintain soil moisture and reduce
evaporation;
      (6)   Zoning of plant materials according to their microclimate needs and
water requirements;
      (7)   The use of drought-tolerant plants from the Sunset Valley
Recommended Plant List; and,
      (8)   Appropriate and timely maintenance.
   (B)   Site development standards. Creative site development concepts shall
be used in order to promote resource conservation. These standards include:
      (1)   The preservation of existing native plant communities.
      (2)   The re-establishment of native plant communities.
      (3)   Limiting the amount of turf areas.
      (4)   Landscaped areas shall be configured to maximize the
interconnectivity within the site to natural areas and landscaped areas
adjacent to development. Small isolated islands of landscaping should be
avoided except as required for screening along roadways and within parking
lots.
      (5)   Landscape design shall enhance natural features, drainage ways and
environmental resources.
      (6)   All landscape improvements shall be designed for mature landscapes
and shall provide appropriate visibility for cars and pedestrians. Landscape
design shall consider the view of store fronts and signage for vehicular
access.
      (7)   The use of shade trees to reduce transpiration rates of lower story
plant materials.
      (8)   Incorporate elements of gateway, path and destination into the
design of landscapes. Gateways are entries that provide transitions from one
space to another. Pathways are routes that lead to a destination. Destinations
are focal points. The use of pervious paving materials is encouraged.
      (9)   Plants having similar water use shall be grouped in distinct hydro
zones, shown on the landscaping plan.
      (10)   High hydro zones shall be separated from low and very low hydro
zones by moderate hydro zones whenever possible.
      (11)   Planting strips less than ten feet wide shall be planted with low
or very low water use plants.
      (12)   Decorative water features must use recirculated water and are
subject to drought restrictions.
      (13)   Plants shall be selected to blend with native vegetation for
projects that interface between urban areas and natural open spaces. Plants
with low fuel volume and/or low flammability shall be emphasized.
§ 150.680 WATER-EFFICIENT IRRIGATION DESIGN.
   (A)   Irrigation. All required landscaping shall be irrigated by one of the
following methods:
      (1)   An underground sprinkling automatic irrigation system - either
conventional spray, bubblers, drip emitters, drip tubing, porous pipe or other
similar system.
      (2)   A hose attachment within 100 feet of all street yard required
landscaped areas and plant materials where there is no road or parking pavement
between the hose attachment and landscaped areas and the site plan area is no
larger than one acre.
      (3)   Landscape areas planted with native grasses and wildflowers may use
a temporary and above ground irrigation system in accordance with the design
criteria outlined herein and shall be required to provide irrigation only for
the first two growing seasons. The irrigation schedule is to be determined at
time of planting and approved by the city or its designated agents.
      (4)   Hand watering may be considered for low and very low hydro zones.
      (5)   Use of non-treated water for irrigation is encouraged if a
permanent suitable supply is available §
150.688 details credits and approved methods for innovative water management.
      (6)   Irrigation shall not be required for natural areas or existing
trees which are not disturbed or affected by the proposed development.
   (B)   The irrigation methods used shall:
      (1)   Provide a moisture level in an amount and frequency adequate to
sustain growth of the plant materials on a permanent basis;
      (2)   Be in place and operational at the time of the final landscape
inspection.
      (3)   Be maintained and kept operational at all times to provide for
efficient water distribution;
      (4)   Be described in the landscape plans by a detail and drawing,
indicating the nature and location of the irrigation methods which will be
used. The description should be specific enough to show that adequate
irrigation will be provided to all required landscape areas and plant materials
and that there is no disturbance to the critical root zones of existing trees.
      (5)   Turf zones and non-turf areas shall be on separate valves.
      (6)   Drip emitters and sprinklers shall be placed on separate valves.
      (7)   Bubblers for trees shall be placed on a separate valve. Bubblers
shall not exceed one and one-half gallons per minute (gpm) for each device.
      (8)   Each valve shall irrigate a landscape with similar site, slope, and
soil conditions and plant material with similar watering needs.
      (9)   Special attention shall be given to avoid runoff from slopes and to
avoid overspray.
   (C)   Irrigation system requirements. Automatic irrigation systems shall
comply with the following guidelines. These guidelines (division (C)(1) through
(C)(8)) shall be noted on the site plan and shall be implemented as part of the
landscape inspection.
      (1)   Adjustable flow controls shall be required on circuit remote
control valves. Pressure regulation component(s) shall be required where static
pressure exceeds manufacturer's recommended operating range.
      (2)   Valves and circuits shall be separated based on water use, so that
turf areas can be watered separately from shrub and groundcover areas.
      (3)   Sprinkler heads shall have matched precipitation rates within each
control valve circuit.
      (4)   Serviceable check valves shall be required where elevation
differential may cause low head drainage adjacent to paving areas.
      (5)   Sprinkler head spacing shall be designed for head-to-head coverage
or heads shall be spaced as per manufacturer's recommendations and adjusted for
prevailing winds. The system shall be designed for minimum run-off and minimum
overspray onto non-irrigated areas (i.e. paving and structures).
      (6)   All automatic irrigation systems shall be equipped with a
controller capable of dual or multiple programming. Controllers shall have
multiple cycle start capacity and a flexible calendar program, including the
capability of being set to water once a week. All automatic irrigation systems
shall be equipped with a rain and freeze sensor shut-off device.
      (7)   System must be designed to be able to water all zones within a
maximum 15-hour period per week.
      (8)   Irrigation construction plans shall include a water budget that
conforms with allowable landscaping water budget in §
150.681(A). A laminated copy of the water budget shall be permanently installed
inside the irrigation controller door. Water budgets shall include:
         (a)   Estimated monthly water use (in gallons per application) and the
area (in square feet) irrigated.
         (b)   Precipitation rates for each valve circuit.
         (c)   Monthly irrigation schedule for the plant establishment period
(first three months) and recommended yearly watering schedule, including
seasonal adjustments.
         (d)   Location of emergency irrigation system shut-off valve.
§ 150.681 LANDSCAPE WATER CONSERVATION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Dedicated landscape water meter and backflow device.
      (1)   Separate water meters shall be required for all new landscaping or
renovated landscaped areas that have a construction area of new landscaping
larger than 5,000 square feet.
      (2)   All irrigation systems must have a backflow device as required by
the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
   (B)   Landscape water budget. The landscape water budget for new landscape
shall be no more than 70% of reference evapotranspiration per square foot of
landscaped area, including turf grass. The landscape water budget shall be
calculated using the equation below:
      (1)   Landscape water budget = (0.7)(ETo)(0.00083)(LA);
         (a)   Water budget =annual upper limit of irrigation water allowed.
(CCF/year);
         (b)   0.7=ET adjustment factor;
         (c)   ETo=Reference evapotranspiration;
         (d)   Conversion factor to CCF;
         (e)   LA=Landscape area (square feet).
      (2)   New landscapes that are irrigated with non-potable water are
allowed a total of 100% of evapotranspiration rate per square foot. Acceptable
alternatives for non-potable water can be found in §
150.688.
      (3)   The annual water use shall not exceed the annual water budget.
§ 150.682 BUFFERING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Required buffers. Buffering is a site specific requirements that shall
be evaluated based on viewer distance and angle of view from the areas or
features that require buffering. Buffer design should also consider the amount
of view obstruction required and the type and mixture of design elements.
Compatibility and buffering are required wherever a property other than
residential abuts adjacent residential property. The buffer shall comply with
the requirements outlined in the §
150.105.
   (B)   Non-residential property adjacent to residential property. Wherever a
vehicular use area, parking area, service area, utility appurtenances or
parking lot serving a non-residential property abuts adjacent residential
property, the requirement outlined in §
150.105 shall apply.
      (1)   Effective buffering of residential districts from all other
districts, except, park, greenspace/preservation, and conservation areas shall
include a minimum 100 feet landscape setback.
      (2)   The landscaping requirements of this chapter cannot be met within
the landscape setback required pursuant to §
150.105.
   (C)   Buffering of water quality and utility improvements. Landscape
buffering requirements outlined under the requirements of §
150.682 shall also apply to detention ponds, sedimentation ponds and filtration
and utility appurtenances.
   (D)   Non-residential property adjacent to non-residential property.
Landscape buffering of non-residential property adjacent to non-residential
property is a site specific requirement that shall be evaluated by the city or
its designated agent based on viewer distance and angle of view from the areas
or site features requiring buffering. Such areas or site features requiring
landscape buffering include, but are not limited to, vehicular use areas,
parking lots and their parked cars, and , service areas,. Buffer design shall
also consider the amount of view obstruction required and the type and mixture
of design elements used in the buffer.
§ 150.683 BUFFERING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Buffering standards. To be considered effective, a combination of
buffering elements shall be used to provide a partial view obstruction of those
items to be buffered (pavement, parked cars, etc.).
      (1)   Landscape buffers shall contain at least two of the following
elements:
         (a)   Trees;
         (b)   Shrubs; or
         (c)   Berms.
      (2)   Plants and trees used as buffering elements shall be planted in a
permeable landscape area at least 15 feet wide, measured from back of curb,
pavement, or face of building to the property line. All plantings shall conform
to the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   To determine the quantity of elements to be included in a buffer,
the following point system should be used. This system assigns a point value to
each landscape element listed above. The values for these elements are found in
Table 13.2.
      (4)   For each linear foot of buffer area required, one point of
buffering element as listed above should be provided within the buffer area.
The buffer area does not have to be planted at the same density throughout.
However, the elements should be combined so that no more than one-quarter of
the buffer area is absent of elements and no less than two elements are used
for more than 50% of the buffer length.
      (5)   All required landscaping must be accomplished within the boundaries
of the site being developed. Landscaping accomplished in any dedicated right-
of-way shall not be included in meeting the landscaping or buffering
requirements imposed by this chapter. Landscaping areas preserved or planted
for the purpose of preserving or creating drainage ways, detention ponds, or
sedimentation ponds shall not be included in satisfying the landscaping
requirements provided by this chapter, except that the top one-third of the
depth of such landscaped drainage way, detention pond, or sedimentation pond
may be included in satisfying landscaping requirements.
      (6)   Fifty percent of proposed landscaped plantings must be conspicuous,
e.g., blooming material.
TABLE 13.2: BUFFERING POINT SYSTEM
TABLE 13.2: BUFFERING POINT SYSTEM
Trees
Plant          1 - 1 ½ Caliper  2 - 2 ½ Caliper       3 - 3 ½ Caliper
Classification
Trees          Recommended Other Recommended     Other  Recommended Other
               Plant             Plant                  Plant
Large tree     3 pts.      1 pt. 6 ps.           2 pts. 9 pts.      3 pts.
Small tree     3 pts.      1 pt. 6 pts.          2 pts. 9 pts.      3 pts.
Shrubs
Plant          1 Gallon                          5 Gallon
Classification
Shrubs         Recommended Plant Other           Recommended Plant  Other
Large shrub    1 pt.             1/3 pt.         3 pts.             1 pt.
Medium shrub   1 pt.             1/3 pt.         3 pts.             1 pt.
Small shrub    ½ pt.            1/6 pt.         2 pts.             2/3 pts.
Walls and Berms
Decorative wall (3 ft. minimum height)           3 pts. per linear foot
Berm per linear foot (3 ft. minimum height at no 1 pt. per linear foot
greater than 3:1 side slope)
 
§ 150.684 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT.
   Minimum requirements. Each newly built residential home where only one
primary residence is constructed shall meet these minimum standards:
   (A)   All disturbed areas and bare ground must be revegetated with approved
grass and/or wildflower seed. Sod shall be used in areas with greater than 5%
slope. Mulch and erosion control blanket may be used for temporary
stabilization of the area.
   (B)   Grass and seed selection must be from the Sunset Valley Recommended
Plant List.
   (C)   If a lot has fewer than five existing, mature trees, two minimum one
and one-half caliper trees chosen from the large tree replacement list found in
§
150.783 must be planted.
   (D)   All planting and seeding must occur before issuance of a certificate
of occupancy.
   (E)   Revegetated areas must be established before environmental controls
can be removed.
   (F)   A dedicated irrigation meter and backflow device shall be required.
§ 150.685 LANDSCAPE MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Shrubs, vines and ground cover. Shrubs, vines and ground cover planted
pursuant to this chapter should be good, healthy nursery stock normally grown
for or found growing in the Travis County area. Plant materials which are
native or naturalized and have low water requirements are highly recommended.
Shrubs must be, at a minimum, a one gallon container size.
   (B)   Plant quality standards. Plants installed pursuant to this chapter
shall conform to or exceed the minimum standard as provided in the most current
edition of American Standards for Nursery Stock (ASNS) recommended for general
use and adoption by the American Association of Nurserymen. Another accepted
standard may be used if it equals or exceeds the quality of the ASNS.
   (C)   Plant ball sizes. Ball sizes on all transplanted plant materials shall
conform to or exceed the minimum standards as noted in the most current edition
of ASNS.
   (D)   Turf grass. Traditional grass areas are not required in Sunset Valley.
The city invites innovative and environmentally appropriate alternatives to
turf grass monocultures. Such areas may be established in native diverse
species which have low water requirements. Grass areas using grass not listed
on the Sunset Valley Recommended Plant List are not credited as landscaped
area. In shaded turf areas (areas that receive less than six hours of sunlight
per day), a shade-tolerant, low water use grass may be used. Areas may be
sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded except that solid sod shall be used in
swales or other areas subject to erosion.
   (E)   Synthetic lawns or plants. Synthetic or artificial lawns or plants
shall not be used in lieu of plant requirements in this chapter. These products
do not provide ecological services and may increase the heat island effect.
   (F)   Architectural planters. The use of architectural planters shall not be
permitted in fulfillment of landscape requirements, but may be used in addition
to landscaping requirements.
   (G)   Drainage. Drainage ways shall be designed and maintained so as to
maximize the use of native vegetation on the bottoms and sides.
   (H)   Species. No more than 35% of the trees or shrubs shall be from the
same species within a specified genus. No more than 25% of planted trees,
shrubs and groundcover shall be from the same genus.
   (I)   Weed control fabric. All weed control fabric must be pervious and
allow water to flow freely into the ground.
§ 150.686 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   General minimum requirements. The following standards shall be
considered the minimum requirements for the installation of all landscaping
within Sunset Valley.
      (1)   Installation requirements. All landscape materials shall be
installed according to ASNS standards. This requirement will be monitored by
the city or its designated agent.
      (2)   Anti-transpirants - general. In order to reduce the transpiration
rate of plant material during the installation process, anti-transpirants may
be used. Anti-transpirants reduce the amount of water loss through the leaves
of plant material during installation, thereby reducing the amount of water
required for the survival of the plants. Anti-transpirants may be used on all
permitted landscape installation projects.
      (3)   It shall be the responsibility of each private property owner to
remove any dead, diseased or dangerous trees or shrubs, or parts thereof, which
overhang or interfere with traffic control devices, public sidewalks, rights-
of-way or property owned by the city. The city shall have the authority to
order the removal of any such trees or shrubs.
   (B)   Watering.
      (1)   All watering of planted areas shall be managed so as to:
         (a)   Maintain healthy flora.
         (b)   Make plant material more drought tolerant.
         (c)   Avoid excessive turf growth.
         (d)   Minimize fungus growth.
         (e)   Stimulate deep root growth.
         (f)   Minimize leaching of fertilizer.
         (g)   Minimize cold damage.
         (h)   Minimize runoff.
      (2)   Watering of turf areas. All watering of turf areas shall be
accomplished on an as needed basis. Buffalo grass may not require watering even
when wilting. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to preclude the
withholding of water from turf beyond the stage of turf wilt.
      (3)   Promoting deep root growth of trees and shrubs. Watering of plants
and trees should always be in a sufficient amount to thoroughly soak the root
ball of the plant and the surrounding area, thereby promoting deep root growth
and tolerance.
      (4)   Operation of automatic irrigation systems. Whenever possible,
automatic irrigation systems should be operated between the hours of midnight
and 6:00 a.m. or as designated by the City of Sunset Valley. Irrigating during
these hours reduces fungus growth and loss of water due to evaporation.
      (5)   Maintenance of irrigation systems. Irrigation systems shall be
constantly maintained to eliminate waste of water due to loss of heads, broken
pipes or misadjusted nozzles and to adjust controller programs to reflect
weather changes.
      (6)   All watering schedules must comply with applicable Sunset Valley
water restrictions during droughts.
   (C)   Maintenance and replacement of dead material. The owner of the
building, or the manager or agent of the owner, shall be responsible for the
appearance of landscaping at all times and landscaping shall be kept free of
refuse and debris. Ongoing maintenance shall include the replacement of dead
plant material if that material was used to meet the requirements of this
chapter. Should a tree die or be removed from which credit has been obtained
pursuant to the terms of §
150.674, a smaller tree with a minimum caliper of two inches that will have a
mature crown similar to the tree removed must be substituted within six months
and the planting area or pervious cover provided for the larger tree retained.
   (D)   The required two to four-inch mulch layer shall be maintained on all
landscape projects.
§ 150.687 REPLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Replacement requirements: Vegetation which is required to be planted or
preserved by this chapter shall be replaced with equivalent vegetation.
Preserved trees for which credit was awarded which subsequently die shall be
replaced by the requisite number of living trees according to the standards
established in §
150.674.
§ 150.688 CREDIT FOR INNOVATIVE WATER MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   Water budget credit. Projects that use alternative non-potable water
sources or smart irrigation controllers will be able to use 100% of their water
budget.
   (B)   Rainwater harvesting. Rainwater from rooftops can be collected onsite
and used for irrigation. For this application the rainwater harvesting tank
will also be exempted from impervious cover calculations when used for
irrigation of landscaped areas.
      (1)   Tank must be sized to collect four inches of rainfall per square
foot of rooftop.
      (2)   Projects that include rainwater harvesting will also receive a
reduction of 5% of the required landscape area when used for irrigation of
landscaped areas.
      (3)   Rainwater harvesting tanks for this application shall not be used
to meet water quality treatment requirements of site per §§
150.320 through
150.349.
   (C)   Rain gardens.
      (1)   Rain gardens that are lined with impervious liner and complies with
rain garden design specifications in the pollution reduction manual will be
exempted from the water budget calculations.
      (2)   Rain garden must be equal in size to 10% of the total requirement
of the street yard landscape area.
   (D)   Disconnected downspouts from rooftops.
      (1)   These downspouts must be directed into landscaping beds.
      (2)   Disconnected downspouts used in conjunction with lined rain gardens
will receive an additional 5% reduction of the required landscape area.
   (E)   Evapotranspiration and smart irrigation controllers. The use of
evapotranspiration systems or smart irrigation controllers that regulate water
use may be considered for additional water budget credit.
§ 150.689 VARIANCES AND ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Except in regards to buffering standards found in §
150.105, the City Council may authorize a variance from these regulations when,
in its opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In
granting a variance, the Council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems
necessary or desirable in the public interest. In making the findings herein
below required, the Council shall take into account the nature of the proposed
use of the land involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of
persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable
effect of such variance upon traffic conditions and upon the public health,
safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted
unless the Council finds:
      (1)   That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the
land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this
chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land;
      (2)   That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment
of a substantial property right of the applicant; and
      (3)   That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area.
   (B)   Alternative compliance. Notwithstanding all of the foregoing
provisions of this chapter, a landscape site plan which is an alternative to
strict compliance with the various landscaping requirements of this chapter may
be approved by the City Council, if the Council finds that such plan is as good
or better than a plan in strict compliance with the various landscaping
requirements of this chapter in accomplishing the purposes of this chapter.
Consideration should be given to preservation of heritage and ancestral trees
which are not necessarily in required landscape areas. In no event, however,
will landscaping or buffering within a dedicated right-of-way constitute
alternative compliance with the requirements imposed by this chapter, nor shall
such landscaping or buffering be deemed to satisfy any requirement of this
chapter.
      (1)   Alternative proposals should be clearly identified on the landscape
plans and the site plan application should include a letter outlining the
alternative proposal. Review of the alternative proposal will be in conjunction
with the site plan review.
      (2)   To establish some guideline equivalents for the major landscape
requirements listed in §
150.674, a list of alternative equivalent ratings are found below. These
ratings assign relative values to the landscape elements of a design and should
be used when formulating alternative proposals. Each basic requirement which
cannot be achieved is assigned a negative point value and may be compensated
for with positive equivalents shown in the compensation list. An example using
this concept is provided below:
         (a)   These ratings are intended to provide guidance for proposing
alternatives to strict compliance for unusual site specific conditions.
However, other proposed equivalents may be accepted based on extremely unusual
conditions, if approved by the City Council.
         (b)   Deficiencies. The following information should be used to
formulate alternative proposals when a site design cannot conform to the basic
landscape requirements as described in §
150.674. Approved alternative compliance proposals must be from the Sunset
Valley Recommended Plant List.
ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE EQUIVALENT RATINGS
ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE EQUIVALENT RATINGS
Landscape Area as a Percent of Street Yard        Negative Points
<20%                                              -20
20%                                               -15
21%                                               -10
22%                                               -8
23%                                               -6
24%                                               -4
25%                                               0
Landscape Area for Each 12 Parking Spaces         Negative Points
<60 square feet                                   -15
61 - 89 square feet                               -10
90 - 119 square feet                              -5
>120 square feet                                  0
Landscape Islands, Medians or Peninsula Placement Negative Points
within 100 feet of each space                     -10
within 75 feet of each space                      -5
within 50 feet of each space                      0
Trees Installed in Parking Landscape Areas        Negative Points
within 100 feet of each space                     -10
within 75 feet of each space                      -5
within 50 feet of each space                      0
 
         (c)   Deficiency compensation.
ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE EQUIVALENT RATINGS
ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE EQUIVALENT RATINGS
Trees                                                           Positive Points
All must be from Sunset Valley Recommended Plant List
                                                                        3 inch
Percentage of Installed Street Yard Trees                       2 inch  or
                                                                caliper greater
                                                                        caliper
10%                                                             +1      +1
20%                                                             +2      +4
30%                                                             +3      +6
40%                                                             +4      +8
50% or greater                                                  +5      +10
Buffer Increased Above Minimum                                  Positive Points
10%                                                             +1
20%                                                             +2
30%                                                             +3
40%                                                             +4
50%                                                             +5
Special Landscape Features                                      Positive Points
Covered walkways not attached to buildings, arbors, gazebos or  +5
shaded seating areas for public benefit
Sidewalks, trails or pedestrian paths outside the public right- +5
of-way
Sculpture, public art or water features that support aquatic    +5
plant and/or animal life
Herb or antique rose display gardens                            +5
Rain Garden or Wet Pond                                         +5
Native Plant Credit                                             Positive Points
All native plant materials                                      +5
Water Conservation Credit
Approved rain water storage and irrigation distribution system  +5
The installation of an automatic conventional spray type
irrigation system for all landscape areas in compliance with § +3
150.680
The installation of an automatic water saving drip system for   +4
all landscaped areas and in compliance with § 150.680
ET/Smart Controller                                             +5
 
SIGN REGULATIONS
§ 150.700 PURPOSE AND GOALS.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide uniform sign standards that
perform the following:
      (1)   Promote a positive image of the city;
      (2)   Protect an important aspect of the economic base;
      (3)   Reduce the confusion and hazards that result from excessive and
prolific use of sign displays;
      (4)   Ensure that no hazard is created due to collapse, wind, fire,
collision, decay or abandonment; that no obstruction is created to fire
fighting and police surveillance; and no traffic hazard is created by confusing
or distracting motorists, or by impairing the driver's ability to see
pedestrians, obstacles, or other vehicles, or to read traffic signs;
      (5)   Promote efficient transfer of information in sign message by
providing that businesses and services may identify themselves; customers and
other persons may locate a business or service; and persons exposed to signs
are not overwhelmed by the number of messages presented, and are able to
exercise freedom of choice to observe or ignore said messages, according to the
observer's purpose; and
      (6)   Protect the public welfare and enhance the appearance an economic
value of the landscape by providing signs that do not interfere with scenic
views; do not create a nuisance to persons using the public right-of-ways; do
not constitute a nuisance to occupancy of adjacent and contiguous property by
their brightness, size, height, or movement; are not detrimental to land or
property value; and, contribute to the special character of particular areas or
districts within the city, helping the observer to understand the city and
orient oneself within it.
   (B)   By recognizing this purpose, this chapter shall serve to strengthen
the economic stability of business, cultural, and residential areas in the
city; recognizing that visual clutter leads to decline in the community's
appearance, in property values, and in the effectiveness of the signs.
   (C)   The goals of this chapter are to preserve the integrity of our
community, promote pride in our
neighborhoods, promote safe egress/ingress on public roadways, and encourage
the effectiveness of signs.
   (D)   In the event of conflicts, actual or perceived, in the terms or
requirements of this chapter, the most restrictive interpretation shall apply.
§ 150.701 FIRST AMENDMENT RIGHTS.
   This chapter shall not be construed, applied, interpreted, nor enforced in a
manner to violate the First Amendment rights of any person, and the Building
Official shall seek the advice and recommendation of the City Attorney prior to
taking any action to enforce any provision of this chapter with respect to any
non-commercial sign or speech by any person. No provision of this chapter shall
be construed in a manner as to violate of the Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 216.903
(protecting certain political signs).
§ 150.702 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Authority. The Building Official and the City Administrator are hereby
authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter, and to
make complaints for prosecution of violations in the city's municipal court.
   (B)   Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection, to enforce
any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the Building Official or
City Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any
building or upon any premises any condition which violates the provisions of
this chapter, the Building Official or City Administrator may enter such
building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform
any duty imposed upon the Building Official or City Administrator by this
chapter. If such building or premises is occupied, the Building Official or
City Administrator shall first present proper credentials and request entry;
and if such building or premises is unoccupied, the City Administrator shall
first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having
charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry
is refused, the Building Official or City Administrator shall have recourse to
every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
§ 150.703 PERMITS, CERTIFICATES AND APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect,
construct, enlarge, move or convert any sign within the city limits or its
extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) without first obtaining a sign permit from
and paying a permit fee unless specifically provided otherwise in this chapter.
   (B)   Compliance required. No person may install a sign or structurally
alter an existing sign except in conformity with this chapter and other
applicable federal, state, and local regulations, including, but not limited
to, the building code, electrical code, and other applicable ordinances of the
city. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and other laws, the most
restrictive standards applies.
   (C)   Permit approval. An application for a sign permit must be accompanied
by the permit fee and shall include such information as is necessary to assure
compliance with all appropriate laws and regulations of the city, including:
      (1)   Complete a sign application permit;
      (2)   For any sign to be located along a highway, within the city and/or
its area of extraterritorial jurisdiction, which is designated as being a
portion of the Interstate Highway System or the Federal-Aid Primary Highway
System, the owner must have an outdoor advertising license from the State
Department of Highways and Public Transportation, if applicable.
   (D)   Presumed responsibility. The primary beneficiary (e.g. the business
advertised) and the owner of the property on which a sign has been installed,
moved, structurally altered, structurally repaired, maintained, or used in
violation of this chapter shall be presumed responsible for the violation of
this chapter.
§ 150.704 SIGN MAINTENANCE, REPAIR AND REMOVAL.
   (A)   If the City Administrator finds that the condition of any sign that
had lawfully been installed is in violation of the provisions of this chapter,
he/she shall give written notice of the violation by certified mail to the
owner or person entitled to possession of the sign or the owner of the property
where the sign is located as specified in the penalties and enforcement section
of this Code.
   (B)   All signs in the city and its ETJ shall be properly maintained in a
good and safe structural condition, shall be painted on all exterior parts,
unless coated or made of rust resistant material, and shall be maintained in
good condition and appearance at all times. Any owner or primary beneficiary
failing to maintain, repair, or remove any such sign after due notice has been
given shall upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor. The City Administrator
shall have the authority to order the painting, repair, or removal of a sign
and accompanying landscaping which do not comply with this chapter or the
building codes or that constitute a hazard to safety, health or public welfare
by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment.
Any multi-tenant signage having more than one vacant slot for a period
exceeding 90 consecutive days shall be considered improperly maintained unless
all businesses on the lot are in compliance with the advertisement limitation
of the monument signs for businesses section of this Code.
§ 150.705 LIABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as relieving or
limiting in any way the responsibility or liability of any person, firm or
corporation erecting or owning any sign from personal injury or property damage
resulting from the placing of the sign, or resulting from the negligence or
willful acts of such person, firm or corporation, its agents, employees or
workmen, in the design, construction, maintenance, repair or removal of any
sign erected in accordance with a permit issued under the provisions of this
chapter. Nor shall it be construed as imposing upon the city or its officers or
employees, any responsibility or liability by reason of the approval of any
signs, materials, or devices under the provisions hereof.
§ 150.706 VISIBILITY.
   Signs shall not be constructed or installed in a manner that would interfere
with visibility, create a traffic hazard, or be confused with any traffic
control sign or signal.
§ 150.707 PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   No sign shall be located on or project over public property or a
street right-of-way except governmental signs, bench signs, and temporary
banner signs that comply with this chapter, except where a provision in this
chapter allows such location, or with the approval by the City Council of a
license agreement. No portion of a freestanding sign shall be permitted to
extend into the public right-of-way.
   (B)   No person shall, either directly or indirectly, cause or authorize a
sign to be installed, used, or maintained on any utility pole, traffic signal
pole, traffic signal controller box, tree, public bench, street light, or any
other structure located on or over any public property or public right-of-way,
located within the city's planning jurisdiction, except as authorized by this
chapter.
   (C)   Any unapproved sign located in public right-of-way may be immediately
removed by the Building Official or the City Administrator without notice to
the owner.
§ 150.708 APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Except as specifically exempted within this Code, a sign application
permit must be obtained from the city. The sign application permit must be
properly completed and returned to the city. The application is not completed
until all submittal information required by the "sign application requirements"
is received.
   (B)   The City Administrator shall accept the properly completed sign
application permit submittal and will review for administrative completeness,
and provide notice of deficiencies following the procedures for provided in
this Code pertaining to submissions for administrative completeness.
   (C)   The City Administrator will approve, deny or approve upon condition
consistent with the provisions of this chapter, the sign application permit
based upon its conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   If the application is approved or approved upon condition, the
applicant will be duly notified by the City Administrator's decision.
   (E)   If the City Administrator determines that the sign application does
not meet the technical requirements, including but not limited to size, height,
and number, of this chapter, City Administrator may deny the application. Upon
denial of an application, notification will be given in writing to the
applicant defining the reason for disapproval. The applicant may request an
appeal to the City Council within 30 days following such determination.
   (F)   If the application is approved upon condition, the applicant will be
duly notified of the City Administrator's decision and the applicant will be
required to adhere to the conditions of the permit.
   (G)   Upon the conclusion of the construction and erection of the approved
sign, the applicant will request a final inspection from the City Inspector.
   (H)   The City Inspector will inspect the sign and will, if the sign is
found to be in compliance with the approval, issue an approved inspection
report completing the sign permit procedures.
§ 150.709 SIGN APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All applications, computations, submittals, and photos become the
property of the city at the time of submittal and may be used for presentation
purposes to the public and/or the City Council.
   (B)   An application submittal for a sign permit shall include the following
information:
      (1)   Permit application with the following information:
         (a)   Name, address, telephone number of the applicant and date of
application;
         (b)   Numerical location of building structure upon its lot and
physical street address upon which the sign is to be located;
         (c)   The Code section under which the application is being made;
         (d)   Type of sign for which the permit is requested;
         (e)   Illumination type;
         (f)   Number of signs requested;
         (g)   Position of the sign on the building or on the ground in both
plan view, drawn to scale, and views of the elevation(s), drawn to scale;
         (h)   Lineal feet of frontage of the business.
      (2)   Detailed drawings showing the following:
         (a)   Two sets of scale drawings of the plans and specifications,
including size and color of the sign and its various parts, the style of
lettering, the message, lighting, type of material of which it is fabricated
and the method of attachment to the building or to the ground and associated
landscaping;
         (b)   A color sketch or color photograph of the sign and building, as
well as any contiguous street or building in order to display how they would
appear in relation to one another;
         (c)   Name, address and contact information of person or person(s)
erecting the sign.
      (3)   Proper method of permit fee payment in accordance with the fee
schedule as amended.
      (4)   Such other information reasonably necessary to determine compliance
with all applicable sign regulations, and building, lighting and electrical
regulations.
   (C)   If required by the City Inspector, a copy of stress sheets and
calculations showing that the structure is designed for dead load and wind
pressures in any direction in the amount required by this and all other laws
and ordinances of the city;
   (D)   A separate application shall be completed for each sign.
§ 150.710 REPRESENTATIONS BY APPLICANT.
   All representations, whether oral or written, made by the applicant or his
agent on behalf of the application for a sign permit under this chapter become
conditions upon which a permit is issued. It shall be unlawful for the
permittee to vary from such representation unless the permittee first makes
application, as required by the provisions of this chapter, to amend the permit
and such amendment is approved by the proper authority.
§ 150.711 FINAL INSPECTION REPORT.
   A final sign inspection is to be performed only by the designated City
Inspector and shall contain the following information:
   (A)   Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
   (B)   Numerical location of building structure upon its lot and street
address upon which the sign is to be located; and
   (C)   Signature and date of approval by the City Inspector.
§ 150.712 PERMIT FEES.
   At the time the city accepts the sign application permit, the applicant
shall pay in full the required fee in accordance with the adopted fee schedule
as amended. The applicant's submittal will not be considered complete until
payment has been received.
§ 150.713 REVIEW OF SIGNS BY CITY STAFF.
   The City Administrator shall review the location, appearance, lighting,
form, color, character, dimensions and materials of all signs for compliance
with all applicable regulations. The City Council may adopt from time to time
such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to permit the City
Administrator to perform his or her prescribed duties.
§ 150.714 APPROVAL AND INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   If an application is approved, the City Administrator shall sign his/her
name to the application and specify whether the permit is Approved or Approved
on condition. Following approval of a permit by the City Administrator, or by
the City Council if applicable, the City Inspector shall inspect the
installation of the sign for which the permit was issued and shall report the
results of such inspection to the City Administrator.
§ 150.715 ACTS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts:
   (A)   To post, paint, or otherwise exhibit any advertisement, poster, bill,
or other notice or sign, on any property not owned or controlled by him,
without the permission of the person owning or controlling said property.
   (B)   To tear down, remove, or otherwise interfere with any notice, sign,
advertisement, bill or poster erected by another, unless the same was placed or
maintained on the property of the person removing the same, without permission
previously given.
   (C)   To paint, mark or write on, or to post or otherwise affix, any hand-
bill or sign to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, curbstone, street lamp
post, hydrant, tree, shrub, tree stake or guard, railroad trestle, electric
light or power or telephone or telegraph, wire pole or wire appurtenance
thereof or upon any fixture of the fire alarm or police system or upon any
lighting system, public bridge, or lifesaving equipment, street sign or traffic
sign. Any hand-bill or sign found posted, or otherwise affixed upon any public
property contrary to the provisions of this section may be removed by the
Police Department or other department or individual so designated by the City
of Sunset Valley.
   (D)   To erect, maintain, or paint any sign, or other message or outdoor
advertising upon a tree, rock, or other natural feature.
   (E)   To erect within the city limits of the City of Sunset Valley or its
extraterritorial jurisdiction, any sign, or other outdoor advertising, without
having prior thereto obtained from the city a permit, except as specifically
exempted by the provisions of this chapter.
   (F)   Erect a monument sign in (SF) Single Family Residential zones.
§ 150.716 REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   In the event any provision hereof is violated within the corporate
limits of the City of Sunset Valley, or outside such corporate limits but
within the area of the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, the City of
Sunset Valley may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in the
District Court or another court of competent jurisdiction to restrain and
enjoin the violation of such chapter.
   (B)   The City Administrator shall have the authority, and the duty, to
remove or cause to be removed and impounded any sign, poster, handbill, banner,
streamer or other outdoor advertising erected, placed, altered, maintained, or
neglected in violation of this chapter, if the same is located on, in, or above
any public street, right-of-way or sidewalk area, or other public property.
   (C)   Any item impounded by authority of this section shall be held for a
period of 30 days and then disposed of in any manner designated by the City
Administrator. During the 30 days, the owner of said item upon proof of same
may reclaim said item at the place of storage by paying to the city the actual
cost of removal and impounding.
   (D)   Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a Class C misdemeanor.
§ 150.717 LANDSCAPING.
   Landscaping is required for commercial monument signs and should be designed
to harmonize with the building and surrounding natural landforms and native
plants and shall be consistent with plant selections listed in the landscape
chapter of this Code.
§ 150.718 LIGHTING.
   Lighting should be of no greater wattage than is necessary to make the sign
visible at night. All lighting shall be indirect lighting as defined herein and
all flood lights shall be shielded. No sign shall be erected which contains or
is illuminated in whole or in part, by any flashing, intermittent or moving
light or intermittent message of any nature except a sign providing solely
public service information such as time, date, temperature or weather. No sign
shall be so illuminated that it interferes with the effectiveness of, or
obscures, an official traffic sign, device or signal. The use of search lights
is prohibited.
   (A)   Lighting. Sign lighting shall be installed to protect the driver of a
vehicle from dangerous glare and to maintain visual clearance of all official
traffic signs, signals and devices.
   (B)   Glare. Signs shall be designed, located, shielded, and directed to
prevent the casting of glare or direct light from artificial illumination, upon
adjacent public right-of-way and surrounding property.
   (C)   Brightness limitations. The lighting intensity of a sign adjacent to
SF districts, whether resulting from internal illumination or external
illumination, shall not exceed two foot candles at the property line.
   (D)   Electrical permit. All signs in which electrical wiring and
connections are to be used shall be subject to the applicable provisions of the
city's electrical Codes.
§ 150.719 SIGN AREA CALCULATION.
   Sign area measurement. Sign area for all sign types is measured as follows:
   (A)   Sign copy mounted, affixed, or painted on a background panel or area
distinctively painted, textured, or constructed as a background for the sign
copy, is measured as that area contained within the sum of the smallest
rectangle(s) that will enclose both the sign copy and the background.
   (B)   Sign copy mounted as individual letters or graphics against a wall,
fascia, mansard, or parapet of a building or surface of another structure that
has not been painted, textured, or otherwise altered to provide a distinctive
background for the sign copy, is measured as a sum of the smallest rectangle(s)
that will enclose each word and each graphic in the total sign.
   (C)   Freestanding sign area is the entire advertising area of a sign,
including framing, trim or molding and the supporting frame for monument signs
and including the air space between the supporting structures for freestanding
signs.
§ 150.720 SIGN HEIGHT MEASUREMENT.
   Sign height is measured as follows:
   (A)   Freestanding signs. The height of a freestanding sign shall be
computed as the distance from the base of the sign at finished grade to the top
of the highest attached component of the sign. The height of any monument sign
base or other structure erected to support or adorn the sign is measured as
part of the sign height. If a sign is located on a mound, berm, or other raised
area for the sole purpose of increasing the height of the sign, the height of
the mound, berm, or other raised area shall be included in the height of the
sign.
   (B)   Building mounted signs. The height of wall, fascia, mansard, parapet
or other building mounted signs is the vertical distance measured from the base
of the wall on which the sign is located to the top of the sign or sign
structure.
§ 150.721 EXEMPTED SIGNS.
   The following signs are exempt from the requirement of a permit.
   (A)   Warning and security signs placed by a public utility for the safety,
welfare, or convenience of the public, including, but not limited to signs
identifying high voltage, public telephone, or underground cables.
   (B)   Any sign erected by or under the authority of the city on property
owned by the city.
   (C)   "No Dumping" and "No Trespassing" signs, less than one square foot in
area per sign and not spaced less than 100 linear feet apart.
   (D)   Signs attached to a temporary structure utilized specifically for
outdoor sales or services or any other signs which are approved in a specific
use permit authorizing the outdoor sales or services.
   (E)   Non-illuminated names of buildings, dates of erection, monument
statues, commemorative tablets and the like when carved into stone, concrete,
metal, or any other permanent type of construction and made an integral part of
an allowed structure, made flush to the ground, or permanently attached to and
incorporated into the overall design of all or part of one or more facades of a
building in a GUI zoning district.
   (F)   Any traffic sign, public notice or warning required by a valid and
applicable federal, state, or local law, regulation, or ordinance on public or
private property.
   (G)   Traffic control signs on private property, such as stop, yield, and
similar signs, and which contain no commercial message.
   (H)   Address signs not located in single family residential zones and not
greater than five square feet in area. One is permitted per access drive.
   (I)   Residential nameplate sign not exceeding one, two square foot sign per
single family unit.
   (J)   Retail store window displays of merchandise, freestanding three-
dimensional promotional items (with or without proprietary words or symbols
solely describing the merchandise and/or merchandise that is sold in the
store), and/or display fixtures not affixed to windowpanes and located inside
the store.
   (K)   Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message.
   (L)   Restricted parking signs required or authorized by city ordinance or
by law, including but not limited to handicap parking signs.
   (M)   (1)   No sign permit is required for a change of copy on any sign, or
for the repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance or repair of a sign
or sign structure for which a permit has previously been issued, so long as the
sign or sign structure is not modified.
      (2)   Exception: If the sign was approved by a variance from the City
Council, the replacement of a sign face will require a new permit which may
again require Council approval.
   (N)   A political sign exempt pursuant to the provisions of Tex. Loc. Gov't
Code § 216.903.
§ 150.722 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs shall be prohibited from use within the city limits and
it's ETJ. Signs not considered as exempted, nonconforming, limited exemption,
temporary requiring a permit, or permanent requiring a permit shall hereby be
considered prohibited, including the following:
   (A)   Canopy signs;
   (B)   Billboard signs;
   (C)   Electronic message signs;
   (D)   Inflatable signs;
   (E)   Home occupation signs;
   (F)   Signs with flashing lights, revolving beacon lights, fluttering,
undulating, swinging, or otherwise moving parts. An electronically controlled
changeable-copy sign is not considered a flashing sign unless it directly falls
under the definition of "flashing" as defined in this chapter;
   (G)   Portable signs;
   (H)   Signs displayed on a vehicle or trailer that is parked or located for
the primary purpose of displaying the advertisement;
   (I)   Roof signs;
   (J)   Signs painted on fences or other structures;
   (K)   Advertising search lights;
   (L)   Advertisement flags; and
   (M)   Waving banners.
§ 150.723 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   The following nonconforming signs shall be terminated immediately upon the
occurrence of the event specified:
   (A)   A sign that, having been permitted under previous regulations, is
required to be removed because the sign, or a substantial part of it, is blown
down or otherwise destroyed or dismantled for any purpose other than
maintenance operations or for changing the letters, symbols or other matter on
the sign;
   (B)   A nonconforming sign that has been abandoned;
   (C)   A nonconforming sign for a business or commercial enterprise that has
been discontinued for a continuous period of 90 days; or
   (D)   A nonconforming sign that has become obsolete or substandard under any
applicable ordinance of the municipality to the extent that the sign becomes a
hazard or danger.
§ 150.724 GENERAL CRITERIA RELATED TO LIMITED EXEMPTIONS.
   The following signs are exempt from the requirement for a sign permit as
long as they meet the corresponding standards.
   (A)   Temporary ground signs specified in the specific criteria related to
limited exemptions section of this Code may be displayed at or behind the
property line. These signs may not be displayed on public R.O.W., including
medians.
   (B)   For temporary ground signs, sign height is measured as the vertical
distance between the grade of the closest roadway surface and the top of the
sign.
   (C)   All signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind
pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square foot of area and shall be
constructed to receive dead loads as required by the city's currently adopted
Building Code.
   (D)   Signage in this category is not permitted to have lighting used for
the sole purpose of enhancing the sign message. Exceptions include replacement
sign panels and window signs.
§ 150.725 SPECIFIC CRITERIA RELATED TO LIMITED EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Development/construction sign. A temporary ground sign with a maximum
height of five feet and a maximum sign area of eight square feet. One sign is
allowed per street frontage and may only be installed after approval of a
preliminary site plan. Sign must be removed within one year of installation or
upon issuance of Certificate of Occupancy whichever comes first.
   (B)   Subdivision marketing sign/open house sign. A temporary ground sign
with a maximum height of three feet, and maximum sign area of four square feet.
One onsite sign is allowed and no more than two off site signs are allowed.
Signs may be displayed between noon on Friday and 5:00 a.m. on Monday,
requiring pick up prior to 6:00 a.m. on Monday. All signs must display the
telephone number of the real estate broker, sales agent, homeowner or builder.
   (C)   Residential builder sign. A temporary ground sign with a maximum
height of six feet, and maximum sign area of four square feet. One onsite sign
is allowed and may be installed only after issuance of a building permit and
must be removed upon issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. No offsite signage
is permitted.
   (D)   Commercial real estate sign. A temporary or permanent ground sign with
a maximum height of ten feet, and maximum sign area of 32 square feet. One
onsite sign is allowed per street frontage. Two additional onsite ground signs
may be permitted up to eight square feet so long as they are visible only from
within the center. The ground sign is only allowed when space is available for
lease or for sale on the same site. One window sign is permitted per lease
space. Window signs shall not exceed 10% of the window area as explained in §
150.705(J).
   (E)   Residential real estate sign. A temporary ground sign with a maximum
height of four feet, and maximum sign area of eight square feet. One onsite and
one offsite sign is allowed per lot. Signs may be displayed between noon on
Friday and 5:00 a.m. on Monday, requiring pick up prior to 6:00 a.m. on Monday.
   (F)   Garage/yard sale sign. A temporary ground sign with a maximum height
of three feet, and maximum sign area of four square feet. Four signs are
allowed per sale with not more than three off-site signs. Signs may remain from
noon on Thursday until noon on Monday or any legal holiday not to exceed twice
per calendar year.
   (G)   Political sign. A temporary sign with no limitation set for type of
placement. Signs shall have a maximum height of eight feet and be no more than
32 square feet. There is no limitation on the number of signs that may be
placed. Signs associated with an election must be removed within seven days
after the election. Signs shall not be displayed on city property or on public
or TXDOT right-of-way.
   (H)   Restricted parking sign. May be a temporary or permanent sign not
exceeding seven feet in height and a maximum of two square feet. Limited to one
sign per 25 parking spaces and colors are limited to black, red, green, blue
lettering with a white background.
   (I)   Vehicular sign. May be either temporary or permanent as long as the
primary use of the vehicle is not for the display of signage. The vehicle must
display a valid license plate and current registration and inspection tags.
   (J)   Window signs.
      (1)   One illuminated window sign is permitted per lease space entry with
a maximum of two signs per space. Signs shall not exceed four square feet per
sign and shall be for the sole purpose of notifying the public that the space
is open for business.
      (2)   Illuminated window signs shall be limited to 400 lumens in
brightness, measured at a distance of four feet off the sign face, shall only
be illuminated during business operating hours and shall not flash, blink,
strobe or move.
   (K)   Human signs. May be displayed only on private property and may be
visible from, but not located in, public rights-of-way. Each business is
limited to one sign for a period not to exceed 14 calendar days twice annually.
§ 150.726 GENERAL CRITERIA RELATED TO TEMPORARY SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT.
   (A)   All signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind
pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square foot of area and shall be
constructed to receive dead loads as required by the city's currently adopted
Building Code.
   (B)   Banners not affixed to the building are not permitted.
   (C)   Signage in this category is not permitted to have lighting used for
the sole purpose of enhancing the sign message.
§ 150.727 SPECIFIC CRITERIA RELATED TO TEMPORARY SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT.
   (A)   Banner. One banner is allowed per lease space attached to a building
for a period not to exceed 30 days with a maximum of two banners per calendar
year. The banner shall not exceed 75% of the storefront width. Banner size can
be one-half square feet for every one foot of width of building or lease space
not to exceed 60 square feet.
   (B)   Grand opening banner. One banner is allowed per lease space attached
to the building for a period of 15 days and may be displayed one time within
one year of issuance of C.O. This banner will be permitted in addition to the
two banner permits allowed in a calendar year. The width of this sign shall not
exceed 75% of the storefront width. Banner size can be three-quarter square
feet for every one foot of width of building or lease space not to exceed 48
square feet.
   (C)   Special purpose sign. Two off-site and one on premise attached or
ground signs may be permitted per event sponsored by a non-profit or civic
organization. Ground signs shall not exceed six feet in height and shall not be
larger than four feet and shall be located at or behind property lines. They
are not to be placed in the right-of-way. Signs may be placed up to two weeks
prior to the event and must be removed within 48 hours of event completion.
   (D)   Parks and recreation banner. Three attached or ground banners, per
park may be permitted. Signs shall not exceed three square feet and cannot be
placed in the public right-of-way. Each permit is applicable for 15 days with a
total of two permits approved consecutively.
   (E)   Light pole banner. One attached banner is permitted per light pole
with a maximum of ten square feet. Signs may not exceed two feet in width and
allow for a minimum of six feet of sidewalk clearance at all times. All light
pole banners shall be approved by the appropriate utility company prior to
consideration by the City Council. Light pole banners shall be limited to
publicize community wide events, holiday celebrations, public art, and other
city sponsored events.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/79c532003de10fc6987b7b2a233f3f572d8a6a80/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2053.png]
   (F)   Sandwich board sign. One sign is permitted per lease space along
sidewalks and internal driveways only. Signs shall be removed at the end of
each business day after the business is closed and shall have a maximum height
of four feet and maximum width of two feet. Chalkboards may be used for daily
changing messages. No reader boards may be used.
   (G)   New construction/for sale/leasing sign. One ground sign per site per
street frontage is permitted. Additionally, one sign attached to the interior
of the window shall be allowed, per space for lease, for commercial properties,
not to exceed 10% of the window area. Ground signs are not to exceed eight feet
in height, shall be a maximum of 32 square feet, shall be placed at or behind
the property line, not in the ROW, and shall be removed after sale or lease has
been finalized or one year after sign was erected, whichever comes first.
§ 150.728 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO PERMANENT SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT.
   All permanent signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind
pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square foot of area and shall be
constructed to receive dead loads as required by the city's adopted building
code as amended. The sign permit application must include a statement signed by
the applicant which states compliance with this requirement.
§ 150.729 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO PERMANENT SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT.
   (A)   Attached signs.
      (1)   Each lease or tenant space shall be permitted only one attached
building sign per street front with a maximum of two signs per tenant/lease
space. Each sign is limited in width to 75% of the single plane facade. Each
sign shall be located in the middle 75% of the single plane facade or centered
on an articulate surface of the building facade. The maximum logo height for an
attached sign may be no more than 125% of the maximum permitted letter height.
Each sign shall use indirect lighting in the form of aluminum individual
reverse channel letters with aluminum faces and clear backing. No exposed
lighting is permitted. Returns shall be not less than three inches and not
greater than five inches. All signs shall be a minimum of two inches off the
supporting structure and not greater than three inches. Lighting shall be
either red or white in color.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/79c532003de10fc6987b7b2a233f3f572d8a6a80/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2055.png]
      (2)   The maximum square foot area permitted for an attached sign is one
and one-half times the linear feet of lease space. The calculation applies to
each exterior wall separately with a maximum of two signs per lease space.
      (3)   Businesses under 15,000 square feet of lease space are permitted to
have individual letters not exceeding 28 inches in height.
      (4)   Businesses 15,000 square feet of lease space or greater are
permitted to have individual letters not exceeding 48 inches in height.
   (B)   Special attached sign standards.
      (1)    Projecting signs. One unlit projecting sign in addition to the
attached wall sign is permitted per lease space. Projecting signs shall not be
higher than the eave line or parapet wall of the top of the principal building;
shall be a minimum of eight feet above grade when located adjacent to or
projecting over a pedestrian walkway. Sign square footage shall not exceed four
feet and shall not extend more than four feet from the wall.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/79c532003de10fc6987b7b2a233f3f572d8a6a80/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2057.png]
      (2)   Menu board. One menu board per site is permitted for internal
drives utilized by drive thru businesses only. The sign shall not exceed 24
square feet in area or eight feet in height and must be located at the side or
rear of the principal building.
      (3)   Drive through. One internally lit drive through sign is permitted
per site on internal streets and drives only with a maximum of four square feet
of sign face and a maximum height of four feet.
      (4)   Awnings. The purpose of an awning sign is to provide an advertising
message on the face of an awning. Awing signs shall only be allowed within
Highway Commercial Districts.
         (a)   An awning may extend across the entire width of a building or
tenant space. An awning may not extend above the apparent roof line of the
building. An awning shall not exceed five feet in height or extend more than
three feet from the supporting wall.
         (b)   The sign area on an awning shall not exceed 20% of the area of
the awning and shall extend for no more than 5% of the length of the awning. A
permit shall be required for an awning sign. Awning signs may be illuminated.
         (c)   Letter and/or logo height shall not exceed six inches in height.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/79c532003de10fc6987b7b2a233f3f572d8a6a80/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2059.png]
   (C)   (1)   Monument signs for businesses.
         (a)   Base construction. The sign base and sign structure shall be
made of brick, stone, or masonry material matching the front facade of the
principal building. It shall be a maximum of two feet in height and shall be
included in the calculation of the total sign height.
         (b)   Changeable copy. Signs with changeable copy are not permitted.
         (c)   Street address. All freestanding signs, either berm or monument
signs, shall include the street address. The street address shall not be
included in the calculation of the sign area, except in such case that the
street address exceeds four square feet in size.
         (d)   Color for multiple panels. For signs with multiple sign panels,
the background color for all sign panels on the sign shall be consistent.
         (e)   Development name. For multi-tenant developments, the development
name, if included as an integral part of the monument structure (i.e. not a
separate panel), will not count toward the maximum sign face area as long as
the area of the development name does not exceed 20% of the allowable maximum
sign face area.
         (f)   Advertisement limitation. No business is permitted to advertise
via a Monument Sign more than once per street frontage.
         (g)   Location. Monument signs shall not be placed in the right-of-way
and shall have a setback of five feet from the property line. A sign installed
in compliance with this chapter is not required to meet building setback
requirements established in a separate city ordinance.
         (h)   Lighting. Each sign shall use indirect lighting in the form of
landscape lighting or reverse channel letters. Reverse channel letters shall
have aluminum faces and clear backing. Returns for individual letters, if used,
shall be not less than three inches and not greater than five inches. All signs
shall be a minimum of two inches of the supporting structure and not greater
than three inches. Lighting shall be either red or white in color.
         (i)   Visibility. Signs shall not be constructed or installed in a
manner that would interfere with visibility, create a traffic hazard, or be
confused with any traffic control sign or signal.
         (j)   Landscaping. Single business use shall have a minimum of 100
square feet of landscape plus ten square feet for each additional square foot
of sign above the maximum allowed and shall comply with the Land Development
Code landscape regulations as amended. Multi-tenant use shall be a minimum of
120 square feet plus ten square feet for each additional foot and shall comply
with the Land Development Code landscape regulations as amended.
         (k)   Maximum height. No sign shall exceed the maximum height provided
for in this chapter. In determining the maximum height of a sign, no sign shall
be located on a mound where the surrounding grade has been altered by more than
18 inches for purposes of artificially increasing the overall height of a sign
above that allowed by the height regulations in this chapter.
      (2)   (a)    Single business use. Single business use signs shall be used
to advertise a business that is the sole occupant of a single lot. One sign is
permitted per lot with a maximum total height of eight feet and a maximum sign
face height of seven feet. The sign shall be limited to 40 square feet not
including the sign base.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/79c532003de10fc6987b7b2a233f3f572d8a6a80/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2061.png]
         (b)    Multi-tenant use. Shall be used to advertise two or more
businesses occupying a single lot. One multi-tenant sign may be placed at the
entrance of each street access drive unless a single business use monument sign
exists. Monuments signs should be placed a minimum of 300 feet apart shall have
a maximum total height of ten feet and a maximum sign face height of nine feet.
Sign shall have a minimum of six and not more than eight panels and a maximum
of 50 square feet not including the sign base. Exception: If a multi-tenant
property on a freeway frontage has fewer than six lease spaces, the sign shall
not have more panels than tenant spaces.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/79c532003de10fc6987b7b2a233f3f572d8a6a80/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2063.png]
§ 150.730 PURPOSE; LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   In order to lessen practical difficulties and prevent unnecessary
physical hardships, variances from the regulations may be granted. A practical
difficulty or unnecessary physical hardship may result from the size, shape, or
dimensions of a structure, or the location of the structure, from topographic
or physical conditions on the site or in the immediate vicinity, or from other
physical limitations, street locations, or traffic conditions in the immediate
vicinity. Cost or inconvenience to the applicant of strict or literal
compliance with a regulation shall not be a reason for granting a variance.
   (B)   With respect to signs or outdoor advertising, along Highway 290 or any
other portion of the Interstate Highway system or federal-aid Primary Highway
system within the city and/or its area of extraterritorial jurisdiction, which
are subject to regulation under Tex. Transportation Code Chapter 391 and State
Department of Highways and Public Transportation regulations, no variance shall
be granted from spacing, size and lighting requirements when such would result
in less stringent regulation than that provided for under those regulations.
   (C)   Except for the foregoing, a variance may be granted allowing minor
exceptions to the regulations contained in this chapter, in those instances in
which a substantial injustice would result unless the minor exceptions were
granted in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and
safeguards.
§ 150.731 APPLICATION.
   Application for a variance shall be submitted to the City Council in the
form of a letter stating the applicant's reason for requesting the variance in
accordance with the criteria for approval section of this chapter. The variance
application shall also include an application for a sign permit, detailed sign
specifications, and a site plan showing the sign location.
§ 150.732 FEE.
   The fee for a variance is set forth in the fee schedule adopted by ordinance
or resolution. The fee shall be paid at the time of application and shall not
be refundable.
§ 150.733 HEARING.
   Upon receipt of a variance application, the City Administrator shall set a
date for a hearing before the Council.
§ 150.734 ACTION ON APPLICATION.
   The Council may recommend approval of the application as submitted, or may
recommend approval of the application subject to such modifications or
conditions as it deems necessary to accomplish the purpose of this chapter, or
the Council may recommend denial of the application. A variance may be
revocable or may be granted for a limited time period.
§ 150.735 CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL.
   Before the City Council acts on a variance application, the applicant must
prove physical hardship, and the Council must find that:
   (A)   There are special circumstances or conditions applying to the land,
buildings, topography, vegetation, sign structures or other matters on adjacent
lots or within the adjacent right-of-way, which would substantially restrict
the effectiveness of the sign in question; provided, however, that such special
circumstances or conditions are unique to the particular business or enterprise
to which the applicant desires to draw attention, and do not apply generally to
all businesses or enterprises;
   (B)   That such special circumstances were not created by the applicant or
anyone in privy to the applicant;
   (C)   That the granting of the variance will be in general harmony with the
purposes of this chapter, and will not be materially detrimental to the persons
residing or working in the vicinity, to adjacent property, to the neighborhood,
or to the public welfare in general;
   (D)   The variance applied for does not depart from the provisions of this
chapter any more than is required to identify the applicant's business or use;
   (E)   Such other factors and criteria as the Council deems applicable to the
proposed variance.
§ 150.736 VARIANCE APPROVAL TIME LIMITATION.
   No order of the City Council permitting the erection or alteration of a sign
shall be valid for a period longer than six months, unless a sign permit for
such erection or alteration has been obtained within such period and such
erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with
the terms of such permit.
MOVING OF BUILDINGS
§ 150.750 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall move any building, or portion thereof, from one site
to another, or along any public way or place within the city, until such person
shall have first secured a permit to do so from the Building Standards
Commission.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to buildings specifically designed and
constructed to be portable when the same are loaded on trucks, trailers, or
dollies, and have a loaded height of not over 14 feet, and loaded width of not
over 14 feet.
§ 150.751 APPLICATION FOR PERMITS, FEES, DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Applications for moving permits shall be upon forms provided by the
Building Official, and shall show at least the name of the owner, the name of
the mover, the present use and location of the building, the future use and
location of the building, the proposed route and time of move, and the loaded
height and width.
   (B)   The application for a moving permit shall be accompanied by
restoration plans for the building or structure to be moved, and a tax
certificate indicating that no delinquent taxes are outstanding on the
properties involved.
   (C)   Application for permits shall be made in the Municipal Building, and
shall be accompanied by an application fee, a deposit, and an inspection fee as
determined by the City Council by ordinance or resolution if the building is
proposed to be located within the city limits. The Building Official shall make
a charge against such deposit for the escort services of each officer or
employee of the city required by the Building Official to escort such move,
based upon the current hourly wage of such officer or employee. The unused
balance of such deposit shall be refunded to the applicant, and the applicant
shall promptly remit to the Building Official the balance due, if such deposit
is insufficient to cover the escort service charges. No house moving permit may
be issued until all building permits required by this Code, or any other
ordinances of the city, have been issued.
   (D)   In lieu of the application fee set out in division (C) above, the
application fee set by the City Council by ordinance or resolution shall be
required for the moving of one principal building, and its accessory buildings,
if all such buildings and parts thereof are moved within a period of 20 days.
The other charges, deposits, and fees set forth in division (C), above, shall
be applicable.
   (E)   (1)   The person applying for a permit under this chapter shall file
with the Building Official a good and sufficient surety bond in a form to be
approved by the city's legal counsel and Building Official, which bond shall be
carried by a company authorized to transact such business in Texas. Such bond
may be filed in connection with one such permit, or may cover all permits
issued to the permittee during a given period. A permit shall be required for
each house moving operation, regardless of the filing of a sufficient bond.
      (2)   The bond shall be payable to the Mayor, or any successors in
office, for the use and benefit of the city and of the other persons described
in this section, and shall be conditioned that the principal shall pay to the
city any damages to streets or other property owned or controlled by the city,
which damages are occasioned in any manner by the principal's use of his or her
house moving permit; that the principal shall indemnify and hold harmless the
city against any claims, damages, causes of action, costs and expenses, arising
against the city by reason of such operations; and that the principal shall
comply with all lawful regulations and ordinances of the city and with the
terms and conditions of the permit in connection with which this bond is filed.
Such bond shall be in the amount of $20,000; shall constitute a continuing
liability notwithstanding any recovery thereon; and shall contain a provision
for a ten-day written notice to the city of cancellation by the surety.
§ 150.752 APPLICATION PROCESSING.
   (A)   (1)   The Building Official shall be entitled to inspect the building,
and the proposed location of the building, and satisfy himself or herself that
this chapter, and all applicable City Codes and ordinances, are being complied
with, or that satisfactory arrangements to comply with this Code, and all
applicable ordinances, have been made. If the Building Official determines that
the cost of repairs and rehabilitation will exceed 60% of the assessed tax
value, he or she can recommend that no moving permit be issued by the Building
Standards Commission.
      (2)   The Building Standards Commission may refuse to issue a moving
permit for the removal of any building if it finds that it cannot be safely
moved over the proposed route, or that it cannot, or will not, be made to
comply with this Code, and any other applicable City Code or ordinance, in its
proposed new location, or if the structure is judged to be incompatible with
the neighborhood. The decision of the Building Standards Commission to deny or
grant a moving permit may be appealed to the City Council by any aggrieved
individual.
   (B)   The Building Official shall inform the Police Department, Fire
Department, and all public utilities affected by the move of the applicant's
proposed route, size of load, time of move, lighting and safety precautions,
and other features of the move brought to the attention of the Building
Official. If any such department or utility shall inform the Building Official
of reasons why such permit should not issue, the applicant shall be entitled to
amend his or her application and to take such remedial steps or precautions as
may be necessary after being advised of the nature of any disapproval of his or
her application.
   (C)   No person shall be issued a moving permit under this chapter, or move
any building, or portion thereof, on the streets of the city, unless such
person has currently in effect public liability and property damage insurance
covering any loss or damage that may be caused any person, or any property
other than vehicles, trailers, dollies, or cargo of such house mover, in
amounts of $100,000 for each person for bodily injury; $300,000 for bodily
injury liability on each accident; and $50,000 for property damage liability
for each accident.
§ 150.753 ISSUANCE OF THE MOVING PERMIT.
   (A)   Each application for a moving permit for a building to be moved into,
or out of the city shall be reviewed by the Building Standards Commission which
has the authority to grant or deny the permit after hearing. However, no
hearing is required for moving a building which neither originates nor ends
within the city limits.
   (B)   At least 14 days prior to the hearing on a moving permit by the
Building Standards Commission, the locations involved shall be posted with a
sign giving the following information:
      (1)   The current location of the structure, or the intended move-on
location;
      (2)   The name and address of the owner; and
      (3)   The date, time, and location of the hearing. In addition, all
residents and property owners within 300 feet of the proposed move-on location
shall be notified of the intended move by mail, and any neighborhood
association on file in the area of the proposed move-on and move-off location
shall be similarly notified.
   (C)   The Building Standards Commission may require the owner of the new
site to post a cash deposit of at least $100, or a bond to cover the demolition
or removal of the structure, if the moved structure fails to comply with the
standards of this chapter.
   (D)   Each section of the building must be moved by a bonded mover.
   (E)   The final permit issued to the mover shall describe the terms and
conditions of the move fully. One copy of the permit shall be posted on the
building before the same is moved, and retained thereon until the conditions
have been fully met.
   (F)   Move permits shall be issued with a maximum renovation and completion
time of 120 days. The Building Standards Commission may grant an extension of
time.
   (G)   Any move permit which has not been activated within 30 days after
issuance shall expire. In the event no work was ever commenced, the permit may
be renewed without additional charge.
§ 150.754 EXECUTION OF MOVE.
   (A)   No building, or portion thereof, shall be on any street within the
city, except between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:30 a.m.; except, that
certain buildings which are of a size and so loaded and routed as to be quickly
and safely moved without public inconvenience, may be moved over such streets
within the city by special permission of the Building Standards Commission at
other hours. The decision of any one of the departments (police or fire) or
public utilities affected, that moving should not be permitted at any time
other than between 12:00 midnight and 6:30 a.m. shall be final. In the event
that the move cannot be made at its originally scheduled time, the permittee
shall request and obtain written permission for time change before proceeding
with the move.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any building, or portion
thereof, to be on any public street or alley at any time other than the time
stated on the moving permit for such building, or portion thereof.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any permittee to transfer, any permit, or any
rights secured to him by any permit, issued under this section.
   (D)   If the Chief of Police shall find that the protection of public
safety, or property other than vehicles, trailers, dollies, or cargo of the
mover requires a police escort, and shall so advise the Building Official, such
fact shall be specified on the moving permit, and it shall be unlawful for such
building to be moved along or across any street or public place within the city
unless accompanied by a uniformed police escort as required by the Chief of
Police. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to comply with
any lawful order or direction of any police officer escorting such move. After
the move has been completed, the escorting police officer shall file a written
report of such move with the Building Official.
§ 150.755 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES; VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   (A)   The building or structure to be moved, and the site of the restoration
work, must be kept in a clean and safe condition during repairs and remodeling.
   (B)   Each lot from which a structure or building is moved shall be left in
a clean, raked condition within 30 days after the removal of the structure or
building.
   (C)   Failure to comply with the requirements of this section constitutes a
violation of this chapter.
   (D)   Upon failure to comply with this requirement, the City of Sunset
Valley is then authorized to clean the lot by city contract, or by city forces.
Such expenses incurred by the City of Sunset Valley constitute a lien against
the real property on which the structure stood, and the lien runs with the
land.
§ 150.756 DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
   If the moving of a building pursuant to this chapter has caused any damage
to public or private property, other than vehicles, trailers, dollies, or cargo
of the mover, the permittee shall forthwith place the same in as good repair as
it was before the permit was granted. Upon his failure to do so within ten days
after notification, the Building Official may cause the necessary repairs to be
made, and the mover shall be responsible for the payment of the costs. The
permittee shall not cut or trim those parts of trees or shrubs, on or over any
public way or place, without permission from the department of public works,
and shall not cut or trim those parts of trees or shrubs, on or over any
private property, without permission from the owner or person in control of
such property. Permits may be withheld from any mover who has willfully and
repeatedly violated the provisions of this Code.
§ 150.757 NEW BUILDINGS.
   Existing buildings which are moved or relocated into the city shall be
considered as new buildings, and shall comply with all the requirements of this
chapter.
TREE AND NATURAL AREA PROTECTION
§ 150.770 PURPOSE.
   Trees are hereby declared to be of great value in the maintenance of the
public health and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and in the
conservation of vital energy resources. Trees have a positive economic benefit
by enhancing property values and making the city an attractive place to live
and do business. These trees should be preserved to the maximum extent feasible
for the health, education and enjoyment of future generations. The purpose of
this subchapter is:
   (A)   To protect, maintain, and manage the city's existing forest resources
by providing regulations relating to the cutting, removal, or destruction of
protected, heritage and ancestral trees;
   (B)   To encourage protection and preservation of the natural environment
and aesthetics of the city;
   (C)   To provide for replacement of trees removed or destroyed;
   (D)   To provide incentives for creative site design which preserves trees
while allowing development; and
   (E)   To provide regulations for the enforcement and administration of tree
protection.
§ 150.771 SIZES AND TYPES OF PROTECTED, HERITAGE AND ANCESTRAL TREES.
   (A)   Protected tree.
      (1)   Protected trees are those with a diameter of ten inches or more,
measured four and one-half feet above natural grade for the majority of large
tree species. A tree with a diameter greater than five inches of the following
small tree species shall be considered protected:
         (a)   Texas Persimmon (Diospyrus texana);
         (b)   Texas Mountain Laurel (Sophora secundiflora);
         (c)   Eve's necklace (Sophora affinis);
         (d)   Silk Tassel (Garrya ovata); and
         (e)   Big Tooth Maple (Acer grandentatum).
      (2)   In addition trees of all species that meet the size requirements in
division (A)(1) of this section are protected except the following species of
trees:
         (a)   Chinaberry (Melia azederach);
         (b)   Chinese Tallow (Sapium sebiferum);
         (c)   Japanese Ligustrum (Ligustrum japonica);
         (d)   Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus altissima); and
         (e)   Callery Pear (Pyrus calleryana).
   (B)   Heritage tree.
      (1)   Any tree with a diameter of 24 inches or more, measured four and
one-half feet above natural grade, and is one of the following species:
         (a)   Texas Ash (Fraxinus texensis);
         (b)   Bald Cypress (Taxodium distichum);
         (c)   American Elm (Ulmus americana);
         (d)   Cedar Elm (Ulmus crassifolia);
         (e)   All Oaks (Quercus sp.);
         (f)   Pecan (Carrya illinoinensis);
         (g)   Arizona Walnut (Juglans major);
         (h)   Eastern Black Walnut (Juglans nigra);
         (i)   Honey Mesquite (Prosopsis gladulsis); and
         (j)   Ashe Juniper (Juniperus asheii) with no more than two main
trunks.
      (2)   In addition, heritage tree means a tree that has a diameter of ten
inches or more, measured four and one-half feet above natural grade, and is one
of the following species:
         (a)   Texas Persimmon (Diospyrusfexono);
         (b)   Texas Mountain Laurel (Sophora secundiflora);
         (c)   Eve's necklace (Sophora affinis);
         (d)   Silk Tassel (Garrya ovata); and
         (e)   Bigtooth Maple (Acer grandidentatum).
      (3)   This list of eligible heritage tree species may be supplemented.
   (C)   Ancestral tree. Any tree listed on the heritage tree list that has
reached a diameter of 30 inches or more for the large tree category or 15
inches or more for the small tree category.
§ 150.772 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   It is unlawful for any person to remove any protected, heritage or ancestral
tree without first securing a tree removal permit. It is unlawful for any
person to damage a protected, heritage or ancestral tree, such as damaging over
50% of the critical root zone, tree topping, over-pruning, or chemical
poisoning. It is unlawful for a person to continue work or removal of trees
when the City Arborist has issued a stop work order.
§ 150.773 TREE REMOVAL PERMITTING PROCESS.
   (A)   Protected, heritage or ancestral tree removal through the site plan
process. For commercial and residential site development tree removal requests,
tree surveys, tree protection plans and tree replacement plans shall be
submitted with the building permit application. A tree inventory or partial
tree survey in lieu of a tree survey may be accepted to document trees within
the limits of construction for small residential projects. Final approval of
the site plan shall constitute approval for tree removal.
   (B)   Tree removal permit (no site plan). An application for the removal of
a protected, heritage or ancestral tree must specify:
      (1)   The approximate location of the tree;
      (2)   The diameter of the trunk of the tree, as measured four and one-
half feet above natural grade level;
      (3)   The approximate crown size of the tree;
      (4)   The species and/or common name of the tree;
      (5)   The approximate size of the lot, tract, or parcel on which it is
located;
      (6)   A photograph of the tree;
      (7)   The reason for the proposed removal; and
      (8)   Such other information as may be reasonably required by the city.
§ 150.774 ACTION ON TREE REMOVAL PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Upon receipt of a tree removal permit application, the city shall inspect
the subject tree. The Director of Public Works and Environmental Services upon
recommendation by the City Arborist shall approve or deny the application in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The tree removal permit will be
processed within 15 working days of date of receipt. Approval from the City
Arborist to remove dead or hazardous trees may be given before the permit has
been completed.
§ 150.775 TREE REMOVAL OR RELOCATION.
   (A)   A protected tree may be removed or relocated without replacement once
a tree removal permit is granted if:
      (1)   The protected tree is damaged by natural causes or is diseased
beyond the point of recovery;
      (2)   The protected tree is removed as a safety measure because it is in
danger of falling;
      (3)   The protected tree is dead;
      (4)   Relocating a protected tree to a suitable location that is
beneficial to the long-term growth and survival of the tree on the same
property or off site. The applicant must comply with generally accepted
transplanting methods as described in the urban forest management plan and the
tree survives for a period of two years. During the two-year period, the
applicant is required to provide ongoing watering and monitoring to increase
chance of survival.
   (B)   A protected tree may be removed with replacement if:
      (1)   The protected tree is located as to prevent reasonable access to
the property; or
      (2)   The location of the protected tree precludes all reasonable and
lawful use of the property on which it is located.
   (C)   A heritage or ancestral tree may only be removed if:
      (1)   The tree is dead;
      (2)   The tree is an imminent hazard to life or property and the hazard
cannot be reasonably mitigated without removing the tree; or
      (3)   Is diseased and;
         (a)   Restoration to sound condition is not practicable; or
         (b)   The disease may be transmitted to other trees and endanger their
health.
   (D)   A variance request may be made to City Council to request removal of a
heritage or ancestral tree. The following criteria should be used to determine
variance approval:
      (1)   The applicant has applied for and been denied a variance,
exemption, modification or alternative from another City Code provision which
would eliminate the need to remove the heritage or ancestral tree; and
      (2)   Removal of the heritage or ancestral tree is not based on a
condition caused by the method chosen by the applicant to develop the property,
unless removal of the heritage or ancestral tree will result in a design that
will allow for the maximum provision of ecological service, historic and
cultural value of the trees on the property.
   (E)   Every approval for tree removal shall automatically expire one year
from its effective date
§ 150.776 CONFLICTS WITH OTHER CITY POLICIES AND REGULATIONS.
   In any case where engineering or design standards or city policies or rules
establish conditions that cannot be met in a specific situation without removal
of a protected, heritage or ancestral tree, the City Council shall determine
what specific adverse effect would result from waiver or modification of such
standard, policy, rule or application thereof, to the extent necessary to save
the tree. If the City Council determines that there is no serious and imminent
adverse effect, the standard, policy or rule may be modified or waived. In
circumstances involving regulations under the authority of the Board of
Adjustment, the Board of Adjustment will have determination and modification
authority. All determinations required to be made under this chapter shall be
made before the expiration of 30 working days from the date of the application
for approval for tree removal, except in cases requiring Board of Adjustment
review which will have 60 working days for approval of tree removal.
§ 150.777 CRITICAL ROOT ZONE.
   During construction, temporary tree protection devices shall be installed at
least to the limit of the critical root zone or dripline, whichever is greater,
for any protected, heritage or ancestral trees to be preserved when the
respective critical root zone is within the limits of construction.
§ 150.778 DISTURBANCE TO CRITICAL ROOT ZONE (CRZ).
   A minimum of 50% of the critical root zone must be preserved at natural
grade and with natural ground cover. No cut or fill, any deposit or stockpiling
of earthen materials in their natural state, greater than four inches will be
located closer to the tree trunk than one-half the CRZ radial distance. If more
than 50% of the tree's critical root zone is affected by construction the tree
may be preserved but replacement plantings must be met as part of the
mitigation requirements in accordance with §
150.782 and §
150.783.
§ 150.779 CROWN IMPACTS.
   A maximum amount of 25% of the viable portion of the tree's crown may be
removed. If more than 25% of the trees crown is removed for construction the
tree may be preserved but replacement plantings must be met as part of the
mitigation requirements in accordance with §
150.782 and §
150.783.
§ 150.780 HAZARDOUS ACTIVITIES.
   Activities during construction that are hazardous to the health of any
protected, heritage or ancestral trees are prohibited, including but not
limited to the following:
   (A)   Physical damage. Any physical damage, including tree topping, trunk
damage, or over pruning.
   (B)   Equipment cleaning and liquid disposal. Cleaning equipment, depositing
or allowing harmful liquids to flow overland within the critical root zone.
This includes paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar, tar or similar
materials.
   (C)   Grade changes. Grade changes within the limits of the critical root
zone unless adequate construction methods are approved by the City Arborist.
   (D)   Impervious paving. Paving with impervious materials within the limits
of the critical root zone and which may reasonably be expected to kill a tree.
   (E)   Material storage. Storing materials intended for use in construction
or allowing waste materials due to excavation for demolition to accumulate
within the limits of the critical root zone.
   (F)   Tree attachments. Attaching to a tree any signs, wires or other items,
other than those of a protective nature.
   (G)   Vehicular traffic. Vehicular and/or construction equipment traffic,
parking or storage within the limits of the critical root zone, other than on
pre-existing approved pavement. This restriction does not apply to single
incident access within the critical root zone for purposes of clearing
underbrush, vehicular access for emergency services, routine utility
maintenance, and emergency restoration of utility services or routine mowing
activities.
   (H)   Utility encroachment. Installation of utilities and appurtenances
within the critical root zone or crown except where approved by the City
Arborist.
   (I)   Excavation and trenching. Excavation and trenching within the limits
of the critical root zone except as approved by the City Arborist.
§ 150.781 TREE PROTECTION PLANS.
   Details and notes prohibiting hazardous activities as generally provided in
the Urban Forest Management Plan shall be included on all tree protection
plans.
§ 150.782 TREE REPLACEMENT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   When protected, heritage or ancestral trees are removed, tree
replacement is required as outlined in
Table 16.401 except in those provisions contained in §
150.775.
   (B)   Replacement trees will also be required to replace any trees that were
planted or identified to be preserved in a tree replacement plan, but died
within two years of the date the certificate of occupancy was issued.
   (C)   Each replacement tree shall be a minimum of two caliper inches unless
otherwise approved by the City Arborist.
   (D)   Available planting area. Replacement trees should be planted on the
site or easement from which existing trees are removed. If this is not
feasible, a person may initiate a proposal to plant trees off-site. This may be
acceptable if the planting site is in reasonable proximity to the project area
and approved by the City Arborist.
   (E)   Survival potential. Before agreeing to any replacement option, the
City Arborist will assess the probability that trees planted will survive. This
typically requires that some type of irrigation system be implemented for a
minimum of two years. Irrigation may not be required if it can be demonstrated
that, given the size and type of trees planted, the planting site and the time
of year the trees are planted, the mortality rate is likely to be low.
   (F)   Quantities of replacement trees.
      (1)   Replacement tree values will be expressed in terms of caliper
inches. The minimum size acceptable for replacement will be two caliper inches.
The replacement schedule is located in
Table 16.401.
      (2)   Any condition requiring the planting of a replacement tree(s) must
be met within 12 months after removal of the protected tree.
      (3)   Table 16.401; tree replacement schedule.
TABLE 16.401: TREE REPLACEMENT SCHEDULE
Type Protected, Heritage, or Ancestral Tree Tree Replacement Ratio
TABLE 16.401: TREE REPLACEMENT SCHEDULE
Type                      Protected, Heritage, or Tree Replacement Ratio
                          Ancestral Tree
Tree removal permit       Protected tree          1/3 of the total diameter
Tree removal permit       Heritage tree           1:1
Tree removal permit       Ancestral tree          2:1
Tree removal through site Protected tree          1:1
plan
Tree removal through site Heritage tree           2:1
plan
Tree removal through site Ancestral tree          3:1
plan
 
   (G)   Types of replacement trees.
      (1)   In order to enhance the general quality of the urban forest,
certain restrictions will be placed on the types of trees which will be allowed
to serve as replacements for trees removed. Unless site conditions prohibit it,
75% of the total caliper inches of replacement trees must be represented by
large canopy trees (
Table 16.402). The remaining 25% can be a mixture of small trees (
Table 16.402). All trees selected must be suitable to the planting site. A
minimum of five different species must be planted if more than 50 caliper
inches of trees are required. This is to prevent large monocultures of any
single tree species, which increase the chance of disease epidemics. The
planting of thin bark red oaks near oak wilt centers is discouraged.
      (2)   Table 16.402; tree replacement.
 
TABLE 16.402: TREE REPLACEMENT
Large Tree Replacement List           Small Tree Replacement List
                                      American Smoke Tree (Cotinus obovatus)
Arizona Cypress (Cupressus arizonica) Anacacho Orchid Tree (Bauhinia
Bald Cypress (Taxodium distichum)     lunarioides)
Big Tooth Maple (Acer grandidentatum) Desert Willow (Chilopsis linearis)
Bur Oak (Quercus macrocarpa           Eve's Necklace (Sophora affinis)
Catalpa (Catalpa bignoniodes)         Flameleaf Sumac (Rhus copallina and
Cedar Elm (Ulmus crassifolia)         glabra)
Chinese Pistache (Pistacia chinensis) Goldenball Lead-tree (Leucaena retresa)
Chinquapin Oak (Quercus muhlenbergii) Kidneywood (Eysenhardtia texana)
Chitalpa (Chilopsisx Catalpa)         Lindheimer silktassel (Garrya
Deodar Cedar (Cedrus deodara)         lindheimeri)
Drake Elm (Ulmus parvifolia "Drake")  Mexican Buckeye (Ungnadia speciosa)
Escarpment Cherry (Prunus serotina)   Mexican Plum (Prunus mexicana)
Honey Mesquite (Prosopis glandulosa)  Mexican Redbud (Cercis canadensis var.
Lacey Oak (Quercus glaucoides)        "Mexicana")
Little Walnut (Juglans microcarpa)    Possumhaw Holly (Ilex deciduas)
Live Oak (Quercus fusiformis)         Smooth Leaf Sumac (Rhus glabra)
Monterrey Oak (Quercus polymorpha)    Red Buckeye (Aesculus pavia)
Pecans (Carya illinoinensis)          Texas Mountain Laurel (Sophora
Texas Red Oak (Quercus texana)        secundiflora)
Texas Sycamore or Mexican Sycamore    Texas Persimmon (Diospyros texana)
(Platanus occidentalis glabrata)      Texas Pistache (Pistacia texana)
Shumard Red Oak (Quercus shumardii)   Texas Redbud (Cercis canadensis var.
                                      "Texensis")
                                      Yaupon Holly (Ilex vomitoria)
 
§ 150.783 TREE FUND AND TREE REPLACEMENT FEE.
   If the City Arborist determines that adequate planting space is not
available an individual may apply for approval to pay a tree replacement fee.
   (A)   Establishment of fund. A tree fund is hereby established.
   (B)   Funds to be deposited. Tree replacement fees for the installation of
replacement trees shall be deposited in the tree fund. Donations may also be
made to the tree fund.
   (C)   Fees. Fees are based on the ratio in
Table 16.401. Payment is calculated at $75 per caliper inch. Changes to the fee
may be adopted periodically by resolution of the City Council.
   (D)   Use of funds. Expenditures from the tree fund shall be used solely for
the purpose of purchasing and installing trees on public rights-of-way and any
other city owned property and for administering the tree fund.
§ 150.784 PRESERVATION OF NATURAL VEGETATION.
   In addition to satisfying the requirements set forth in this chapter in
connection with the removal of protected, heritage or ancestral trees, when
site plan review and approval or any other approval by the City Council is
required for any development or project, the applicant shall:
   (A)   Demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Council that the design has
been accomplished to preserve the existing natural vegetation of the site.
   (B)   Preserve trees four to ten inches in diameter, to the extent that such
preservation is reasonable and feasible.
   (C)   Show the locations of existing trees above four inches in diameter on
the site plan.
   (D)   Preserve understory and herbaceous vegetation to the extent that such
preservation is reasonable and feasible.
§ 150.785 INDISCRIMINATE CLEARING.
   As understory and smaller plants provide shelter, food, and place to raise
young there shall be no indiscriminate clearing of natural vegetation.
   (A)   The indiscriminate clearing of natural vegetation is prohibited
without first securing approval of the city, except where the clearing is for
the removal of trees or vegetation damaged by natural forces, livestock, and
removal of small, non-protected Ashe Juniper (Juniperus asheii).
   (B)   Application for the indiscriminate clearing of natural vegetation
shall be made on a form provided by the city.
   (C)   Where practicable, an application for the indiscriminate clearing of
natural vegetation shall be combined with any other applications and/or site
plans required for specific development projects.
   (D)   Applications required under this chapter shall be approved or denied
in accordance with the provisions of §
150.784.
§ 150.786 EXCEPTIONS.
   During the period of an emergency, such as a tornado, flood or other natural
disaster the requirements of this article may be waived as deemed necessary by
the Director of Public Works and Environmental Services or other designee.
§ 150.787 ADMINISTRATION.
   This chapter shall be administered by the City Council or its designee who
shall oversee regulation of the care and removal of protected, heritage and
ancestral trees now and hereafter in the City of Sunset Valley.
§ 150.788 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Stop work order. The City Arborist, Council or other duly authorized
city official may order all work, including site clearing or other site
preparation, stopped on any site where a violation of this chapter or of a
final site plan is found. Any person, including a workman on the site, who
fails to comply with a stop work order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable as provided for in the penalty section hereof.
   (B)   Revocation of final site plan approval. If the City Council finds,
after notice and hearing, that a significant violation of an approved final
site plan has occurred, the Council may revoke its approval of such site plan.
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any work on the site covered by the
site plan unless and until a new application for site plan approval has been
filed and processed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the
Council grants approval to a new final site plan which corrects the violations
of the original site plan.
   (C)   Injunction and other remedies. Any tree removal or other work done
contrary to any of the provisions of this chapter or to any of the details
contained in any final site plan approved by the City Council or to any of the
conditions imposed in connection with the granting of any application required
by this chapter is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a
violation of this chapter. The Council may direct the City Attorney to initiate
injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other action available in law or equity
to prevent, enjoin, abate or correct unlawful tree removal or other work.
   (D)   Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision
of this chapter or any order made under the authority of this chapter, or who
causes or permits any such violations, or who fails to perform any act required
hereunder, or does any prohibited act or takes any action contrary to any final
site plans approved by the Council or fails to take any action required by such
site plan, may be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, if convicted thereof, shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 per offense. Each and every day on
which any violation is committed or permitted to continue may constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such. The owner or tenant of any
building, structure or premises and any designer, builder, contractor, agent or
other person who knowingly commits, participates in, assists in or maintains
such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and subject to
the penalties as provided herein.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL REGISTRATION PROCESS
IN SINGLE FAMILY DISTRICTS
§ 150.800 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY OF SHORT-TERM RENTAL REGISTRATION.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish regulations for the
registration and use of short-term rentals for single family dwelling units.
The requirements of this subchapter apply only to short-term rentals, as
defined herein, located in single family residential districts established
under the city's zoning ordinance. Nothing in this subchapter, however, shall
be construed to be a waiver of the requirement to assess and collect hotel
occupancy taxes for any residential rental for less than 30 consecutive days,
or any other applicable provision of the Sunset Valley Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 220621-B, passed 6-21-2022)
§ 150.801 DEFINITIONS FOR SHORT-TERM RENTALS.
   As used in this subchapter:
   ADVERTISE. The written, audio, oral or other methods of drawing the public's
attention whether by brochure, written literature or on-line posting to a
short-term rental in order to promote the availability of the short-term
rental.
   BEDROOM or SLEEPING UNIT. As required by the International Residential Code
shall contain the following:
      (1)   Egress. Shall contain two methods of egress, one to exterior via a
door measuring 36" in width or greater or window measuring two feet by three
feet and one to the interior via a door measuring 32" in width or greater.
      (2)   Ceiling height. Minimum ceiling height of seven feet from the floor
to the ceiling.
      (3)   Size. Be a minimum of 70 square feet and it must have at least
seven feet in any horizontal direction.
      (4)   Light and ventilation.
         (a)   Must have window glazing of at least 8% of the floor area.
         (b)   Natural ventilation for outdoor airs through a window that are
not less than 4% of the floor size.
      (5)   Must be able to be heated and cooled and maintain a temperature of
at least 68°F.
      (6)   A smoke alarm must be installed per the International Residential
Code.
   GUEST HOUSE. A single guest house, as that term is defined in the City of
Sunset Valley Land Development Code, which is used for human habitation of
which the maximum number of occupants permitted for the dwelling unit is three
times the number of bedrooms per the Tex. Property Code, § 92.010.
   HOST. The person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association, assigned
the duty and responsibility by the owner to manage or rent the residence for a
short-term rental.
   HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX. The hotel occupancy tax as defined in
Chapter 112 of the Sunset Valley Code of Ordinances and Chapter 3 of the Tex.
Tax Code.
   LOCAL EMERGENCY CONTACT. An individual other than the registrant, who can
respond within the hour of the subject property or has given enforcement
authorization to Sunset Valley Police Department, and who is designated by the
owner/registrant to act as the owner's authorized agent if the owner has
traveled outside of the immediate area or is otherwise unavailable. The local
emergency contact should be reachable on a 24-hour basis, have access to the
short-term rental property, and be authorized by the owner to act in the
owner's absence to address any complaints, disturbances, and emergencies.
   OWNER. The person who, in accordance with the most recently recorded deed,
deed of trust, security instrument, trust instrument, affidavit of heirship,
muniment of title or other similar document indicating title to real property
recorded in the Official Public Records of Travis County, Texas, is vested in,
the ownership, dominion or title of real property, including, but not limited
to:
      (1)   The owner of a fee simple title;
      (2)   The owner of a life estate;
      (3)   The purchaser named in an executory contract for conveyance entered
in compliance with Tex. Property Code, Title 2, Chapter 5, Subchapter D; or
      (4)   A mortgagee, receiver, executor, or trustee in control of real
property.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, or association, two or more persons having a joint or common
interest, or any other legal or community entity.
   PRIMARY RESIDENCE. The usual dwelling place of the registrant's residential
dwelling and is documented as such by at least two of the following: motor
vehicle registration, driver's license, Texas State Identification card, voter
registration, property tax documents, or utility bill. For purpose of this
subchapter, a person may have only one primary residence.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. Includes the following districts: SF- Single Family
or any Planned Development District defined as a residential use in the Code of
Ordinances.
   RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE. A single-family residence as referred to in this
subchapter is a:
      (1)   One-family dwelling (detached). A dwelling designed and constructed
for occupancy by one family and located on a lot or separate building tract and
having no physical connection to a building located on any other lot or tract;
      (2)   One-family dwelling (attached). A dwelling which is joined to
another dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or abutting separate wall
and which is designed for occupancy by one family; or
      (3)   Guest house. A single guest house, as that term is defined in the
City of Sunset Valley Land Development Code, which is used for human habitation
of which the maximum number of occupants permitted for the dwelling unit is
three times the number of bedrooms per the Tex. Property Code, § 92.010.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL (STR). The rental of any residence or residential
structure, means a single-family residence with the following criteria, or a
portion of a residence or residential structure for a period of less than 30
days. The term does not include:
      (1)   A unit that is used for a nonresidential purpose, including an
educational, health care, retail, restaurant, banquet space, or event center
purpose or another similar use;
      (2)   A bed and breakfast;
      (3)   A hotel/residence hotel; or
      (4)   A structure that is not permanently affixed, such as a travel
trailer.
   SHORT TERM RENTAL REGISTRATION. The registration issued by the Building
Official or their designee pursuant to this subchapter.
(Ord. 220621-B, passed 6-21-2022)
§ 150.802 SHORT-TERM RENTAL REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall hereafter advertise, offer to rent, or rent, lease,
sublease, license or sublicense a residential property within the city as a
short-term rental for which a registration has not been properly made and filed
with the City of Sunset Valley. Registration shall be made upon forms furnished
by the city for such purpose and shall specifically require the following
minimum information:
   (A)   Name, address, phone number and e-mail address of the property owner
(s) of the short-term rental property, and trade names and registered agents if
applicable.
   (B)   Verification that this short-term rental property is the registrant's
property, or permission from the property owner allowing the use as an STR.
   (C)   Name, address, phone number and e-mail address of the designated local
emergency contact.
   (D)   The maximum number of occupants permitted for the dwelling unit is
three times the number of bedrooms per the Tex. Property Code, § 92.010.
   (E)   A submission of a sketch floor plan of the dwelling with room layout.
   (F)   Sketch of the property indicating maximum number of vehicles that can
be legally parked on the property, without encroaching onto street, sidewalks,
or alleys; other public rights-of-way or public property.
   (G)   Acknowledgement of receipt of a copy of this subchapter and agreement
to comply with all provisions of this subchapter as a condition to receiving
and maintaining a short-term rental registration.
   (H)   The registrant shall provide a copy of the filed Comptroller of Public
Accounts Form AP-102 (hotel occupancy tax questionnaire).
(Ord. 220621-B, passed 6-21-2022)
§ 150.803 INSPECTION REQUIRED FOR SHORT-TERM RENTAL REGISTRATION.
   Upon registration and renewal, and prior to the first rental occupant of a
short-term rental property, the owner is required to schedule an inspection of
the residential structure with the City of Sunset Valley to determine
compliance with the STR checklist attached.
   (A)   If only a portion of the premises is offered for rent, then that
portion plus shared amenities and points of access shall be inspected.
   (B)   If, upon completion of the inspection, the premises are found to be in
violation of one or more provisions of applicable city codes and ordinances,
the city shall provide written notice of such violation and shall set a re-
inspection date for violation to be corrected prior to its occupancy.
(Ord. 220621-B, passed 6-21-2022)
§ 150.804 RESTRICTIONS ON SHORT-TERM RENTALS.
   (A)   External signage. There shall be no external on-site or off-site
advertising signs or displays indicating the property is a short-term rental.
   (B)   Limit on occupants allowed. There shall be a maximum occupancy of
three persons per bedroom, including adult and children.
   (C)   Limits on number of vehicles. There shall be a maximum of one motor
vehicle per bedroom, or maximum number of motor vehicle that can be
accommodated within the garage and driveway, without extending over the public
rights-of-way (alleys and sidewalks) whichever is less. No vehicle parking area
shall cause the site to be in violation of impervious cover requirements
without a variance of such having been approved by the City Council.
   (D)   Advertisement and contracts. Any advertisement of the property as a
short-term rental and all rental contracts must contain language that specifies
the allowed maximum number of occupants and maximum number of vehicles.
   (E)   Other restrictions. It is unlawful:
      (1)   To operate or allow to be operated a short-term rental without
first registering the property in which the rental is to occur with the city in
accordance with this subchapter;
      (2)   To advertise or offer a short-term rental without first registering
the property in which the rental is to occur with the city in accordance with
this subchapter; documented advertisement of the subject property as a short-
term rental, online or offline, shall be considered evidence of a violation of
this subchapter;
      (3)   To operate a short-term rental that does not comply with all
applicable city and state laws and codes;
      (4)   To operate a short-term rental without paying the required hotel
occupancy taxes;
      (5)   Permit the use of the short-term rental for the purpose of housing
sex offenders; operating a structured sober, recovery or other purpose living
home or similar enterprise; selling illegal drugs; selling alcohol or another
activity that requires a permit or license under the Alcoholic Beverage Code;
gambling house; or operating as a sexually oriented business.
(Ord. 220621-B, passed 6-21-2022)
§ 150.805 BROCHURE AND SAFETY FEATURES FOR SHORT-TERM RENTALS.
   (A)   Safety features. The owner/registrant shall provide in the premises
working smoke detectors in accordance with adopted codes and at least one
working carbon monoxide detector and alarm, and one working fire extinguisher.
The premises shall otherwise comply with applicable Codes of Ordinance
including but not limited to Building and Fire Codes.
   (B)   Informational brochure. The city shall provide a brochure that
contains:
      (1)   The host's 24-hour contact information if the property owner is not
within the city limits when guests are renting the premises; and
      (2)   Pertinent neighborhood information including, but not limited to,
parking restrictions, restrictions on noise and amplified sound, and trash
collection schedules; information to assist guests in the case of emergencies
posing threats to personal safety or damage to property, including emergency
and non-emergency telephone numbers for police, fire and emergency medical
services providers and instructions for obtaining severe weather, natural or
manmade disaster alerts and updates. Information about how parking by renters
or their guests shall not encroach upon or obstruct ingress, egress, or access
to the neighboring properties.
(Ord. 220621-B, passed 6-21-2022)
§ 150.806 NOTIFICATION OF APPROVAL OF SHORT-TERM RENTAL.
   Within ten days of the approval of a short-term rental registration or
renewal, a notice will be sent to all property owners within 200 feet of the
property, and shall include the 24-hour complaint line, and pertinent
information about this subchapter.
(Ord. 220621-B, passed 6-21-2022)
§ 150.807 REGISTRATION TERM, FEES, AND RENEWAL OF SHORT-TERM RENTALS.
   (A)   All registrations approved under this chapter shall be valid for a
period of two years from the date of its issuance.
      (1)   The fees for registration of a short-term rentals shall be as
established by resolution of the City Council and include the following:
         (a)   The initial registration fee; and
         (b)   Renewal fee every two years.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for renewal of the registration, the
City Administrator or their designee may deny the renewal if there is
reasonable cause to believe that:
      (1)   There are grounds for suspension, revocation, or other registration
sanction as provided in this subchapter.
(Ord. 220621-B, passed 6-21-2022)
§ 150.808 INSPECTIONS; RE-INSPECTIONS; SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF SHORT- TERM
RENTAL REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Inspections; access. The resident owner, nonresident owner, resident
manager, and property manager, as a condition to the issuance of a short-term
rental registration required by this subchapter, shall consent and agree to
permit and allow the city's Building Official or their designee to make the
following inspections of the short-term rental when and as needed to ensure
compliance with this subchapter:
      (1)   Before the short-term rental registration and any renewal of the
short-term rental registration is approved, and before the rental of any
single-family residence as a short-term rental under this subchapter, the
resident owner, non-resident owner, resident manager, or property manager shall
request an inspection and make the single-family residence available for
inspection by the Building Official or their designee. The Building Official or
their designee and the resident owner, nonresident owner, resident manager, and
property manager shall agree on a reasonable date and time for the requested
inspection.
      (2)   The inspection list will be provided to the registrant prior to the
inspection being scheduled.
   (B)   Admission to premises. The Building Official or their designee may
enforce the provisions of this subchapter upon presentation of proper
identification to the occupant in charge of the short-term rental and may
enter, with the occupant's permission, any short-term rental between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.; provided, however, that in cases of emergency where
extreme hazards are known to exist which may involve imminent injury to
persons, loss of life, or severe property damage, the Building Official or
their designee may enter the short-term rental referenced in division (A) of
this section at any time and upon presentation of identification and the
occupant's permission shall not apply. Whenever the Building Official is denied
admission to inspect any short-term rental under this provision, inspection
shall be made only under authority of a warrant issued by a magistrate
authorizing the inspection.
   (C)   Reinspection. If any of the inspections authorized by this subchapter
require a second reinspection due to noted violations, then a reinspection fee
as listed in the city's fee schedule shall be paid prior to the second
reinspection.
   (D)   Suspension or revocation of registration. Failure of an owner to
comply with the provisions of this subchapter after receipt of written notice
of the violation from the Building Official or their designee setting out the
violations and the time allowed to rectify the violations, the short-term
rental registration authorized by this subchapter issued to the owner may be
suspended or revoked by the Administration Department.
   (E)   Reinstatement. Any person requesting a reinstatement or reissuance of
a short-term rental registration that has been suspended or revoked shall be
required to apply for and receive a new short-term rental registration issued
under this subchapter upon review by the Administration Department that all
conditions causing the revocation to have been met.
(Ord. 220621-B, passed 6-21-2022)
§ 150.809 REVOCATION/APPEAL; VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Revocation/appeal of short-term rental registration.
      (1)   Registration may be denied and/or revoked by the City Administrator
or designee upon a finding by the noncompliance with any provisions of this
subchapter or violations of the zoning ordinance, or other applicable city
codes.
      (2)   A registration may be subject to revocation of their registration
if there are three or more violations within a 12-month period of this
subchapter or other safety, health, and welfare ordinances of the city.
      (3)   The Administration Department or their designee, shall issue a
notice of violation of any provision of this subchapter or violations as
provided herein. Such notice shall include the date, time and synopsis of the
facts surrounding such violation.
      (4)   A registrant who wishes to appeal the denial or revocation of a
registration under this subchapter, shall file an appeal with the Board of
Adjustment for reinstatement of a denied or revoked registration.
      (5)   All decisions of the Board of Adjustment shall follow the Sunset
Valley ordinance related to the Board of Adjustment, §
150.047.
   (B)   Violations and penalties for short-term rentals.
      (1)   Violation of this subchapter upon conviction shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed the sum of $2,000 for each offense; and
      (2)   Each and every day such violation shall continue shall be deemed to
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 220621-B, passed 6-21-2022)
§ 150.810 FEES FOR SHORT-TERM RENTAL REGISTRATION.
   All fees for registration, inspection, or renewal, including any late fees
or exemptions, as provided in this subchapter, shall be as established by
resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 220621-B, passed 6-21-2022)
§ 150.811 PRESUMPTION; PRESENTATION OF DOCUMENTS OR AFFIDAVIT FOR SHORT- TERM
RENTAL REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Presumption. It shall be a rebuttable presumption that a single-family
residence that is occupied by one or more person(s) who are not the owner is
being occupied pursuant to an agreement between the owner and the occupant(s)
of the single-family residence wherein the occupant(s) have agreed to lease
said residence from the owner.
   (B)   Presentation of documents or affidavits. Any resident owner or
nonresident owner claiming that the owner is not required to obtain a short-
term rental registration pursuant to this subchapter shall, not later than five
business days following receipt of a written request of the Building Official
or their designee or, in the case of an appeal filed pursuant to §
150.809, deliver to the City Administrator a true and correct copy of any
agreements, documents of title, letters of administration, letters
testamentary, executory contracts for conveyance (also known as "contracts for
deed"), affidavits, or other documents that establish to the satisfaction of
the Community Development Department that a landlord/tenant relationship does
not exist between the owner and the occupant(s) of the single-family residence.
Unless an extension of the time for delivery of such documents or affidavits is
granted by the Building Official or their designee or City Administrator, as
the case may be, the failure of the owner to present the requested documents
within the time provided by this division (B) shall result in the presumption
described in division (A) above, becoming irrefutable.
(Ord. 220621-B, passed 6-21-2022)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Penalties for building permit violations. Violation of any sections of
this Code relating to building permits is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of
$200 per day for each day that a structure is constructed and/or maintained in
violation of these sections of the Code.
   (B)   Penalties for Violations of International Building Code, International
Residential Code, International Energy Conservation Code, International
Swimming Pool and Spa Code, NFPA 70 National Electrical Code and Various
Regulations of Code chapter 6.
      (1)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
the International Building Code, International Residential Code, International
Energy Conservation Code, International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, or NFPA 70
National Electrical Code as adopted and amended in §§
150.395 through
150.427 and §§
150.440 through
150.446 which do not relate to public health, sanitation or fire safety, within
the corporate limits of the City of Sunset Valley, Texas shall be deemed guilty
of a Class "C" misdemeanor, and each such person shall be guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any such
violation is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon conviction shall be
fined an amount not exceeding $500 for each day of such violation.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
the International Building Code, International Residential Code, International
Energy Conservation Code, International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, or NFPA 70
National Electrical Code as adopted and amended in §§
150.395 through
150.427 and §§
150.440 through
150.446, within the corporate limits of the City of Sunset Valley, Texas, that
relates to public health and sanitation or fire safety shall be deemed guilty
of a Class "C" misdemeanor, and each such person shall be guilty of separate
offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any such
violation is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon conviction shall be
fined an amount not exceeding $1,000 for each day of such violation.
      (3)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
§§
150.395 through
150.427 and §§
150.440 through
150.446 regarding (1) the requirement of first obtaining a permit for any
construction, including any alteration of a street or right-of-way; (2) a
suspension, revocation, or stop order; (3) occupancy of a building or structure
without a Certificate of Occupancy; (4) trench safety; (5) restoration of a
street following disturbance pursuant to a permit; and (6) a requirement to
burrow under a street when extending a utility line which do not relate to
public health, sanitation or fire safety, within the corporate limits of the
City of Sunset Valley, Texas shall be deemed guilty of a Class "C" misdemeanor,
and each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day or portion thereof during which any such violation is committed, continued,
or permitted, and upon conviction shall be fined an amount not exceeding $500
for each day of such violation. Any such violation within the corporate limits
of the City of Sunset Valley, Texas, that relates to public health and
sanitation or fire safety shall be deemed guilty of a Class "C" misdemeanor,
and each such person shall be guilty of separate offense for each and every day
or portion thereof during which any such violation is committed, continued, or
permitted, and upon conviction shall be fined an amount not exceeding $1,000
for each day of such violation.
   (C)   Penalties for International Mechanical Code Violations.
      (1)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
the International Mechanical Code as adopted and amended in §§
150.395 through
150.427 and §§
150.440 through
150.446 which do not relate to public health, sanitation or fire safety, within
the corporate limits of the City of Sunset Valley, Texas shall be guilty of a
Class "C" misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined an amount not
exceeding $200. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each
and every day or portion thereof during which such violation is committed,
continued, or permitted.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
the International Mechanical Code as adopted and amended in §§
150.395 through
150.427 and §§
150.440 through
150.446 within the corporate limits of the City of Sunset Valley, Texas, that
relates to public health and sanitation or fire safety shall be guilty of a
Class "C" misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined an amount not
exceeding $1,000. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for
each and every day or portion thereof during which any such violation is
committed, continued, or permitted.
   (D)   Penalties for Uniform Plumbing Code Violations.
      (1)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted which do not relate to public health,
sanitation or safety, within the corporate limits of the City of Sunset Valley,
Texas shall be deemed guilty of a Class "C" misdemeanor, and upon conviction
shall be fined an amount not exceeding $200. Each such person shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during
which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed,
continued, or permitted.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted, within the corporate limits of the City
of Sunset Valley, Texas, that relates to public health and sanitation or fire
safety shall be deemed guilty of a Class "C" misdemeanor, and upon conviction
shall be fined an amount not exceeding $1,000. Each such person shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during
which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed,
continued, or permitted.
   (E)   Penalties for International Fire Code violations. Any person, firm or
corporation violating any of the provisions of the International Fire Code as
adopted and amended in §§
150.395 through
150.427 and §§
150.440 through
150.446  within the corporate limits of the City of Sunset Valley, Texas, shall
be guilty of a Class "C" misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined an
amount not exceeding $1,000. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which such violation
is committed, continued, or permitted.
   (F)   Penalties for underground storage tank violations. The violation of
any of the provisions of the sections of this Code on underground storage tanks
shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense. Upon conviction, any person
violating these sections of the Code shall be fined in an amount not to exceed
$2,000. Each day a violation of these sections of the Code continues shall
constitute a distinct and separate offense.
   (G)   Penalties for excavation permit violations. Any person who shall
violate any of the provisions of the sections of the Code regulating excavation
permits not relating to health, safety or sanitation or shall fail to comply
therewith or any of the requirements thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be liable for a fine, and upon conviction of any of such
violations shall be fined in a sum of not more than $500; and each day any such
violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. Any person violating any provision of these sections of the Code
relating to health safety, or sanitation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and,
upon conviction shall be fined an amount not exceeding $1,000.
   (H)   Penalties for underground utility line violations.
      (1)   Any person violating these sections of the Code on underground
utility lines within the corporate limits of the City of Sunset Valley, Texas,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction shall be fined an amount
not exceeding $5,000.
      (2)   Each day that such violation continues shall be a separate offense.
Prosecution or conviction under this provision shall never be a bar to any
other remedy or relief for violation of these sections of the Code.
   (I)   Penalties for subdivision violations.
      (1)   Any person violating any provision of this Code relating to non-
health and sanitation subdivision requirements within the corporate limits of
the City of Sunset Valley, Texas, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction, shall be fined an amount not exceeding $200. Any person violating
any provision of these sections of the Code within the corporate limits of the
City of Sunset Valley, Texas, that relates to health or sanitation shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined an amount not
exceeding $1,000.
      (2)   Each day that such violation continues shall be a separate offense.
Prosecution or conviction under this provision shall never be a bar to any
other remedy or relief for violations of these sections of the Code.
      (3)   In the event any provision of the subdivision requirements of the
Code is violated within the corporate limits of the city, or outside such
corporate limits but within the area of extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
city, the city may institute any appropriate action or proceedings in District
Court or another Court of competent jurisdiction to restrain and enjoin the
violation of such sections of the Code.
   (J)   Penalties for watershed development violations.
      (1)   Any person violating any provision of the sections of this Code on
watershed development which do not relate to health or sanitation within the
corporate limits of the City of Sunset Valley, Texas, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be fined an amount not exceeding $500.
Any person violating any provision of the sections of this Code on watershed
development within the corporate limits of the City of Sunset Valley, Texas,
that relates to health or sanitation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and,
upon conviction shall be fined an amount not exceeding $1,000.
      (2)   Each day that such violation continues shall be a separate offense.
Prosecution or conviction under this provision shall never be a bar to any
other remedy or relief for violations of these sections of the Code.
      (3)   In the event any provision of these sections of the Code is
violated within the corporate limits of the city, or outside such corporate
limits but within the area of extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, the
city may institute any appropriate action or proceedings in District Court or
another Court of competent jurisdiction to restrain and enjoin the violation of
such sections of the Code.
   (K)   Penalties for sign violations.
      (1)   Any individual, association, corporation or legal entity violating
any provision of §§
150.700 through
150.736 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by the assessment of a fine not exceeding $500 and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
      (2)   The primary beneficiary of any sign installed in violation of §§
150.700 through
150.736 shall be presumed to have authorized or caused, either directly or
indirectly, the installation, use, or maintenance of the sign in violation of
§§
150.700 through
150.736.
      (3)   Whenever any construction, installation, alteration, or repair of a
sign is being done contrary to the provisions of §§
150.700 through
150.736, another controlling ordinance or statute governing the sign, the
Building Official may order the work stopped by notice verbally or in writing
served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done and
the city shall post a STOP WORK ORDER on the property adjacent to the posted
building permit, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until
authorized by the Building Official to proceed with the work. If no permit has
been issued, all work shall stop until a permit has been properly issued and
all errors corrected to the satisfaction of the Building Official. The Building
Official or Code enforcement authority may also issue a work correction order,
which shall be served upon any persons who are working on a certain aspect of
the sign.
      (4)   The city and/or the City Administrator shall enforce §§
150.700 through
150.736 by appropriate administrative action, including but not limited to, the
rejection of plans, maps, plats and specifications not found to be in
compliance with §§
150.700 through
150.736 and good engineering practices, and the issuance of stop work orders.
      (5)   Upon the request of the City Council, the City Attorney or other
authorized attorney shall file an action in the district courts to enjoin the
violation or threatened violation of §§
150.700 through
150.736, or to obtain declaratory judgment, and to seek and recover court costs
and attorney fees, and/or recover damages in an amount sufficient for the city
to undertake any construction or other activity necessary to bring about
compliance with a requirement regarding the property and established pursuant
to §§
150.700 through
150.7366.
   (L)   Penalties for landscaping violations.
      (1)   Any violation of the sections of the Code regulating landscaping
will constitute a misdemeanor. Upon conviction a fine shall be assessed (not
exceeding $200). Each day that such violation continues shall be a separate
offense. Prosecution or conviction under this provision shall never be a bar to
any other remedy or relief for violations of these sections of the Code.
      (2)   To avoid penalties involving the removal or damage of certain trees
protected by this Code, the developer also should be familiar with and adhere
to the requirements of the sections of the Code regulating trees of this city.
   (M)   Penalties for oak wilt disease regulations violations. It shall be
unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate the provisions of §§
150.650 through
150.661. Any person violating any of the provision of §§
150.650 through
150.661 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof
during which any violation of any provision of §§
150.650 through
150.661 is committed, continued, or permitted and upon the conviction of any
such violation, such offense shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$2,000.
   (N)   Penalties for drainage criteria violations.
      (1)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of
the sections of this Code on drainage criteria which do not relate to health or
sanitation within the corporate limits of the City of Sunset Valley, Texas,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be fined an
amount not exceeding $200. Any person violating any provision of these sections
of the Code within the corporate limits of the City of Sunset Valley, Texas,
that relates to health or sanitation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and,
upon conviction shall be fined an amount not exceeding $1,000.
      (2)   Each day that such violation continues shall be a separate offense.
Prosecution or conviction under this provision shall never be a bar to any
other remedy or relief for violations of these sections of the Code.
      (3)   In the event any provision of these sections of the Code is
violated within the corporate limits of the city, or outside such corporate
limits but within the area of extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of
Sunset Valley, the city may institute any appropriate action or proceedings in
District Court or another court of competent jurisdiction to restrain and
enjoin the violation of such sections of the Code.
   (O)   Penalties for blasting permit violations. Failure to comply with the
regulations in this Code on blasting permits will be subject to fines not to
exceed $1,000 per day, each day of violation constitutes a separate offense.
   (P)   Penalties for fire lane violations. A violation of the requirement of
a fire lane is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $100 per day for
each day that a parking facility is in use in violation of these sections of
the Code regulating fire lanes.
   (Q)   Penalties for on-site sewage system permit violations. Any person
violating any of the provisions of the sections of the Code regulating on-site
sewage systems shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person
shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion
thereof during which any violation of any provision of these sections is
committed, continued or permitted and upon conviction of any such violation,
such offense shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000. Prosecution
under this section shall not bar any action under other federal or state
statute or local ordinance.
   (R)   Penalties for wastewater system violations.
      (1)   Any person violating any provision of these sections of the Code
regulating the wastewater system which do not relate to health or sanitation
within the corporate limits of Sunset Valley, Texas shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined an amount not exceeding $200.
      (2)   Any person violating any provision of these sections of the Code
within the corporate limits of the City of Sunset Valley, Texas, that relates
to health or sanitation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall be fined an amount not exceeding $2,000.
      (3)   Each day that such violation continues shall be a separate offense.
Prosecution or conviction under this provision shall never be a bar to any
other remedy or relief for violations of these sections of the Code.
   (S)   Penalties for violation of floodplain regulations.
      (1)   Any person violating any provision of §§
150.360 through
150.384 (flood regulations) of this Code within the corporate limits of Sunset
Valley, Texas shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be
fined an amount not exceeding $500.
      (2)   Each day that such violation continues shall be a separate offense.
Prosecution or conviction under this provision shall never be a bar to any
other remedy or relief for violations of the provisions of §§
150.360 through
150.384.
   (T)   Penalties for violation of obligation to timely pay permit. It shall
be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to continue any development
activity or to use any improvement installed or constructed pursuant to a
permit issued for such development or improvement without timely paying all
application fees owing in connection with such permit, including third party
review fees first due and payable by the applicant after issuance of such
permit. Any person violating the provisions of this
division (T) shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person
shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion
thereof during which any such violation is committed, continued, or permitted
and upon the conviction of any such violation, such offense shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $200.
   (U)   Penalties for violation of zoning regulations.
      (1)   Any person violating any provision of §§
150.030 through
150.252 (zoning regulations) of this Code within the corporate limits of Sunset
Valley, Texas shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be
fined an amount not exceeding $500.
      (2)   Each day that such violation continues shall be a separate offense.
Prosecution or conviction under this provision shall never be a bar to any
other remedy or relief for violations of the provisions of §§
150.030 through
150.252.
APPENDIX A: CONCEPTUAL SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS FOR ZONING CHANGES, AMENDMENTS
AND VARIANCES
   An application for a change in zoning classification shall include a
conceptual site plan (20 copies) and meeting the following minimum
requirements.
      (1)   A site map showing all existing structures and features (streets,
roads, drainages, etc.) on and within 500 feet of the area for which a request
in zoning is requested;
      (2)   A conceptual layout showing proposed structures, parking
facilities, egress/ingress routes, and landscaping and water quality control
features for the subject area. The applicant will not be bound to the location
of proposed improvements shown on the conceptual plan, but their general
location is required for planning and evaluation purposes; and
      (3)   A written description of the conceptual plan summarizing, at a
minimum, the following items:
         (a)   Current and proposed zoning;
         (b)   Nature and extent of proposed improvements;
         (c)   General types, size and number of improvements;
         (d)   Listing and brief description of benefits and impacts the
proposed improvements and change in zoning will have on the immediate areas and
on the city;
         (e)   Reason(s) for requesting the change in zoning;
         (f)   Listing, description and applicant's justification for any and
all conditional overlays, deed restrictions and/or other covenants which are
proposed by the applicant as part of the change in zoning; and
         (g)   General time or schedule requirements of the applicant.
APPENDIX B: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS FOR ZONING CHANGES, AMENDMENTS, AND
VARIANCES
   The site plan referred to herein shall contain the following:
   (A)   The boundary lines and dimensions of the property, existing
subdivision lots, available utilities, easements, roadways, sidewalks, fire
lanes, and public rights-of-way.
   (B)   Topography of the property proposed for development in contours of not
less than two feet, together with any proposed grade elevations, if different
from existing elevations. If the natural contour of the land is to be altered
or changed in any location on the property more than four feet then the site
plan must provide detailed information on the proposed grading plan to the
surrounding properties and the use of surrounding properties, and shall include
information indicating the drainage and line of sight effect the proposed
grading plan will have on the surrounding properties.
   (C)   The floodplains, water courses, wetlands, drainage areas, and other
significant features including, but not limited to, rock outcroppings and tree
groupings.
   (D)   The location and use of all existing and proposed buildings or
structures, including all refuse storage areas, and the minimum distance
between buildings, where building complexes are proposed, a site plan showing
the location of each building and the minimum distance between buildings, and
between buildings and the property line, street or curb line and/or alley shall
be submitted.
   (E)   Total number of off-street parking and loading spaces in accordance
with this Code.
   (F)   All points of vehicular ingress and egress and circulation within the
property. Any special traffic regulation facilities, proposed or required, to
assure the safe function of the circulation plan shall also be shown.
   (G)   Setbacks, lot coverage, and when relevant, the relationships of the
setbacks provided and the height of any existing or proposed building or
structure.
   (H)   The location, size, and arrangement of all outdoor signs, exterior
auditory speakers, and lighting.
   (I)   A landscape plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of this
Code.
   (J)   The location and height of fences or screen plantings and the type of
building materials or plantings to be used for fencing or screening in
accordance with the requirements of this Code.
   (K)   Note a soil erosion control plan for the period during which
construction will be taking place.
   (L)   Where multiple types of land uses are proposed, a land use plan
delineating the specific areas to be devoted to various uses shall be required.
   (M)   Vicinity map, north point, scale, name of the development, name of the
owner, name of the planner, total acreage of the project, street address or
common description of the property.
   (N)   Current land uses and zoning district of the property and current land
uses and zoning districts of the contiguous properties and buildings on the
exterior of the site and within 25 feet of all property lines.
   (O)   The location and size of existing and proposed surface and subsurface
drainage facilities.
   (P)   A description of the type of land use that is proposed for a site
including its Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code if there are any
chemicals or toxic materials involved. The City Planner may allow all of the
foregoing to be contained within a single drawing if in the opinion of the City
Planner the drawing can be properly evaluated.
APPENDIX C: HAZARDOUS MATERIAL RATINGS
   (A)   Determination of degree of health hazard. The health hazard rating of
a material shall be determined by evaluating the potential for harm and the
relative toxicity of the material or mixture of materials as a whole. Table A-
1 applies to human effects data. In the absence of human exposure data, Table
A-2 shall be used as a guideline. Where both acute and chronic exposure data
are available, the data for the worst effect shall be used to develop the
rating.
   Table A-1
   RELATIVE TOXICITY RATING FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
   (Human Exposure by Any Route)
            *   Includes substances which bear a significant relationship to
the development of cancer in man, but excluding the common varieties of skin
cancer.
            **   Allergens are rated according to their sensitizing potential
rather than the severity of an allergic reaction upon re-exposure to a
substance by a sensitized worker.
   Table A-2
   RELATIVE ACUTE TOXICITY CRITERIA
   (B)   Determination of degree of fire hazard.
      (1)   The fire hazard rating of a product shall be determined by
evaluating the potential for harm and the relative flammability of the material
or mixture of materials as a whole, using the criteria which follows:
      (2)   The fire hazard rating of a liquid shall be determined from the
criteria contained in Table A-3 and based on data using the final product
formulation. The test procedures as found in 29 CFR 1910.106 and 107 are
mandatory liquids.
      EXTREMELY FLAMMABLE:   Rating 4
         Materials which on account of their physical form or environmental
conditions can form explosive mixture with air which are readily dispersed in
air, such as dusts of combustible solids and mists or flammable or combustible
liquid droplets.
      HIGHLY FLAMMABLE:   Rating 3
         Liquids and solids that can be ignited under almost all ambient
temperature conditions. This rating shall include:
         Solid materials in the form of coarse dusts which may burn rapidly but
which generally do not form explosive atmospheres with air.
         Solid materials in a fibrous or shredded from which may burn rapidly
and create flash fire hazards, such as cotton, sisal and hemp.
         Materials which burn with extreme rapidity, usually by reason of self-
contained oxygen (e.g., dry nitrocellulose and many organic peroxides).
         Materials which ignite spontaneously when exposed to air or to other
substance.
      MODERATELY COMBUSTIBLE:   Rating 2
         Materials that must be moderately heated or exposed to relatively
highly ambient temperatures before ignition can occur. Materials with this
rating would not under normal conditions form hazardous atmospheres with air,
but under high ambient temperatures or and/or moderate heating may release
vapor in sufficient quantities to produce hazardous atmospheres with air. This
rating shall include solids and semisolids which readily give off flammable
vapors.
      SLIGHTLY COMBUSTIBLE:   Rating 1
         Materials that must be preheated before ignition can occur.
         Materials with this rating require considerable preheating, under all
ambient temperature conditions, before ignition and combustion can occur. This
rating shall include: Materials which will burn in air when exposed to a
temperature of 1,500°F (815°C) for a period of five minutes or less.
      NONCOMBUSTIBLE:   Rating 0
         This group should include any material which will not burn in air when
exposed to a temperature of 1,500°F (815°C) for a period of five minutes.
         The relative ratings are taken from NFPA 704M booklet, with changes in
flash point to reflect current IOTA regulations.
   TABLE A-3
   RELATIVE FLAMMABILITY CRITERIA
   (C)   Determination of degree of reactivity.
      (1)   The reactivity hazard rating of a material shall be determined by
evaluating the potential for harm and the relative reactivity of the material
or mixture of materials as a whole, using the criteria which follow.
      (2)   Materials in this category may be self-reactive by polymerization,
decomposition or condensation and/or reactive with other materials commonly
encountered in the work place. The reactivity in this category often involves
the rapid release of highly hazardous products. The assessment of relative
reactivity requires specific knowledge of what materials may be encountered in
the work place.
      EXTREMELY REACTIVE:   Rating 4
         Materials which in themselves are readily capable of detonation or of
explosive decomposition or explosive reaction at normal temperatures and
pressures. This rating would include materials which are sensitive to
mechanical or localized thermal shock at normal temperatures and pressures.
      HIGHLY REACTIVE:   Rating 3
         Materials which in themselves are capable of detonation or of
explosive decomposition or explosive reaction, but which require a strong
initiating source or which must be heated under confinement before initiation.
This rating should include materials which are sensitive to thermal or
mechanical shock at elevated temperatures and pressures or which react
explosively with water without requiring heat or confinement.
      MODERATELY REACTIVE:   Rating 2
         Materials which in themselves are normally unstable and readily
undergo rapid chemical change but do not detonate. This rating should include
materials which can undergo chemical change with rapid release of energy at
normal temperatures and pressure. It should also include those materials which
may react violently with water or which may form potentially explosive mixtures
with water.
      SLIGHTLY REACTIVE:   Rating 1
         Materials which in themselves are normally stable but which can become
unstable at elevated temperatures and pressures or which may react violently
with water with some release of energy but not violently.
      NONREACTIVE:   Rating 0
         Materials which in themselves are normally stable, even under fire
exposure conditions and which are not reactive with water.
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   STREET CLOSINGS AND VACATIONS
      
II.   STREET NAMING; CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS
      
III.   REZONINGS; CONDITIONS
      
IV.   ANNEXATIONS; BOUNDARY EXTENSIONS
      
V.   FRANCHISES; AGREEMENTS
      
VI.   MORATORIUMS
      
VII.   BUDGETS
      
VIII.   BONDS
      
IX.   TAXATION AND LEVIES
TABLE I: STREET CLOSINGS AND VACATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
961210   12-10-1996  Closing the portion of Jones Road from the intersection
                     with Henry Miller Drive to U.S. Highway 290
                     Vacating the portion of Jones Road from the intersection
961210A  12-10-1996  with Henry Miller Drive to U.S. Highway 290; abandoning
                     the right-of-way to the J.D. Weaver Family Limited
                     Partnership and the Miller family; quit-claiming fee title
081111   11-11-2008  Vacating a portion of Oakdale Drive
 
TABLE II: STREET NAMING; CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
26       2-19-1974   Accepting Sunset Trail, Clarmac Drive and Reese Road;
                     dedicating them to public use
761029   10-29-1976  Widening Jones Road; dedicating it for public use as a
                     public road
                     Ordering the paving and improvement of certain streets or
770412   4-12-1977   portions thereof; authorizing plans; fixing liens; and the
                     like
790612   6-12-1979   Widening Brodie Lane; dedicating it for public use as a
                     public road
790612A  6-12-1979   Widening State Highway 290; dedicating it for public use
                     as a public road
991019A  10-19-1999  Renaming Roadway B to “Ernest Robles Way”
 
TABLE III: REZONINGS; CONDITIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Rezoning 12.8631 acres out of and a part of Cullen Tract
910419   4-19-1991   Four from SF (Single-Family Residential) to O-Professional
                     and Business Office District
                     Rezoning a 24.106-acre tract of land owned by Charlotte
960618   6-18-1996   Weaver from SF (Single-Family Residential) to R2 (Retail-
                     2), with conditional overlays
961119   11-19-1996  Rezoning a 47.254 tract of land from SF (Single-Family
                     Residential) to R2 (Retail 2) with conditional overlays
                     Amendment; expanding the zoning of a 24.106-acre tract of
961119A  11-19-1996  land to include 29.185 acres of land; rezoning the lands
                     as R2 (Retail-2), with conditional overlays
                     Amendment; adjusting the conditional overlays concerning
970121A  1-21-1997   height for a 29.185-acre tract of land owned by the J.D.
                     Weaver Family Limited Partnership
                     Rezoning a 47.254-acre tract of land owned by the J.D.
971021   10-21-1997  Weaver Family Limited Partnership from SF (Single-Family
                     Residential) to R2 (Retail-2), with conditional overlays
                     Rezoning a 2.199-acre tract of land owned by Sam and Mary
980721A  7-21-1998   Kate Kelley from SF (Single-Family Residential) to NC
                     (Neighborhood Commercial)
                     Rezoning a 11.433-acre tract of land owned by the city
000606   6-6-2000    from SF (Single-Family Residential) to GUI (Governmental,
                     Utility and Institutional)
                     Rezoning a 1.012-acre tract of land owned by the city from
000606A  6-6-2000    SF (Single-Family Residential) to GUI (Governmental,
                     Utility and Institutional)
                     Rezoning a 21.894-acre tract of land owned by the city
000606B  6-6-2000    from SF (Single-Family Residential) to P (Parks,
                     Conservation Areas and Easements)
                     Rezoning a 40-acre tract of land owned by the city from SF
000606C  6-6-2000    (Single-Family Residential) to P (Parks, Conservation
                     Areas and Easements)
                     Rezoning a 2.195-acre tract of land owned by Sam and Mary
010605   6-5-2001    Kate Kelley from NC (Neighborhood Commercial) to HC
                     (Highway Commercial)
                     Amendment; rezoning Lot 2, Block F, Section 2, Sunset
060523   5-23-2006   Valley Village Subdivision; providing for conditional
                     overlays
                     Amendment; expanding the zoning of a 29.185-acre tract of
070522   5-22-2007   land to a 29.761-acre tract of land to R2 (Retail-2), with
                     conditional overlays
                     Rezoning Lot 44 of the Sunset Valley Meadows Subdivision,
070619   6-19-2007   Blocks D and E, Section 1, from SF (Single-Family
                     Residential) to G (Greenspace and Preservation)
                     Rezoning Lot 44 of the Sunset Valley Meadows Subdivision,
070619-A 6-19-2007   Blocks D and E, Section 1, from SF (Single-Family
                     Residential) to G (Greenspace and Preservation)
                     Rezoning a 11.288-acre tract of land out of the Theodore
-        5-6-2008    Bissell 18 Survey from SF (Single-Family Residential) to G
                     (Greenspace and Preservation)
                     Rezoning approximately 1.042 acre tract of land located on
110118   1-18-2011   U.S. Highway 290 West from SF-Single Family Residential to
                     Highway Commercial.
                     Amendment to Ord. 070522; rezoning a 29.761 acre tract of
111206-C 12-6-2011   land from R2-Retail-2, with conditional overlays, to
                     Highway Commercial, with conditional overlays
160524   5-24-2016   Rezoning the following:
                     3617 Country White Lane; Lot 1 Block A Country White
                     Subdivision 3.13 acres with house from Single-Family (SF
                     temporary due to annexation) to Single-Family (SF)
                     Lot 2 Block A Country White Subdivision - 3.23 acre tract
                     from Single-Family (SF temporary due to annexation) to
                     Conservation (C)
                     764 Oakdale Drive; Lot 2 Oakdale Estates - 11.288 acre
                   tract from Single-Family (SF) to Greenspace/Preservation
                     (G)
                     10 Sunset Trail - 1.209 acre vacant lot from Single-Family
                     (SF) to Greenspace/Preservation (G)
                     34 Reese Drive - 5.9375 acre tract at behind 32 Reese from
                     Single-Family (SF) to Greenspace/Preservation (G)
                     Lot 2 Nance Estates - 2.35 acre tract at the end of
                     Oakdale Drive from Single-Family (SF) to Greenspace/
                     Preservation (G)
                     Rezoning a 2.1-acre tract at 4800 U.S. Highway 290 West
201020-A 10-20-2020  owned by 2901 Manchaca Road Ltd. from SF (Single Family
                     Residential) to NO (Neighborhood Office with conditional
                     overlays)
                     Rezoning a 2.13-acre tract at 4812 U.S. Highway 290 West
201020-B 10-20-2020  owned by Patsy Allred Angeli from SF (Single Family
                     Residential) to NC (Neighborhood Commercial with
                     conditional overlays)
                     Rezoning a 4.976 acre tract at 6405 Brodie Lane owned by
220215   2-15-2022   the Estate of Betty Grubbs from SF (Single Family
                     Residential) to NC (Neighborhood Commercial with
                     conditional overlays)
                     Rezoning a 5.362 acre tract at 6107 Brodie Lane, owned by
230606-B 6-6-2023    the City of Sunset Valley from SF (Single Family
                     Residential) to P (Parkland)
                     Rezoning a 6.144 acre tract at 37 Lone Oak Trail, owned by
230606-C 6-6-2023    the City of Sunset Valley from SF (Single Family
                     Residential) to C (Conservation)
                    
 
TABLE IV: ANNEXATIONS; BOUNDARY EXTENSIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.    Date   Description
No.     Passed
-       10-21- Discontinuing and de-annexing three tracts of land from the corporate limits of
        1954   the city
-       1-31-  Discontinuing territory beginning at a point at the intersection of the north
        1956   line of Allred Lane and the west line of Fredericksburg Road
-       1-7-   Discontinuing territory beginning at the most northerly northeast corner of 4.8
        1957   acres of land, being out of the James Tremmell League
        8-16-  Annexing certain land, being part of the Theodore Bissell survey in the county,
7       1963   beginning at a point in the east line of Brodie Lane, which is located 200 feet
               northerly from the north line of Oakdale Drive
        8-16-  Annexing certain land, being part of the Theodore Bissell survey in the county,
8       1963   beginning at a point in the corner of the present city limit line, the east
               line of Lone Oak Drive (Fowler Road)
        8-22-  Annexing certain land, being part of the Theodore Bissell survey in the county,
9       1963   beginning at a point in the northwest corner of the tract conveyed to M.O.
               Behrens and the southwest corner of Mrs. Charlotte Weaver’s 280-acre tract
        8-22-  Annexing certain land, being part of the Theodore Bissell survey in the county,
10      1963   beginning at a point in the east line of Brodie Lane and the west line of Mrs.
               Charlotte Weaver’s 280-acre tract
        9-10-  Annexing certain land, being part of the Theodore Bissell survey in the county,
11      1963   beginning at a point in the north line of Jones Road in the northeasterly
               projection of a 23.85-acre tract of land
15      2-11-  De-annexing land beginning at a point at the intersection of the north line of
        1964   Jones Road and the east line of Sunset Trail
22      4-8-   Annexing a 10.57-acre tract of land and a 19.68-acre tract of land, both being
        1969   part of the Theodore Bissell survey in the county
7       8-16-  Extension of boundaries
        1983
861202  12-2-  Accepting a petition requesting the annexation of a 39.4203-acre tract of land
        1986   deeded to Theodore E. Becker
870804A 8-4-   Accepting a petition requesting the annexation of a 39.4202-acre tract of land
        1987   deeded to Theodore E. Becker
870818  8-18-  Setting date, time and place for hearing on annexation of property
        1987
870908  9-8-   Annexing vacant land or territory occupied by less than three voters; legally
        1987   described in Exhibit “A”, attached to the ordinance listed herein
        3-21-  Accepting a petition requesting the annex of two tracts of territory contiguous
890321  1989   to the City of Sunset Valley, which territory is not more than one-half mile in
               width
               Accepting a petition requesting the annex of territory contiguous to the City
890502  5-2-   of Sunset Valley, which territory is not more than one-half mile in width;
        1989   legally described in Attachment “A” and Attachment “B”, attached to the
               ordinance listed herein
        5-2-   Repealing Ord. 890321 and accepting a petition requesting annexation of
890502A 1989   territory contiguous to the city, which is not more than one-half mile in width
               legally described in Exhibit A, B and C
900911  9-11-  Amending Ord. 851119
        1990
910410A 4-10-  Amending the official Comprehensive Plan/Land Use Map
        1991
        1-20-  Annexing territory consisting of a 40-acre tract of land by agreement to adjust
980120A 1998   corporate boundary lines between the city and the City of Austin; legally
               described in Exhibit “A”, attached to the ordinance listed herein
980721  7-21-  Annexing vacant land or territory occupied by less than three voters; legally
        1998   described in Exhibit “A”, attached to the ordinance listed herein
001017  10-17- Annexing vacant land or territory occupied by less than three voters; legally
        2000   described in Exhibit “A”, attached to the ordinance listed herein
               Accepting a petition requesting an annexation for a 2.642-acre tract of land
010920  9-20-  out of the Thomas Anderson League Survey 17; setting the date, time and place
        2001   for hearing; directing the preparation of a service plan; authorizing and
               directing publication
011129  11-29- Annexing a territory occupied by less than three voters; legally described in
        2001   Exhibit “A”, attached to the ordinance listed herein
-       4-15-  Annexing two tracts of land consisting of a right-of-way
        2003
               Annexing 6.60 acres of land lying adjacent and contiguous to the city in Travis
150804  8-4-   County locally known as 3617 Country White Lane, and being more particularly
        2015   described by metes and bounds in Exhibit “A” attached to the ordinance listed
               herein, approving a service plan for the annexed area
              
 
TABLE V: FRANCHISES; AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.    Date   Description
No.     Passed
17      12-10- Granting a 25-year gas distribution franchise to Southern Union Gas Company
        1965
        3-10-  Approving the agreement between the city and the state for the maintenance,
23      1970   control, supervision and regulation of certain state highways and/or portions
               of the state highways
46      3-9-   Approving the agreement between the city and the county for the maintenance,
        1976   control, supervision and regulation of Jones Road
760831- 8-31-  Authorizing contract to purchase the water system serving the city from Leon
A       1976   Griffin; purchase of system
        11-21- Revising the rate schedules contained in the order of the Railroad Commission
781121  1978   of Texas in Gas Utilities Docket 827 for natural gas sold by Southern Union Gas
               Company
        2-6-   Revising the rate schedules contained in the order of the Railroad Commission
810206  1981   of Texas in Gas Utilities Docket 827 for natural gas sold by Southern Union Gas
               Company
               Approving the agreement between the state and the city for the installation,
810609  6-9-   construction, existence, use, operation and maintenance of highway signal
        1981   projects; locations described in Exhibit “1”, attached to the ordinance listed
               herein
820810  8-10-  Adopting the revised rate schedules for natural gas sold by Southern Union Gas
        1982   Company
841204  12-4-  Providing for a combination audit and weatherization kit program for Southern
        1984   Union Gas Company’s implementation; recovery of costs
850604  6-4-   Suspending the operation of proposed rate changes filed by Southern Union Gas
        1985   Company
850910  9-10-  Revising the retail and transportation rates charged by Southern Union Gas
        1985   Company
861216  12-16- Revising the retail rates charged by Southern Union Gas Company; initiating a
        1986   customer conservation program
870407  4-7-   Granting a one-year solid waste disposal franchise to Browning-Ferris
        1987   Industries; quality of service; termination of franchise
870804  8-4-   Approving Southern Union Gas Company’s utility service regulations
        1987
870901  9-1-   Revising the retail sales and charges of Southern Union Gas Company’s natural
        1987   gas
871103  11-3-  Determining the just and reasonable rates to be charged by Southern Union Gas
        1987   Company
880202A 2-2-   Revising the retail sales rates and charges of Southern Union Gas Company;
        1988   setting customer charges
93-06-  6-29-  Revising the rates charged by Southern Union Gas Company
29      1993
070712- 7-12-  Granting a 25-year gas service franchise to Texas Gas Service Company;
B       2007   providing regulations of conduct
110322  3-22-  Suspending the implementation of the interim rate adjustment by Texas Gas
        2011   Service Company
110517  5-17-  Approving interim rate adjustment of Texas Gas Service Company, a division of
        2011   Oneok, Inc.
130219- 2-19-  Suspending the implementation of the interim rate adjustment by Texas Gas
A       2013   Service Company
130521- 5-21-  Approving interim rate adjustment of Texas Gas Service Company, a division of
B       2013   Oneok, Inc.
150303- 3-3-   Suspending the implementation of the interim rate adjustment under § 104.301 of
A       2015   the Tex. Utilities Code by Texas Gas Service Company
150519- 5-19-  Approving implementation of the February 11, 2015 interim rate adjustment
A       2015   filing pursuant to the Tex. Utilities Code § 104.301 of Texas Gas Service
               Company, a division of Oneok, Inc.
               Granting to Texas Disposal Systems a solid waste franchise to operate motor
160607- 6-7-   vehicles upon the public streets of the city for the collection and removal of
A       2016   refuse from non-residential property; approving the franchise and contract
               attached as Exhibit A
161101  11-1-  Setting rates and establishing tariffs for the provision of natural gas service
        2016   by Texas Gas Service Company
170404  4-4-   Suspending the implementation of the interim rate adjustment under § 104.301 of
        2017   the Texas Utilities Code by Texas Gas Service Company
170606- 6-6-   Approving implementation of the March 1, 2017 interim rate adjustment filing
B       2017   pursuant to the Tex. Utilities Code § 104.301 of Texas Gas Service Company, a
               division of Oneok, Inc.
180403  4-3-   Suspending the implementation of the interim rate adjustment under § 104.301 of
        2018   the Texas Utilities Code by Texas Gas Service Company
190416- 4-16-  Suspending the proposed gas reliability infrastructure program interim rate
A       2019   adjustment of Texas Gas Service Company
              
 
TABLE VI: MORATORIUMS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Establishing a 60-day moratorium on any subsequently filed
941108   11-8-1994   applications file for change in zoning classification and
                     any application for site plan approval or building permits
                     filed after the effective date of the ordinance herein
980519A  5-19-1998   Imposing a moratorium on receiving an processing
                     applications for accessory buildings
                     Establishing a 90-day moratorium on any applications filed
-        11-4-2002   for site plan approval, watershed development, subdivision
                     plats and building permits that require a watershed permit
                     Providing for an additional 20-day suspension on any
030121   1-21-2003   applications filed for site plan approval, watershed
                     development, subdivision plats and building permits that
                     require a watershed permit
 
TABLE VII: BUDGETS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.  Date Passed Description
840918A   9-18-1984   Budget
841002    10-2-1984   Budget
850903A   9-3-1985    Budget
860916    9-16-1986   Budget
860925    9-25-1986   Budget
870915C   9-15-1987   Budget
880920    9-20-1988   Budget
880920A   9-20-1988   Budget
890502B   5-2-1989    Budget
890919    9-19-1989   Budget
900925    9-25-1990   Budget
910716B   7-16-1991   Budget
910930    9-30-1991   Budget
920421    4-21-1992   Budget
920602    6-2-1992    Budget
920929    9-29-1992   Budget
930928    9-28-1993   Budget
930928A   9-28-1993   Budget
940929    9-29-1994   Budget
941018    10-18-1994  Budget
950502    5-2-1995    Budget
950718A   7-18-1995   Budget
950802    8-2-1995    Budget
950822    8-22-1995   Budget
950905    9-5-1995    Budget
950930    9-30-1995   Budget
951019    10-19-1995  Budget
951019A   10-19-1995  Budget
951107B   11-7-1995   Budget
960402A   4-4-1996    Budget
960521    5-21-1996   Budget
960926    9-26-1996   Budget
970210    2-2-1997    Budget
970506    5-6-1997    Budget
970925    9-25-1997   Budget
970930A   9-30-1997   Budget
980811    8-11-1998   Budget
980915A   9-15-1998   Budget
010918    9-18-2001   Budget
010925    9-25-2001   Budget
-         1-16-2002   Budget
020917    9-17-2002   Budget
-         9-21-2004   Budget
-         9-21-2004   Budget
050929    9-29-2005   Budget
051018    10-18-2005  Budget
060404    4-4-2006    Budget
060418    4-18-2006   Budget
060516    5-16-2006   Budget
-         6-6-2006    Budget
060803    8-3-2006    Budget
060815    8-15-2006   Budget
-         9-19-2006   Budget
061121    11-21-2006  Budget
061121A   11-21-2006  Budget
070109    1-9-2007    Budget
070123    1-23-2007   Budget
070403B   4-3-2007    Budget
070501    5-1-2007    Budget
0705022-A 5-22-2007   Budget
070712-A  7-12-2007   Budget
-         8-8-2007    Budget
070808    8-8-2007    Budget
070904    9-4-2007    Budget
-         9-18-2007   Budget
070918    9-18-2007   Budget
070925    9-18-2007   Budget
070925-A  9-25-2007   Budget
071106    11-6-2007   Budget
071204    12-4-2007   Budget
-         4-15-2008   Budget
080415    4-15-2008   Budget
080520    5-20-2008   Budget
080722    8-5-2008    Budget
080805    8-5-2008    Budget
-         9-2-2008    Budget
080923-A  9-23-2008   Budget
-         12-9-2008   Budget
081209    12-9-2008   Budget
090407    4-7-2009    Budget
090505-C  5-5-2009    Budget
090609    6-9-2009    Budget
090915    9- -2009    Budget
091104    11-4-2009   Budget
100209    2-9-2010    Budget
100601    6-1-2010    Budget
100921-B  9-21-2010   Budget
110405  4-5-2011    Budget
110503    5-3-2011    Budget
110719    7-19-2011   Budget
110802    8-2-2011    Budget
110920-A  9-20-2011   Budget
111206-A  12-6-2011   Budget
111206-B  12-6-2011   Budget
120710-A  7-10-2012   Budget
120918-A  9-18-2012   Budget
130122-A  1-22-2013   Budget
130521-A  5-21-2013   Budget
130917    9-17-2013   Budget
140107  1-7-2014    Budget
140506-A  5-6-2014    Budget
140603-A  6-3-2014    Budget
140916-B  9-16-2014   Budget
141202  12-2-2014   Budget
150203    2-3-2015    Budget
150616-B  6-16-2015   Budget
150915-A  9-15-2015   Budget
151201-A  12-1-2015   Budget
151201-B  12-1-2015   Budget
160503    5-3-2016    Budget
160719-B  7-19-2016   Budget
160920-A  9-20-2016   Budget
170919-A  9-19-2017   Budget
171024    10-24-2017  Budget
171219    12-19-2017  Budget
180206    2-6-2018    Budget
180918-A  9-18-2018   Budget
181218-C  12-18-2018  Budget
190310    3-5-2019    Budget
190820    8-20-2019   Budget
190917    9-17-2019   Budget
201215    12-15-2020  Budget
210803    8-3-2021    Budget
210921    9-21-2021   Budget
211109-A  11-9-2021   Budget
211116-A  11-16-2021  Budget
211116-B  11-16-2021  Budget
211116-C  11-16-2021  Budget
211207    12-7-2021   Budget
220215-A  2-15-2022   Budget
220308    3-8-2022    Budget
220419-B  4-19-2022   Budget
220419-C  4-19-2022   Budget
220517-A  5-17-2022   Budget
220517-B  5-17-2022   Budget
220517-C  5-17-2022   Budget
220607    6-7-2022    Budget
220719    7-19-2022   Budget
220816    8-16-2022   Budget
220906-A  9-6-2022    Budget
220927-A  9-27-2022   Budget
220927-B  9-27-2022   Budget
221018-B  10-18-2022  Budget
221101-A  11-1-2022   Budget
230117    1-17-2023   Budget
230307    3-7-2023    Budget
230321    3-21-2023   Budget
230404    4-4-2023    Budget
230919-A  9-19-2023   Budget
231219-A  12-19-2023  Budget
231219-B  12-19-2023  Budget
240116-A  1-16-2024   Budget
240116-B  1-16-2024   Budget
240116-D  1-16-2024   Budget
240206-C  2-6-2024    Budget
240416-A  4-16-2024   Budget
240416-B  4-16-2024   Budget
240416-C  4-16-2024   Budget
240416-D  4-16-2024   Budget
240521-B  5-21-2024   Budget
240604-B  6-4-2024    Budget
240604-C  6-4-2024    Budget
240806-A  8-6-2024    Budget
240806-B  8-6-2024    Budget
240903-B  9-3-2024    Budget
241015    10-15-2024  Budget
241203-A  12-3-2024   Budget
241203-B  12-3-2024   Budget
250107-A  1-7-2025    Budget
250304-B  3-4-2025    Budget
250401-B  4-1-2025    Budget
250401-C  4-1-2025    Budget
250506    5-6-2025    Budget
250603-C  6-3-2025    Budget
250805-A  8-5-2025    Budget
250916    9-16-2025   Budget
251202-A  12-2-2025   Budget
                     
 
TABLE VIII: BONDS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
-        --          Intending to issue waterworks system revenue bonds;
                     $125,000
30       6-17-1974   Intending to issue waterworks system revenue bonds;
                     $125,000
32       7-8-1974    Authorizing the issuance of waterworks system bonds;
                     $125,000
76-08010 8-10-1976   Intending to issue waterworks system revenue bonds;
                     $125,000
76-08-31 8-31-1976   Authorizing the issuance of waterworks system bonds;
                     $125,000
960123   1-23-1996   Ordering an election for the purpose of authorizing
                     general obligation bonds in the amount of $5,000,000
                    
 
TABLE IX: TAXATION AND LEVIES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.  Date Passed Description
31        12-10-1974  Election on adoption of local sales and use tax
780907    9-7-1978    Exempting from local sales and use tax
840918    9-18-1984   Tax levy
850917    9-17-1985   Tax levy
861021    10-21-1986  Tax levy
870922    9-22-1987   Tax levy
880920B   9-20-1998   Tax levy
890919A   9-19-1989   Tax levy
891219B   12-19-1989  Taxation of property exempt
900925A   9-25-1990   Tax levy
910930A   9-30-1991   Tax levy
920929A   9-29-1992   Tax levy
930928B   9-28-1993   Tax levy
940929A   9-29-1994   Tax levy
950930A   9-30-1995   Tax levy
960926A   9-26-1996   Tax levy
970925A   9-25-1997   Tax levy
980602    6-2-1998    Ratifying Ordinance 970925A
980915B   9-15-1998   Tax levy
001205    12-5-2000   Reinstate local tax exemption
010703A   7-3-2001    Election on adoption of local sales and use tax
010925A   9-25-2001   Tax levy
021015    10-15-2002  Tax levy
–       9-21-2004   Tax levy
050705    7-4-2005    Election on adoption of local sales and use tax
050929A   9-29-2005   Tax levy
060117    1-17-2006   Repealing Ordinance 051130
060919A   9-19-2006   Tax levy
07925-A   9-18-2007   Tax levy
070808-A  9-19-2007   Election on adoption of local sales and use tax
–       9- -2008    Tax levy
080923    9-23-2008   Tax levy
080923-B  9-23-2008   Tax levy
090203-A  2-3-2009    Election on adoption of local sales and use tax
090915-A  9-15-2009   Tax levy
100921    9-21-2010   Tax levy
110920-B  9-20-2011   Tax levy
120918-B  9-18-2012   Tax levy
130917-A  9-17-2013   Tax levy
140916-C  9-16-2014   Tax levy
150915-B  9-15-2015   Tax levy
160920-B  9-20-2016   Tax levy
170919-B  9-19-2017   Tax levy
180918-B  9-18-2018   Tax levy
190917-A  9-17-2019   Tax levy
200915-A  9-15-2020   Tax levy
210921-A  9-21-2021   Tax levy
22-0927-C 9-27-2022   Tax levy
230919-B  9-19-2023   Tax levy
240903-C  9-3-2024    Tax levy
250916-C  9-16-2025   Tax levy
                     
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Texas Codes
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO TEXAS CODES
Tex. Administrative Code Code Section
Tex. Administrative Code            Code Section
Title 4, Subch. D                   93.70
                                    93.70;
Title 25, Part 1, Ch. 229, Subch. K 93.71;
                                    93.78
Title 25, Part 1, Ch. 229, Subch. N 93.71
Title 25, Subsection K              93.71
Title 25, § 229.176                93.73
Title 31, §§ 313.1 —313.27      150.471
Title 37, § 13.161                 37.16
                                    
 
 
Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code Code Section
                             150.103;
Ch. 22                       150.177;
                             150.179
                             
 
 
Tex. Business and Commerce Code Code Section
604A.0021                       32.25
                                
 
Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure Code Section
Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure Code Section
18.17                           37.15
Art. 102.011(a)                 10.99
Art. 102.017                    32.02
Art. 102.017(d-1)               32.02
Art. 102.0172                   32.02
Art. 102.0172(d)                32.03
                                
 
 
Tex. Education Code Code Section
Art. 61.003         112.02
                    
 
Tex. Gov’t CodCode Section
Tex. Gov’t CodCode Section
Ch. 418         31.02;
                33.02
Ch. 552         31.72
Ch. 573         31.72
853.502         34.02
853.502(b)      34.02
853.503         34.02
853.505         34.02
2054.003        37.01
                
 
Tex. Health and Safety Code Code Section
Tex. Health and Safety Code Code Section
Ch. 146                     150.006
Ch. 342                     93.30;
                            93.36
342.004                     93.30
342.006                     93.36
431.042                     93.99
Ch. 437                     93.78
437.020(c)                  93.78
437.0203                    93.78
437.0203(c)                 93.78
Chs. 481—485              37.16
Ch. 756                     150.425
                            
 
 
Tex. Human Resources Code   Code Section
Title 8, §§ 123.001 et seq150.006
                            
 
 
Tex. Ins. Code        Code Section
5.43-4 § 1(2) and (3)97.01
                      
 
Tex. Loc. Gov’t CodCode Section
Tex. Loc. Gov’t CodCode Section
5.001                11.01
Ch. 21, Subch. B     31.75
21.002               31.02
Ch. 22               31.59
22.041               31.02
22.073               31.58
22.075               31.55
52.011               Ch. 71, Sch. II;
                     110.05
Ch. 53               10.01
54.001               10.99
Ch. 102              32.17
Ch. 211              150.045;
                     150.046
211.004              150.006
211.008              150.060
Ch. 212              150.265;
                     150.320
212.002              150.440
216.903              150.701;
                     150.721
Ch. 245              150.013
245.002              150.014
Ch. 284              54.02;
                     54.06
284.003              54.05
284.054              54.08
284.055              54.10
284.106              54.05
                     53.01;
Ch. 552, Subch. C    53.02;
                     53.15;
                     53.16
552.053              53.02
Ch. 580              53.22
                     
 
 
Tex. Occupations Code Code Section
Ch. 2303              110.02
                      
 
 
Tex. Parks and Wildlife Code Code Section
                             90.01;
Ch. 31                       90.04;
                             98.01
                             
 
 
Tex. Penal Code Code Section
                
 
 
Tex. Property Code           Code Section
Title 2, Ch. 5, Subchapter D 150.801
92.010                       150.801;
                             150.802
                             
 
 
 
Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Code Section
itle 28              11.01
Art. 601b            92.07
Art. 961             11.01
Art. 2368a           92.07
Art. 6701d § 2(d)   70.03
                     
 
Tex. Tax Code Code Section
Tex. Tax Code   Code Section
Ch. 3           150.801
11.13(d)        32.23
11.13(e)        32.23
11.43           32.23
Ch. 25          32.21
26.04(a)        32.21
26.05           32.22
26.06           32.22
321.002 et seq. 113.02
Ch. 351         31.35
351.101(c)–(j)112.06
                
 
Tex. Transportation Code Code Section
Tex. Transportation Code Code Section
111.002                  92.07
111.057                  92.07
311.008                  150.418
Ch. 391                  150.730
                         90.01;
Ch. 501                  90.04;
                         98.01;
                         98.03
544.002                  Ch. 71, Sch. III
544.003                  Ch. 71, Sch. II
544.004                  Ch. 71, Sch. III
545.425(b-2)             99.03
Ch. 683                  90.04
Ch. 683, Subch. E        98.01
683.012                  90.04
                         
 
 
Tex. Utilities Code Code Section
181.041             150.426
                    
 
 
Tex. Water Code Code Section
13.043(b)       53.21
16.315          150.360
                
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.  Date Passed Code Section
–       --          TSO VIII
851119    --          TSO IV
980519    - -         91.01
051130    - -         TSO IX
–       10-21-1954  TSO IV
–       1-31-1956   TSO IV
–       1-7-1957    TSO IV
7         8-16-1963   TSO IV
8         8-16-1963   TSO IV
9         8-22-1963   TSO IV
10        8-22-1963   TSO IV
11        9-10-1963   TSO IV
15        2-11-1964   TSO IV
17        12-10-1965  TSO V
22        4-8-1969    TSO IV
23        3-10-1970   TSO V
26        2-19-1974   TSO II
27        3-12-1974   11.01
30        6-17-1974   TSO VIII
32        7-8-1974    TSO VIII
31        12-10-1974  TSO IX
43        1-13-1976   Ch. 71, Sch. II
46        3-9-1976    TSO V
76-08010  8-10-1976   TSO VIII
                      93.50—
76-8-10A  8-10-1976   93.53;
                      93.99
76-08-31  8-31-1976   TSO VIII
760831-A  8-31-1976   TSO V
761029    10-29-1976  TSO II
770412    4-12-1977   TSO II
77-09-13B 9-13-1977   Ch. 71, Sch. II
780711C   7-11-1978   93.01;
                      93.99
780907    9-7-1978    TSO IX
781010    10-10-1978  Ch. 71, Sch. IV
781121    11-21-1978  TSO V
790410A   4-10-1979   Ch. 71, Sch. I
790612    6-12-1979   TSO II
790612A   6-12-1979   TSO II
800624    6-24-1980   32.01
810206    2-6-1981    TSO V
810310    3-10-1981   94.05;
                      94.99
810609    6-9-1981    TSO V
820209    2-9-1982    32.15—
                      32.24
820810    8-10-1982   TSO V
820914    9-14-1982   94.04;
                      94.99
830412B   4-12-1983   31.56
7         8-16-1983   TSO IV
840918    9-18-1994   TSO IX
840918A   9-18-1984   TSO VII
841002    10-2-1984   TSO VII
841204    12-4-1984   TSO V
850212A   2-12-1985   31.38
850604    6-4-1985    TSO V
850806    8-6-1985    Ch. 71, Sch. II
850903    9-3-1985    Ch. 71, Sch. II
850903A   9-3-1985    TSO VII
850910    9-10-1985   TSO V
850917    9-17-1985   TSO IX
851112A   11-12-1985  30.14
860916    9-16-1986   TSO VII
860925    9-25-1986   TSO VII
861021    10-21-1986  TSO IX
861202    12-2-1986   TSO IV
861216    12-16-1986  TSO V
870217    2-17-1987   10.99
870217B   2-17-1987   31.55
870407    4-7-1987    TSO V
87-0602   6-2-1987    Ch. 71, Sch. I
870707    7-7-1987    113.01—
                      113.06
870721    7-21-1987   94.05;
                      94.99
870804    8-4-1987    TSO V
870804A   8-4-1987    TSO IV
870818    8-18-1987   TSO IV
870901    9-1-1987    TSO V
870901A   9-1-1987    34.01
870908    9-8-1987    TSO IV
870915A   9-15-1987   10.99
870915C   9-15-1987   TSO VII
870922    9-22-1987   TSO IX
                      130.01—
871006A   10-6-1987   130.04;
                      130.99
871103    11-3-1987   TSO V
                      92.01—
880202    2-2-1988    92.08;
                      92.99
880202A   2-2-1988    TSO V
880301    3-1-1988    Ch. 71, Sch. I
880920    9-20-1988   TSO VII
880920A   9-20-1988   TSO VII
880920B   9-20-1988   TSO IX
890321    3-21-1989   TSO IV
890502    5-2-1989    TSO VII
890502A   5-2-1989    TSO IV
890919    9-19-1989   TSO VII
890919A   9-19-1989   TSO IX
891003A   10-3-1989   10.99
                      92.01—
891219    12-18-1989  92.08;
                      92.99
891219    12-19-1989  TSO IX
900220    2-20-1990   40.10—
                      40.17
900731    7-31-1990   30.01
910410A   4-10-1991   TSO IX
900925    9-25-1990   TSO VII
900925A   9-25-1990   TSO IX
901211    12-11-1990  39.01—
                      39.14
                      38.01—
910108A   1-22-1991   38.08;
                      38.99
910419    4-19-1991   TSO III
                      97.01—
910618A   6-18-1991   97.06;
                      97.99
                      96.01—
910716A   7-16-1991   96.08;
                      96.99
900911    9-11-1991   TSO IV
910930    9-30-1991   TSO VII
910930A   9-30-1991   TSO IX
911105    11-5-1991   10.99
920107A   1-7-1992    70.03
920204A   2-4-1992    70.02
920421    4-21-1992   TSO VII
920407  5- -1992    93.03
920602    6-2-1992    TSO VII
9206156   6-16-1992   10.99
920929    9-29-1992   TSO VII
920929A   9-29-1992   TSO IX
93-06-29  6-29-1993   TSO V
930928    9-28-1993   TSO VII
930928A   9-28-1993   TSO VII
930928A   9-28-1993   TSO IX
940315A   3-15-1994   Ch. 71 Sch. I;
                      Ch. 71, Sch. III
940315B   3-15-1994   Ch. 71 Sch. I;
                      Ch. 71, Sch. II
940315C   3-15-1994   37.15;
                      37.16
940712A   7-12-1994   Ch. 71, Sch. I
940929    9-29-1994   TSO VII
940929A   9-29-1994   TSO IX
941018    10-18-1994  TSO VII
941108    11-8-1994   TSO IV
                      33.01—
950307    3-7-1995    33.09;
                      33.99
950502    5-2-1995    TSO VII
950718A   7-18-1995   TSO VII
950802    8-2-1995    TSO VII
950822    8-22-1995   TSO VII
950905    9-5-1995    TSO VII
950905A   9-5-1995    Ch. 72, Sch. I
950930    9-30-1995   TSO VII
950930A   9-30-1995   TSO IX
951019    10-19-1995  TSO VII
951019A   10-19-1995  TSO VII
951107B   11-7-1995   TSO VII
951107C   11-7-1995   Ch. 71, Sch, III;
                      Ch. 72, Sch. I
960123    1-23-1996   TSO VIII
960123A   1-23-1996   40.01
                      95.01—
960220    2-20-1996   95.15;
                      95.99
960402A   4-4-1996    TSO VII
960521    5-21-1996   TSO VII
960618    6-18-1996   TSO III
960926    9-26-1996   TSO VII
960926A   9-26-1996   TSO IX
961119    11-19-1996  TSO III
961119A   11-19-1996  TSO III
961210    12-10-1996  TSO I
961210A   12-10-1996  TSO I
970121A   1-21-1997   TSO III
970210    2-2-1997    TSO VII
                      51.001—
                      51.008;
                      51.020—
                      51.026;
                      51.040—
                      51.044;
                      51.060—
                      51.067;
                      51.080—
970318A   3-18-1997   51.090;
                      51.105—
                      51.123;
                      51.135—
                      51.139;
                      51.150—
                      51.155;
                      51.170—
                      51.178;
                      51.999
970506    5-6-1997    TSO VII
970925    9-25-1997   TSO VII
970925A   9-25-1997   TSO IX
970930    9-30-1997   34.02
970930A   9-30-1997   TSO VII
971021    10-21-1997  TSO III
980120A   1-20-1998   TSO IV
                      38.01—
980407    4-7-1998    38.08;
                      38.99
980413    4-13-1998   11.02
980519A   5-19-1998   TSO VI
980602    6-2-1998    TSO IX
                      91.01—
980707    7-7-1998    91.03;
                      91.99
980721    7-21-1998   TSO IV
980721A   7-21-1998   TSO III
980811    8-11-1998   TSO VII
                      93.30—
980915    9-15-1998   93.39;
                      93.99
980915A   9-15-1998   TSO VII
980915B   9-15-1998   TSO IX
990216    2-16-1999   Ch. 71, Sch. III;
                      Ch. 72, Sch. I
990504    5-4-1999    90.01—
                      90.07
                      37.01—
                      37.03,
990706    7-6-1999    37.05—
                      37.08;
                      37.99
990907A   9-7-1999    10.99
                      Ch. 71, Sch. I;
991019A   10-19-1999  Ch. 71, Sch. II;
                      TSO II
                      112.01—
000215    2-15-2000   112.07;
                      112.99
000606    6-6-2000    TSO III
000606A   6-6-2000    TSO III
000606B   6-6-2000    TSO III
000606C   6-6-2000    TSO III
001017    10-17-2000  TSO IV
001205    12-5-2000   TSO IX
010403    4-3-2001    94.03;
                      94.99
010605    6-5-2001    TSO III
010619    6-19-2001   34.02
010703A   7-3-2001    TSO IX
010918    9-18-2001   TSO VII
010920    9-20-2001   TSO IV
010925    9-25-2001   TSO VII
010925A   9-25-2001   TSO IX
011129    11-29-2001  TSO IV
–       1-16-2002   TSO VII
                      Ch. 71, Sch. I;
020820    8-20-2002   Ch. 71, Sch. II;
                      Ch. 71, Sch. III;
                      Ch. 72, Sch. I
020820A   8-20-2002   Ch. 71, Sch. I;
                      Ch. 71, Sch. II
                      Ch. 71, Sch. I;
020820B   8-20-2002   Ch. 71, Sch. II;
                      Ch. 71, Sch. V
020917    9-17-2002   TSO VII
021015    10-15-2002  TSO IX
030902    9-2-2003    93.02
–       11-4-2002   TSO VI
030121    1-21-2003   TSO VI
–       4-15-2003   TSO IV
040720    7-20-2004   Ch. 71, Sch. I;
                      Ch. 71, Sch. III
–       9-21-2004   TSO VII;
                      TSO IX
–       --2005      50.01;
                      50.99
050705    7-4-2005    TSO IX
050929    9-29-2005   TSO VII
050929A   9-29-2005   TSO IX
051018    10-18-2005  TSO VII
060117    1-17-2006   TSO IX
060404    4-4-2006    TSO VII
060418    4-18-2006   TSO VII
060516    5-16-2006   TSO VII
060523    5-23-2006   TSO III
–       6-6-2006    TSO VII
060803    8-3-2006    TSO VII
060815    8-15-2006   TSO VII
–       9-19-2006   TSO VII
060919A   9-19-2006   TSO IX
061121    11-21-2006  TSO VII
061121A   11-21-2006  TSO VII
070808    --          TSO IX
070109    1-9-2007    TSO VII
070123    1-23-2007   TSO VII
070403B   4-3-2007    TSO VII
070501    5-1-2007    TSO VII
070522    5-22-2007   TSO III
0705022-A 5-22-2007   TSO VII
070619    6-19-2007   TSO III
070619-A  6-19-2007   TSO III
070619-B  6-19-2007   31.15—
                      31.22
070712    7-12-2007   50.15—
                      50.21
070712-A  7-12-2007   TSO VII
070712-B  7-12-2007   TSO V
070717    7-17-2007   31.35
                      93.15—
070731    7-31-2007   93.18;
                      93.99
–       8-8-2007    TSO VII
070808    8-8-2007    TSO VII
070904    9-4-2007    TSO VII
–       9-18-2007   TSO VII
070918    9-18-2007   TSO VII
070918-B  9-18-2007   70.01;
                      70.99
070925    9-18-2007   TSO VII
07925A    9-18-2007   TSO IX
070925-A  9-25-2007   TSO VII
071106    11-6-2007   TSO VII
071204    12-4-2007   TSO VII
080318    3-18-2008   30.30—
                      30.35
080318-A  3-18-2008   35.01—
                      35.04
–       4-15-2008   TSO VII
080415    4-15-2008   TSO VII
–       5-6-2008    TSO III
080520    5-20-2008   TSO VII
080610-A  6-10-2008   Ch. 71, Sch. I
080624-A  6-24-2008   30.01—
                      30.17
080708    7-8-2008    94.02;
                      94.99
080722    8-5-2008    TSO VII
080805    8-5-2008    TSO VII
–       9- -2008    TSO IX
–       9-2-2008    TSO VII
080923    9-23-2008   TSO IX
080923-A  9-23-2008   TSO VII
080923-B  9-23-2008   TSO IX
081111    11-11-2008  TSO I
–       12-9-2008   TSO VII
081209    12-9-2008   TSO VII
                      110.01—
                      110.06;
090127    1-27-2009   110.20—
                      110.23;
                      110.99
090203    2-3-2009    TSO IX
090407    4-7-2009    TSO VII
090421-A  4-21-2009   Ch. 72, Sch. I
090505    5-5-2009    TSO VII
090609    6-9-2009    TSO VII
090721    7-21-2009   30.01—
                      30.17
090915    9- -2009    TSO VII
090915-A  9-15-2009   TSO IX
091104    11-4-2009   TSO VII
100209    2-9-2010    TSO VII
100601    6-1-2010    TSO VII
100706    7-6-2010    30.01—
                      30.17
100706-A  7-6-2010    34.01;
                      31.59
100706-B  7-6-2010    31.15—
                      31.22
100622    6-22-2010   50.01;
                      50.99
100622A   6-22-2010   31.35
                      53.01—
100907    9-21-2010   53.04;
                      Ch. 53, App. A
100921    9-21-2010   TSO IX
100921-A  9-21-2010   53.15—
                      53.23
100921-B  9-21-2010   TSO VII
110118    1-18-2011   TSO III
110301-A  3-1-2011    Ch. 72, Sch. I
                      111.01—
                      111.11;
                      111.20;
110301-B  3-1-2011    111.21;
                      111.30—
                      111.32;
                      111.99
110322    3-22-2011   TSO V
110322-A  3-22-2011   Adopting Ordinance
110322-B  3-22-2011   Ch. 71, Sch. V
110405    4-5-2011    TSO VII
110419-A  4-19-2011   31.18
110419-B  4-19-2011   50.22
110503    5-3-2011    TSO VII
110517    5-17-2011   TSO V
110621    6-21-2011   50.01
110705    7-5-2011    30.09
110719    7-19-2011   TSO VII
110802    8-2-2011    TSO VII
110920-A  9-20-2011   TSO VII
110920-B  9-20-2011   TSO IX
111101-A  11-1-2011   50.01
111206-A  12-6-2011   TSO VII
111206-B  12-6-2011   TSO VII
111206-C  12-6-2011   TSO III
120508    5-8-2012    31.70—
                      31.75
120710-A  7-10-2012   TSO VII
120710-B  7-10-2012   30.07;
                      30.09
120918-A  9-18-2012   TSO VII
120918-B  9-18-2012   TSO IX
                      93.70—
120918-D  9-18-2012   93.81;
                      93.99
121023    10-23-2012  50.01
121211    12-11-2012  30.18
130122-A  1-22-2013   TSO VII
130122-B  1-22-2013   41.01—
                      41.07
130205    2-5-2013    31.38
130219-A  2-19-2013   TSO V
130219-C  2-19-2013   93.60—
                      93.63
130305-B  3-5-2013    Ch. 71, Sch. VI
130521-A  5-21-2013   TSO VII
130521-B  5-21-2013   TSO V
                      98.01—
130521-C  5-21-2013   98.05;
                      98.99
130820    8-20-2013   96.05;
                      96.07
130917    9-17-2013   TSO VII
130917-A  9-17-2013   TSO IX
131203-A  12-3-2013   31.19
                      93.70—
131203-C  12-3-2013   93.75;
                      93.78
140107    1-7-2014    TSO VII
140204    2-4-2014    50.01
140506-A  5-6-2014    TSO VII
140603-A  6-3-2014    TSO VII
140617    6-17-2014   50.01
                      38.01—
140617-B  6-17-2014   38.08;
                      38.99
140805    8-5-2014    31.17
140916-A  9-16-2014   93.60—
                      93.63
140916-B  9-16-2014   TSO VII
140916-C  9-16-2014   TSO IX
141202    12-2-2014   TSO VII
                      31.17;
141217-B  12-17-2014  31.18;
                      31.19
                      94.01—
141217-C  12-17-2014  94.06;
                      94.99
150203    2-3-2015    TSO VII
150303-A  3-3-2015    TSO V
                      95.01—
150303-B  3-3-2015    95.15;
                      95.99
150505    5-5-2015    94.07;
                      94.08
150519-A  5-19-2015   TSO V
150616-B  6-16-2015   TSO VII
150616-C  6-16-2015   94.09;
                      94.10
150804    8-4-2015    TSO IV
150915-A  9-15-2015   TSO VII
150915-B  9-15-2015   TSO IX
151201-A  12-1-2015   TSO VII
151201-B  12-1-2015   TSO VII
                      30.01—
160112    1-12-2016   30.03;
                      30.34
160405-A  4-5-2016    Ch. 71, Sch. I
160405-B  4-5-2016    Ch. 72, Sch. I
160503    5-3-2016    TSO VII
160607-A  6-7-2016    TSO V
                      99.01—
160621    6-27-2016   99.03;
                      99.99
160719-B  7-19-2016   TSO VII
160719-D  7-19-2016   30.32
160802    8-2-2016    37.01—
                      37.08
160920-A  9-20-2016   TSO VII
160920-B  9-20-2016   TSO IX
161011  10-11-2016  Ch. 71, Sch. V
161101    11-1-2016   TSO V
170110-A  1-10-2017   31.15—
                      31.19
170124    1-24-2017   31.55;
                      31.56
170404  4-4-2017    TSO V
170516-B  5-16-2017   Ch. 72, Sch. I
170606-B  6-6-2017    TSO V
170606-C  6-6-2017    31.19
                      96.01—
170606-D  6-6-2017    96.08;
                      96.99
170620-A  6-20-2017   93.70
170620-B  6-20-2017   35.02;
                      35.03
170718-C  7-18-2017   94.06
170919-A  9-19-2017   TSO VII
170919-B  9-19-2017   TSO IX
171024  10-24-2017  TSO VII
171219  12-19-2017  TSO VII
180206    2-6-2018    TSO VII
180206-A  2-6-2018    32.25
180403    4-3-2018    TSO V
180515    5-15-2018   54.01—
                      54.11
1806-5-A  6-5-2018    91.01;
                      91.04
180619  6-19-2018   Ch. 72, Sch. I
180717    7-17-2018   Ch. 72, Sch. I
                      100.01—
180807    8-7-2018    100.06;
                      100.99
180821    8-21-2018   93.75
180918-A  9-18-2018   TSO VII
180918-B  9-18-2018   TSO IX
181023-A  10-23-2018  93.75
181218-B  12-18-2018  31.17
181218-C  12-18-2018  TSO VII
190108-A  1-8-2019    31.15
190108-B  1-8-2019    93.75
190310    3-5-2019    TSO VII
190416-A  4-16-2019   TSO V
190416-B  4-16-2019   32.02
190416-C  4-16-2019   32.03
190521    5-21-2019   31.59
190604    6-4-2019    96.04,
                      96.05
                      31.01—
190702-C  7-2-2019    31.03;
                      31.14—
                      31.16
190716    7-16-2019   Ch. 72, Sch. I
190820    8-20-2019   TSO VII
190917    9-17-2019   TSO VII
190917-A  9-17-2019   TSO IX
191029-B  10-29-2019  30.10,
                      30.12
                      31.16—
                      31.20;
200204    2-4-2020    31.35;
                      31.55;
                      31.57;
                      31.60
200901    9-1-2020    31.59
200915-A  9-15-2020   TSO IX
201020-A  10-20-2020  TSO III
201020-B  10-20-2020  TSO III
201215    12-15-2020  TSO VII
210105    1-5-2021    31.17
210406    4-6-2021    42.01,
                      42.02
210803    8-3-2021    TSO VII
210921    9-21-2021   TSO VII
210921-A  9-21-2021   TSO IX
211005    10-5-2021   31.19,
                      31.35
211109-A  11-9-2021   TSO VII
211109-B  11-9-2021   150.332
211116-A  11-16-2021  TSO VII
211116-B  11-16-2021  TSO VII
211116-C  11-16-2021  TSO VII
211207    12-7-2021   TSO VII
220215    2-15-2022   TSO III
220215-A  2-15-2022   TSO VII
220308    3-8-2022    TSO VII
220419-A  4-19-2022   31.17;
                      31.35
220419-B  4-19-2022   TSO VII
220419-C  4-19-2022   TSO VII
220503    5-3-2022    31.17
220517-A  5-17-2022   TSO VII
220517-B  5-17-2022   TSO VII
220517-C  5-17-2022   TSO VII
220607    6-7-2022    TSO VII
220621-B  6-21-2022   150.800—
                      150.811
220719    7-19-2022   TSO VII
220816    8-16-2022   TSO VII
220906-A  9-6-2022    TSO VII
220906-B  9-6-2022    150.14;
                      150.019
220927-A  9-27-2022   TSO VII
220927-B  9-27-2022   TSO VII
220927-C  9-27-2022   TSO IX
221018-A  10-18-2022  42.01,
                      42.02
221018-B  10-18-2022  TSO VII
221101-A  11-1-2022   TSO VII
221101-B  11-1-2022   31.59
230117    1-17-2023   TSO VII
230307    3-7-2023    TSO VII
230321    3-21-2023   TSO VII
230404    4-4-2023    TSO VII
230606-B  6-6-2023    TSO III
230606-C  6-6-2023    TSO III
230905-C  9-5-2023    31.36
230905-D  9-5-2023    Ch.71, Sch. II
230919-A  9-19-2023   TSO VIII
230919-B  9-19-2023   TSO IX
231017-A  10-17-2023  42.01,
                      42.02
231017-B  10-17-2023  30.01
231219-A  12-19-2023  TSO VIII
231219-B  12-19-2023  TSO VIII
231219-C  12-19-2023  94.06
240116-A  1-16-2024   TSO VII
240116-B  1-16-2024   TSO VII
240116-C  1-16-2024   31.19,
                      31.35
240116-D  1-16-2024   TSO VII
240206-A  2-6-2024    31.55,
                      31.58
240206-B  2-6-2024    Ch. 71, Sch. II
240206-C  2-6-2024    TSO VII
240416-A  4-16-2024   TSO VII
240416-B  4-16-2024   TSO VII
240416-C  4-16-2024   TSO VII
240416-D  4-16-2024   TSO VII
240507    5-7-2024    150.066
240521-A  5-21-2024   42.01,
                      42.02
240521-B  5-21-2024   TSO VII
240604-B  6-4-2024    TSO VII
240604-C  6-4-2024    TSO VII
240806-A  8-6-2024    TSO VII
240806-B  8-6-2024    TSO VII
240903-B  9-3-2024    TSO VII
240903-C  9-3-2024    TSO IX
241015    10-15-2024  TSO VII
241203-A  12-3-2024   TSO VII
241203-B  12-3-2024   TSO VII
241203-C  12-3-2024   150.101
250107-A  1-7-2025    TSO VII
250107-B  1-7-2025    42.02
250304-A  3-4-2025    Ch.72, Sch. I
250304-B  3-4-2025    TSO VII
                      31.17,
250401-A  4-1-2025    31.20,
                      31.35
250401-B  4-1-2025    TSO VII
250401-C  4-1-2025    TSO VII
250506    5-6-2025    TSO VII
250520    5-20-2025   150.106,
                      150.400
250603-C  6-3-2025    TSO VII
250603-D  6-3-2025    31.15,
                      31.40
250805-A  8-5-2025    TSO VII
250916    9-16-2025   TSO VII
250916-C  9-16-2025   TSO IX
251202-A  12-2-2025   TSO VII
251202-B  12-2-2025   Ch. 72, Sch. I
                     
 
