DESHLER, NEBRASKA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-1 Supplement Contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 986, passed 11-4-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO. 979
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF DESHLER, THAYER COUNTY, NEBRASKA, TO ADOPT A NEW
CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF DESHLER, NEBRASKA; TO REPEAL THE PRIOR CODE;
TO REQUIRE FILINGS; TO PROVIDE FOR PUBLICATION; AND TO PROVIDE AN EFFECTIVE
DATE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF DESHLER, THAYER
COUNTY, NEBRASKA:
   Section 1.   The general ordinances of the City of Deshler, Thayer County,
Nebraska, are hereby revised, adopted, codified, and published as a Code of
Ordinances, composed of the following chapters:
                     Chapter 1:      Administrative
                     Chapter 2:      Commissions and Boards
                     Chapter 3:      Departments
                     Chapter 4:      Health and Sanitation
                     Chapter 5:      Traffic Regulations
                     Chapter 6:      Police Regulations
                     Chapter 7:      Fire Regulations
                     Chapter 8:      Public Ways and Property
                     Chapter 9:      Building Regulations
                     Chapter 10:      Business Regulations
                     Chapter 11:      Municipal Planning
                     Chapter 12:      Wireless Facilities
   Section 2.   The Code of Ordinances contains all of the provisions of a
general nature pertaining to the subjects enumerated. All prior ordinances
pertaining to such subjects are hereby repealed.
   Section 3.   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in the Code of Ordinances,
including ordinances specified in this section, shall remain in effect unless
repealed expressly or by necessary implication:
            a.   Vacating or setting the boundaries of streets, alleys, or
other public places;
            b.   Annexing or detaching territory;
            c.   Granting or accepting easements, plats, or dedication of land
to public use;
            d.   Providing of the acquisition or conveyance of real or personal
property;
            e.   Authorizing or directing public improvements to be made;
            f.   Levying taxes or special assessments;
            g.   Appropriating money;
            h.   Granting franchise or special licenses;
            i.   Providing for the issuance of bonds or other instruments of
indebtedness.
   Section 4.   All boards, commissions, councils, and other such bodies as
established in ordinances or resolutions adopted prior to the adoption of the
Code of Ordinances shall continue in existence and number of members unless
specifically amended in the Code of Ordinances or until an ordinance
abolishing, establishing, or otherwise changing such bodies is adopted or
amended. All fees and charges established in ordinances or resolutions adopted
prior to the adoption of the Code of Ordinances shall remain in effect unless
amended in the Code of Ordinances or until an ordinance adopting a schedule of
fees and charges is adopted or amended.
   Section 5.   At least one copy of the Code of Ordinances shall be kept on
file in the Office of the City Clerk and available for inspection by members of
the public during the hours the office is open for the ordinary transaction of
business. The City may publish the Code of Ordinances on its website. The Clerk
shall file a copy of the Code of Ordinances with the County Court and the City
Attorney.
   Section 6.   This ordinance shall take effect from and after its passage,
approval, and publication according to law.
PASSED AND APPROVED THIS 1ST DAY OF OCTOBER 2024.
                                 Julie Deepe /s/
                                 Julie Deepe, Mayor
ATTESTED AND PUBLISHED IN BOOK OR PAMPHLET FORM WITHIN FIFTEEN (15) DAYS OF
PASSAGE ON THE 1ST DAY OF OCTOBER 2024.
                                 (SEAL)
                                 Julie Buescher /s/
                                 Julie Buescher, City Clerk
 
CHAPTER 1: ADMINISTRATIVE
   Article
      
1.   ELECTED OFFICIALS
      
2.   APPOINTED OFFICIALS
      
3.   CORPORATE SEAL
      
4.   ORDINANCES
      
5.   ELECTIONS
      
6.   FISCAL MANAGEMENT
      
7.   COMPENSATION
      
8.   MUNICIPAL FORMS
      
9.   INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
      
10.   MEETINGS
      
11.   INTERGOVERNMENTAL RISK MANAGEMENT
      
12.   PENAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1: ELECTED OFFICIALS
Section
   
1-101   City Mayor; powers and duties
   
1-102   City Council; Acting President
   
1-103   City Council; selection and duties
   
1-104   City Council; organization
   1-105   Elected officials; vacancy
   
1-105.01   Elected officials; vacancy due to unexcused absences
   
1-106   Mayor; vacancy
   
1-107   Elected officials; restrictions on other employment or elective office
   
1-108   Status as second class city
§ 1-101 CITY MAYOR; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   (1)   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council. The
Mayor may vote on any matter that requires either a majority vote of the City
Council or a majority vote of all the elected members of the City Council if
the Mayor’s vote is required due to the City Council members being equally
divided or a majority of the City Council members or majority vote of all the
elected members cannot be reached due to absence, vacancy or abstention of one
or more City Council members. For purposes of such vote, the Mayor is deemed to
be a member of the City Council.
      (2)   The Mayor shall have superintendence and control of all the
officers and affairs of the city and shall take care that the ordinances of the
city and all laws governing cities of the second class are complied with.
(Neb. RS 17-110)
   (B)   The Mayor shall have the power to veto or sign any ordinance passed by
the City Council and to approve or veto any order, bylaw, resolution, award of
or vote to enter into any contract or the allowance of any claim. If the Mayor
approves the ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution, contract or claim, he or she
shall sign it, and it shall become effective. If the Mayor vetoes the
ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution, contract or any item or items of
appropriations or claims, he or she shall return it to the City Council stating
that the measure is vetoed. The Mayor may issue the veto at the meeting at
which the measure passed or within seven calendar days after the meeting. If
the Mayor issues the veto after the meeting, the Mayor shall notify the City
Clerk of the veto in writing. The Clerk shall notify the City Council in
writing of the Mayor’s veto. Any order, bylaw, resolution, award of or vote to
enter into any contract or the allowance of any claim vetoed by the Mayor may
be passed over his or her veto by a vote of two-thirds of the members of the
Council. If the Mayor neglects or refuses to sign any ordinance, order, bylaw,
resolution, award of or vote to enter into any contract or the allowance of any
claim, but fails to veto the measure within the time required by this section,
the measure shall become effective without his or her signature. The Mayor may
veto any item or items of any appropriation bill or any claims bill, and
approve the remainder thereof, and the item or items vetoed may be passed by
the Council over the veto as in other cases.
(Neb. RS 17-111)
   (C)   The Mayor shall, from time to time, communicate to the City Council
such information and recommend such measures as, in his or her opinion, may
tend to the improvement of the finances, the police, health, security,
ornament, comfort and general prosperity of the city.
(Neb. RS 17-112)
   (D)   The Mayor shall have the power, when he or she deems it necessary, to
require any officer of the city to exhibit his or her accounts or other papers
and to make reports to the Council, in writing, touching any subject or matter
pertaining to his or her office.
(Neb. RS 17-113)
   (E)   The Mayor shall have such jurisdiction as may be vested in him or her
by ordinance, over all places within five miles of the corporate limits of the
city for the enforcement of any health or quarantine ordinance and regulation
thereof and shall have jurisdiction in all matters vested in him or her by
ordinance, excepting taxation, within the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction
of the city.
(Neb. RS 17-114)
   (F)   The Mayor shall have the power to remit fines and forfeitures and to
grant reprieves and pardons for all offenses arising under the ordinances of
the city.
(Neb. RS 17-117)
   (G)   The Mayor shall hold no other elective or appointive office or
employment with the city.
   (H)   The Mayor shall sign the City Clerk’s minutes of all meetings of the
City Council, and he or she shall sign all resolutions that have been passed
and warrants for the payment of money when ordered by the Council.
   (I)   The Mayor shall have such other duties as are reposed in the Mayor by
the laws of the state or as the Council may by resolution confer upon the
Mayor.
Statutory reference:
   Restrictions on holding other office or employment, see Neb. RS 17-108.02,
32-109, 32-603 and 32-604
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 861, passed
3-3-2015, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 1-102 CITY COUNCIL; ACTING PRESIDENT.
   (A)   The City Council shall elect one of its own body who shall be styled
the President of the Council and who shall preside at all meetings of the
Council in the absence of the Mayor.
   (B)   In the absence of the President, the Council shall elect one of its
own body to occupy his or her place temporarily who shall be styled Acting
President of the Council.
   (C)   The President, and Acting President, when occupying the place of the
Mayor, shall have the same privileges as other members of the Council; and all
acts of the President or Acting President, while so acting, shall be as binding
upon the Council and upon the city as if done by the Mayor.
(Neb. RS 17-148)
§ 1-103 CITY COUNCIL; SELECTION AND DUTIES.
   The members of the City Council shall be elected and serve for a four-year
term. The City Council shall be the legislative division of the municipal
government and shall perform such duties and have such powers as may be
authorized by law. The City Council shall maintain the peace, regulate
business, protect the public health and safety and assess such taxes and fees
as are necessary and appropriate in the exercise of these functions.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-103 and 17-104
§ 1-104 CITY COUNCIL; ORGANIZATION.
   City Council members of this municipality shall take office and commence
their duties on the first Tuesday in December following their election. The
newly elected Council members who have qualified as prescribed by law, together
with the members of the City Council holding over, shall assemble in a regular
meeting at the hour and place hereinafter prescribed and perfect the
reorganization of the City Council as herein provided, and all appointive
offices in which the terms of incumbents are expired shall be filled by
appointment. After said meeting has been called to order, the Municipal Clerk
shall report to the City Council the names of all City Council members-elect
who have qualified for their respective offices, and this report shall be
spread upon the minutes of the meeting preceding the roll call. Each ward of
the municipality shall be represented by at least two Council members. No
person shall be eligible who is not at the time of his or her election an
actual resident of the ward for which he or she is qualified and, should any
City Council member move from the ward from which he or she was elected, his or
her office shall thereby become vacant.
(Ord. 251, passed 5-15-1979)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-104, 17-107.01 and 19-613
§ 1-105 ELECTED OFFICIALS; VACANCY.
   (A)   The office of member of the City Council shall be vacant upon the
happening of any of the events specified in Neb. RS 32-560 except as provided
in Neb. RS 32-561.
   (B)   Any vacancy on the City Council shall be filled as provided in
subsection (C) below.
(Neb. RS 32-568)
   (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C)(2) or (C)
(3) below, or §
1-106, vacancies in city elective offices shall be filled by the Mayor and
Council for the balance of the unexpired term. Notice of a vacancy, except a
vacancy resulting from the death of the incumbent, shall be in writing and
presented to the Council at a regular or special meeting and shall appear as a
part of the minutes of such meeting. The Council shall at once give public
notice of the vacancy by causing to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city or by posting in three public places in the city
the office vacated and the length of the unexpired term.
         (b)   The Mayor shall call a special meeting of the Council or place
the issue of filling such vacancy on the agenda at the next regular meeting at
which time the Mayor shall submit the name of a qualified registered voter to
fill the vacancy for the balance of the unexpired term. The regular or special
meeting shall occur upon the death of the incumbent or within four weeks after
the meeting at which such notice of vacancy has been presented. The Council
shall vote upon the nominee, and, if a majority votes in favor of the nominee,
the vacancy shall be declared filled. If the nominee fails to receive a
majority of the votes, the nomination shall be rejected and the Mayor shall, at
the next regular or special meeting, submit the name of another qualified
registered voter to fill the vacancy. If the subsequent nominee fails to
receive a majority of the votes, the Mayor shall continue at that meeting to
submit the names of qualified registered voters in nomination and the Council
shall continue to vote upon the nominations at such meeting until the vacancy
is filled. The Mayor shall cast his or her vote for or against the nominee in
case of a tie vote of the Council. All Council members present shall cast a
ballot for or against the nominee. Any member of the Council who has been
appointed to fill a vacancy on the Council shall have the same rights,
including voting, as if that person were elected.
      (2)   The Mayor and Council may, in lieu of filling a vacancy in a city
elected office as provided in subsection (C)(1) above, call a special city
election to fill such vacancy.
      (3)   If vacancies exist in the offices of one-half or more of the
members of the City Council, the Secretary of State shall conduct a special
city election to fill such vacancies.
(Neb. RS 32-569)
Statutory reference:
   Additional and similar provisions, see Neb. RS 32-560 through 32-572
   Ineligibility of person subjected to recall, see Neb. RS 32-1308
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 874, passed
3-1-2016, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 1-105.01 ELECTED OFFICIALS; VACANCY DUE TO UNEXCUSED ABSENCES.
   (A)   In addition to the events listed in Neb. RS 32-560 and any other
reasons for a vacancy provided by law, after notice and a hearing, a vacancy on
the City Council shall exist if a member is absent from more than five
consecutive regular meetings of the Council unless the absences are excused by
a majority vote of the remaining members.
   (B)   The City Council shall take a vote on whether to excuse a member’s
absence from a meeting upon either:
      (1)   A written request from the member submitted to the City Clerk; or
      (2)   A motion of any other Council member.
   (C)   If a Council member has been absent from six consecutive regular
meetings and none of the absences have been excused by a majority vote of the
remaining members, the City Clerk shall include this as an item on the agenda
for the next regular meeting. At that meeting, the Council shall set a date for
a hearing and direct the City Clerk to give the member notice of the hearing by
personal service or first-class mail to the member’s last known address.
   (D)   At the hearing, the Council member shall have the right to present
information on why one or more of the absences should be excused. If the
Council does not excuse one or more of the member’s absences by a majority vote
at the conclusion of the hearing, there shall be a vacancy on the Council.
(Ord. 702, passed 5-6-2003)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-3101
§ 1-106 MAYOR; VACANCY.
   (A)   Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, or in case of his or
her disability or absence, the President of the Council shall exercise the
office of Mayor until such vacancy is filled or such disability is removed, or
in case of temporary absence, until the Mayor returns.
   (B)   When the successful candidate for Mayor shall be prevented from
assuming office, the incumbent Mayor shall not be entitled to hold over the
term, but such office shall automatically become vacant and the President of
the Council shall exercise the office of Mayor until such vacancy is filled.
   (C)   If the President of the Council shall for any cause assume the office
of Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term, there shall be a vacancy on
the Council which shall be filled as provided in §
1-105.
(Ord. 252, passed 5-15-1979)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-217, 17-107, 32-568 and 32-569
§ 1-107 ELECTED OFFICIALS; RESTRICTIONS ON OTHER EMPLOYMENT OR ELECTIVE OFFICE.
   (A)   The Mayor and members of the Council shall hold no other elective or
appointive office or employment with the city.
   (B)   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ELECTIVE OFFICE. Any office which has candidates nominated or elected at
the time of a statewide primary election, any office which has candidates
nominated at the time of a statewide primary election and elected at the time
of a statewide general election, any office which has candidates elected at the
time of a statewide general election, any office which has candidates nominated
or elected at a city or village election and any office created by an act of
the legislature which has candidates elected at an election and includes an
office which is filled at an election held in conjunction with the annual
meeting of a public body created by an act of the legislature.
      HIGH ELECTIVE OFFICE. A member of the legislature, an elective office
described in Article IV, §§ 1 or 20, or Article VII, §§ 3 or 10, of the
Constitution of the state, or a county, city or school district elective
office.
   (C)   No candidate for member of the legislature or an elective office
described in Article IV, §§ 1 or 20, or Article VII, §§ 3 or 10, of the
Constitution of the state shall be eligible to file as a candidate, to petition
on the ballot as a candidate, to accept a nomination by a political party or by
party convention, caucus or committee to fill a vacancy, or to be a declared
write-in candidate for more than one elective office to be filled at the same
election except for the position of delegate to a county, state or national
political party convention. No candidate for any other high elective office
shall be eligible to file as a candidate, to petition on the ballot as a
candidate, to accept a nomination by a political party or by party convention,
caucus or committee to fill a vacancy or to be declared a write-in candidate
for more than one high elective office to be filled at the same election.
   (D)   Except as provided in subsection (E) or (G) below, no person shall be
precluded from being elected or appointed to or holding an elective office for
the reason that he or she has been elected or appointed to or holds another
elective office.
   (E)   No person serving as a member of the legislature or in an elective
office described in Article IV, §§ 1 or 20, or Article VII, §§ 3 or 10, of the
Constitution of the state shall simultaneously serve in any other elective
office, except that such a person may simultaneously serve in another elective
office which is filled at an election held in conjunction with the annual
meeting of a public body.
   (F)   Whenever an incumbent serving as a member of the legislature or in an
elective office described in Article IV, §§ 1 or 20, or Article VII, §§ 3 or
10, of the Constitution of the state assumes another elective office, except an
elective office filled at an election held in conjunction with the annual
meeting of a public body, the office first held by the incumbent shall be
deemed vacant.
   (G)   No person serving in a high elective office shall simultaneously serve
in any other high elective office.
   (H)   Notwithstanding subsections (E) through (G) above, any person holding
more than one high elective office upon September 13, 1997, shall be entitled
to serve the remainder of all terms for which he or she was elected or
appointed.
(Ord. 418, passed 1-2-1991; Ord. 579, passed 8-11-1998)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-108.02, 32-109, 32-603 and 32-604
§ 1-108 STATUS AS SECOND CLASS CITY.
   (A)   The population of the city has dropped below 800 citizens, as
evidenced in the 2010 census.
   (B)   The Mayor and City Council have determined that it is in the best
interest of the city to continue to operate as a city of the second class, as
authorized by Neb. RS 17-310.
   (C)   The Mayor and City Council do hereby decide and determine to remain a
city of the second class of the state.
   (D)   The Mayor shall certify this decision to the Secretary of State to
formalize the continued status of the city as a city of the second class of the
state.
(Ord. 804, passed 8-2-2011)
ARTICLE 2: APPOINTED OFFICIALS
Section
   
1-201   Appointment; terms; removal; powers; duties
   
1-202   Merger of offices
   
1-203   Municipal Clerk
   
1-204   Municipal Treasurer
   
1-205   Treasurer’s monthly report
   
1-206   Treasurer’s annual report
   
1-207   Municipal Attorney
   
1-208   Municipal Physician
   
1-209   Municipal Police Chief
   
1-210   Municipal police officers
   
1-211   Municipal Fire Chief
   
1-212   Special engineer
   
1-213   Municipal Water Commissioner
   
1-214   Municipal Sewer Commissioner
   
1-215   Municipal Electric Commissioner
   
1-216   Municipal Street Superintendent
   
1-217   Municipal Utilities Superintendent
   
1-218   Municipal Building Inspector
   
1-219   Bonds; requirements
§ 1-201 APPOINTMENT; TERMS; REMOVAL; POWERS; DUTIES.
   (A)   (1)   The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, may appoint
such officers as shall be required by ordinance or otherwise required by law.
Such officers may be removed from office by the Mayor.
      (2)   The terms of office for all officers, except regular police
officers, appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council shall be
established by the City Council by ordinance. The ordinance shall provide that
either:
         (a)   The officers hold the office to which they have been appointed
until the end of the Mayor’s term of office and until their successors are
appointed and qualified unless sooner removed; or
         (b)   The officers hold office for one year unless sooner removed.
   (B)   (1)   The city may enact ordinances or bylaws to regulate and
prescribe the powers and duties of officers not provided for in state law.
      (2)   If the Mayor and City Council appoint any of the officials
specified in this article or any other officials, the officials shall have the
powers and duties, if any, provided in this article or as otherwise provided by
city ordinances and state law.
(Ord. 253, passed 5-15-1979; Ord. 541, passed 6-3-1997; Ord. 813, passed 1-3-
2012)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-107 and 17-604
§ 1-202 MERGER OF OFFICES.
   The governing body may at its discretion by ordinance combine and merge any
elective or appointive office or employment or any combination of duties of any
such offices or employments, except Mayor and Council member, with any other
elective or appointive office or employment so that one or more of such offices
or employments or any combination of duties of any such offices or employments
may be held by the same officer or employee at the same time. The City Manager/
Administrator in a city under the City Manager/Administrator plan of government
as provided by law may in his or her discretion combine and merge any elective
or appointive office or employment or any combination of duties of any such
offices or employments, except Mayor and Council member, with any other
elective or appointive office or employment so that one or more of such offices
or employments may be held by the same officer or employee at the same time.
The offices or employments so merged and combined shall always be construed to
be separate and the effect of the combination or merger shall be limited to a
consolidation of official duties only. The salary or compensation of the
officer or employee holding the merged or combined offices or employments or
offices and employments shall not be in excess of the maximum amount provided
by law for the salary or compensation of the office, offices, employment or
employments so merged and combined. For the purpose of this section, volunteer
firefighters and ambulance drivers shall not be considered officers.
(Ord. 420, passed 1-2-1991)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-108.02
§ 1-203 MUNICIPAL CLERK.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall have the custody of all laws and ordinances and
shall keep a correct journal of the proceedings of the City Council. After the
period of time specified by the State Records Administrator pursuant to the
Records Management Act, being Neb. RS 84-1201 et seq., the Clerk may transfer
the journal of the proceedings of the City Council to the state archives of the
State Historical Society for permanent preservation. The Clerk shall also
perform such other duties as may be required by the ordinances of the city. If
the Clerk is acting as the Treasurer, he or she shall also comply with the
requirements of §
1-204(A)(3).
(Neb. RS 17-605)
   (B)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the Clerk to prepare and publish the
official proceedings of the City Council within 30 days after any meeting of
the Council. The publication shall be in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city, shall set forth a statement of the proceedings of the meeting and
shall also include the amount of each claim allowed, the purpose of the claim
and the name of the claimant, except that the aggregate amount of all payroll
claims may be included as one item. Between July 15 and August 15 of each year,
the employee job titles and the current annual, monthly or hourly salaries
corresponding to such job titles shall be published. Each job title published
shall be descriptive and indicative of the duties and functions of the
position. The charge for the publication shall not exceed the rates provided
for in Neb. RS 23-122.
(Neb. RS 19-1102)
      (2)   Publication under subsection (B)(1) above shall be made in one
legal newspaper of general circulation in the city. If no legal newspaper is
published in the city, then the publication shall be made in one legal
newspaper published or of general circulation within the county in which the
city is located. The cost of publication shall be paid out of the general funds
of the city.
(Neb. RS 19-1103)
   (C)   The Clerk shall dispose of or destroy city public records when the
records have been determined to be of no further legal, administrative, fiscal
or historical value by the State Records Administrator pursuant to the Records
Management Act. This shall not apply to the minutes of the Clerk and the
permanent ordinance and resolution books, or any other record classified as
permanent by the State Records Administrator.
(Neb. RS 18-1701)
   (D)   (1)   The Clerk shall permit any person to examine and copy the public
records in the Clerk’s custody and may charge a fee for providing copies of a
public record, as provided in Neb. RS 84-712 through 84-712.09.
      (2)   The Clerk may charge a reasonable fee for certified copies of any
record in his or her office as set by resolution of the City Council.
   (E)   The Clerk shall permit no records, public papers or other documents of
the city kept and preserved in his or her office to be taken therefrom, except
by such officers of the city as may be entitled to the use of the same, but
only upon their leaving a receipt therefor, and except pursuant to Neb. RS 84-
712(2). He or she shall keep all the records of his or her office, including a
record of all licenses issued by him or her, in a blank book with a proper
index. He or she shall include as part of his or her records all petitions
under which the City Council shall order public work to be done at the expense
of the property fronting thereon, together with references to all resolutions
and ordinances relating to the same. He or she shall endorse the date and hour
of filing upon every paper or document so filed in his or her office. All such
filings made by him or her shall be properly docketed. Included in his or her
records shall be all standard codes, amendments thereto and other documents
incorporated by reference and arranged in triplicate in a manner convenient for
reference. He or she shall keep an accurate and complete account of the
appropriation of the several funds and draw, sign and attest all warrants
ordered for the payment of money on the particular fund from which the same is
payable. At the end of each month, he or she shall then make a report of the
amounts appropriated to the various funds and the amount of the warrants drawn
thereon.
   (F)   The Clerk shall deliver all warrants, ordinances and resolutions under
his or her charge to the Mayor for his or her signature. He or she shall also
deliver to officers, employees and committees all resolutions and
communications which are directed at such officers, employees or committees.
With the seal of the city, he or she shall duly attest the Mayor’s signature to
all ordinances, deeds and papers required to be attested to when ordered to do
so by the City Council.
   (G)   The Clerk shall issue and sign all licenses, permits and occupation
tax receipts authorized by law and required by the city ordinances. He or she
shall collect all occupation taxes and license money, except where some other
city officer is specifically charged with that duty. He or she shall keep a
register of all licenses granted in the city and the purpose for which they
have been issued.
   (H)   The Clerk shall keep in a book with a proper index, copies of all
notices required to be published or posted by the Clerk by order of the City
Council or under the ordinances of the city. To each of the file copies of the
notices shall be attached the printer’s affidavit of publication, if the
notices are required to be published, or the Clerk’s certificate under seal
where the same are required to be posted only.
   (I)   The Clerk shall receive all objections to creation of paving districts
and other street improvements. He or she shall receive the claims of any person
against the city, and, in the event that the claim is disallowed in part or in
whole, the Clerk shall notify the claimant or his or her agent or attorney by
letter within five days after the disallowance, and the Clerk shall then
prepare transcripts on appeals of any disallowance of a claim in all proper
cases.
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 945, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 1-204 MUNICIPAL TREASURER.
   (A)   (1)   The City Treasurer shall be the custodian of all money belonging
to the city. He or she shall keep a separate account of each fund or
appropriation and the debts and credits belonging thereto. He or she shall give
every person paying money into the Treasury a receipt therefor, specifying the
date of payment and on what account paid. He or she shall also file copies of
such receipts with his or her monthly reports. The Treasurer shall, at the end
of every month, and as often as may be required, render an account to the City
Council, under oath, showing the state of the Treasury at the date of such
account and the balance of money in the Treasury. He or she shall also
accompany such accounts with a statement of all receipts and disbursements,
together with all warrants redeemed and paid by him or her, which warrants,
with any and all vouchers held by him or her, shall be filed with his or her
account in the City Clerk’s office. If the Treasurer fails to render his or her
account within 20 days after the end of the month, or by a later date
established by the City Council, the Mayor may use this failure as cause to
remove the Treasurer from office.
      (2)   The Treasurer shall keep a record of all outstanding bonds against
the city, showing the number and amount of each bond, for and to whom the bonds
were issued, and the date upon which any bond is purchased, paid or canceled.
The Treasurer shall accompany the annual statement submitted pursuant to Neb.
RS 19-1101 with a description of the bonds issued and sold in that year and the
terms of sale, with every item of expense thereof.
      (3)   The Treasurer shall annually complete continuing education through
a program approved by the Auditor of Public Accounts, and proof of completion
of such program shall be submitted to the Auditor of Public Accounts.
(Neb. RS 17-606)
   (B)   (1)   The Treasurer shall prepare and publish annually within 60 days
after the close of the city fiscal year a statement of the receipts and
expenditures of funds of the city for the preceding fiscal year. The statement
shall also include the information required by Neb. RS 16-318(3) or 17-606(2).
Not more than the legal rate provided for in Neb. RS 33-141 shall be charged
and paid for such publication.
(Neb. RS 19-1101)
      (2)   Publication shall be made in one legal newspaper of general
circulation in the city. If no legal newspaper is published in the city, then
such publication shall be made in one legal newspaper published or of general
circulation within the county in which the city is located.
(Neb. RS 19-1103)
   (C)   (1)   All warrants upon the Treasurer shall be paid in the order of
their presentation therefor and as otherwise provided in Neb. RS 77-2201
through 77-2215.
(Neb. RS 77-2201)
      (2)   The Treasurer shall keep a warrant register, which register shall
show in columns arranged for that purpose the number, the date and the amount
of each warrant presented and registered, the particular fund upon which the
same is drawn, the date of presentation, the name and address of the person in
whose name the warrant is registered, the date of payment, the amount of
interest and the total amount paid thereon, with the date when notice to the
person in whose name such warrant is registered is mailed.
(Neb. RS 77-2202)
      (3)   The Treasurer shall make duplicate receipts for all sums which
shall be paid into his or her office, which receipts shall show the source from
which such funds are derived and shall, by distinct lines and columns, show the
amount received to the credit of each separate fund, and whether the same was
paid in cash, in warrants, or otherwise. The Treasurer shall deliver one of the
duplicates to the person making the payment and retain the other in his or her
office.
(Neb. RS 77-2209)
      (4)   The Treasurer shall daily, as money is received, foot the several
columns of the cash book and of the register and carry the amounts forward, and
at the close of each year, in case the amount of money received by the
Treasurer is insufficient to pay the warrants registered, he or she shall close
the account for that year in the register and shall carry forward the excess.
(Neb. RS. 77-2210)
      (5)   The cash book, register and retained receipts of the Treasurer
shall at all times be open to the inspection of any person in whose name any
warrants are registered and unpaid.
(Neb. RS 77-2212)
   (D)   The Treasurer shall permit any person to examine and copy the public
records in the Treasurer’s custody and may charge a fee for providing copies of
a public record, as provided in Neb. RS 84-712 through 84-712.09.
   (E)   The Treasurer shall keep all money belonging to the city separate and
distinct from his or her own money. He or she shall cancel all bonds, coupons,
warrants and other evidences of debt against the city, whenever paid by him or
her, by writing or stamping on the face thereof, “Paid by the City Treasurer,”
with the date of payment written or stamped thereon. He or she shall collect
all special taxes, allocate special assessments to the several owners and
obtain from the County Treasurer a monthly report as to the collection of
delinquent taxes.
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 946, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 1-205 TREASURER’S MONTHLY REPORT.
   (Repealed 2005)
§ 1-206 TREASURER’S ANNUAL REPORT.
   (Repealed 2005)
§ 1-207 MUNICIPAL ATTORNEY.
   (A)   The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the City Council. He
or she shall commence, prosecute and defend all suits and actions necessary to
be commenced, prosecuted or defended on behalf of the city, or that may be
ordered by the Council. When requested, he or she shall attend meetings of the
Council and give them his or her opinion upon any matters submitted to him or
her, either orally or in writing, as may be required. He or she shall draft or
review for legal correctness ordinances, contracts, franchises and other
instruments as may be required, and he or she shall perform such other duties
as may be imposed upon him or her by general law or ordinance. The Council
shall have the right to pay the City Attorney compensation for legal services
performed by him or her for it, on such terms as the Council and Attorney may
agree, and to employ additional legal assistance and to pay for such legal
assistance out of the funds of the city.
(Neb. RS 17-610)
   (B)   The City Attorney shall also examine, when requested to do so by the
City Council, the ordinance records and advise and assist the City Clerk as
much as may be necessary to the end that each procedural step will be taken in
the passage of each ordinance to ensure that it will be a valid and subsisting
local law in so far as its passage and approval are concerned.
§ 1-208 MUNICIPAL PHYSICIAN.
   The Municipal Physician shall be a member of the Board of Health of the
municipality and shall perform the duties devolving upon him or her as the
medical advisor of said Board. In all injuries where a liability may be
asserted against the municipality, the Municipal Physician shall immediately
investigate said injuries, the extent thereof and the circumstances. He or she
shall then report the results of his or her investigation with the name of the
party injured and all other persons who may have personal knowledge of the
matter. He or she shall make all physical examinations and necessary laboratory
tests incident thereto and issue such health certificates as are required by
ordinance. For the purpose of making examinations of the sanitary conditions of
the property, and the state of health of the inhabitants therein, he or she
shall have the right at all reasonable hours to go upon and enter all premises,
buildings or other structures in the municipality. He or she shall perform such
other duties as may be required of him or her by the laws of the state and the
ordinances of the municipality. When ordered to do so by the governing body, he
or she shall disinfect or fumigate the premises, or persons in or about the
premises, when the premises are quarantined, and to call upon indigent sick
persons, and perform other professional services at the direction of the
governing body. The Municipal Physician shall receive as compensation for his
or her services such sum as the governing body may from time to time set. He or
she shall receive no compensation for his or her services as a member of the
Municipal Board of Health.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-121
§ 1-209 MUNICIPAL POLICE CHIEF.
   (A)   The Police Chief shall direct the police work of the city and shall be
responsible for the maintenance of law and order. Unless the Mayor and City
Council provide otherwise, he or she shall act as Health Inspector and Building
Inspector.
   (B)   If the city has an agreement with the County Sheriff for law
enforcement purposes, the County Sheriff shall have all the powers and duties
of the Police Chief and city police officers as specified in the agreement.
§ 1-210 MUNICIPAL POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   (1)   The Mayor, by and with the consent of the Council, shall appoint
such a number of regular police officers as may be necessary. All police
officers appointed by the Mayor and Council may be removed, demoted or
suspended at any time by the Mayor as provided in subsection (A)(2) below. A
police officer, including the Chief of Police, may appeal to the City Council
such removal, demotion or suspension with or without pay. After a hearing, the
City Council may uphold, reverse or modify the action.
      (2)   The City Council shall by ordinance adopt rules and regulations
governing the removal, demotion or suspension with or without pay of any police
officer, including the Chief of Police. The ordinance shall include a procedure
for such removal, demotion or suspension with or without pay of any police
officer, including the Chief of Police, upon the written accusation of the
Police Chief, the Mayor or any citizen or taxpayer. The City Council shall
establish by ordinance procedures for acting upon such written accusation, in
accordance with Neb. RS 17-107. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent the peremptory suspension or immediate removal from duty of an officer
by the appropriate authority, pending the hearing authorized by this section,
in cases of gross misconduct, neglect of duty or disobedience of orders.
      (3)   This section does not apply to a police officer during his or her
probationary period.
(Neb. RS 17-107)
   (B)   (1)   The City Council may establish a law enforcement reserve force.
Members of such force shall be appointed at the discretion of the Council. The
Council may limit the size of such reserve force.
      (2)   (a)   A member of a law enforcement reserve force appointed under
this section cannot make arrests, issue citations, detain members of the public
or seize evidence without being under the direct supervision of a physically
present certified law enforcement officer.
         (b)   A reserve officer may perform functions at the direction of the
County Sheriff or Chief of Police when under the direct supervision of the
County Sheriff or Chief of Police. Such functions shall not include making
arrests, issuing citations, detaining members of the public or seizing
evidence.
         (c)   A reserve officer is not limited with respect to the amount of
hours worked annually.
(Neb. RS 81-1438)
Statutory reference:
   Other provisions on law enforcement reserve force, see Neb. RS 81-1439
through 81-1446
§ 1-211 MUNICIPAL FIRE CHIEF.
   The Fire Chief shall be elected by the members of the Fire Department. He or
she shall enforce all laws and ordinances covering the prevention of fires, the
storage and use of explosives and flammable substances, the installation of
fire alarm systems, the maintenance of fire extinguishing equipment, the
regulation of fire escapes, and the inspection of all premises requiring
adequate fire escapes.
§ 1-212 SPECIAL ENGINEER.
   The governing body may employ a special engineer to make or assist the
Municipal Engineer in making any particular estimate, survey or other work. The
special engineer shall make a record of the minutes of his or her surveys and
all other work done for the municipality. He or she shall, when directed by the
governing body, accurately make all plats, sections, profiles and maps as may
be necessary in the judgment of the governing body. He or she shall, upon
request of the governing body, make estimates of the costs of labor and
material which may be done or furnished by contract with the municipality and
make all surveys, estimates and calculations necessary for the establishment of
grades, bridges, building of culverts, sewers, electric light system,
waterworks, power plant, public heating system, curbing and gutters and the
improvement of streets and erection and repair of buildings and shall perform
such other duties as the governing body may require. All records of the special
engineer shall be public records which shall belong to the municipality and
shall be turned over to his or her successor.
(Ord. 339, passed 11-1-1983)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-568, 17-568.01, 17-919 and 18-3301
§ 1-213 MUNICIPAL WATER COMMISSIONER.
   (Repealed by Ord. 685, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 1-214 MUNICIPAL SEWER COMMISSIONER.
   (Repealed by Ord. 685, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 1-215 MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC COMMISSIONER.
   (Repealed by Ord. 685, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 1-216 MUNICIPAL STREET SUPERINTENDENT.
   (A)   The Municipal Street Superintendent shall, subject to the order of the
Mayor and Council, have general charge, direction and control of all works on
the streets, sidewalks, culverts and bridges of the city and shall perform such
other duties as the Council may require.
(Neb. RS 17-119)
   (B)   It shall be his or her responsibility to see that gutters and drains
in the city function properly and that they are kept in good repair.
   (C)   He or she shall, at the request of the City Council make a detailed
report to the Council on the condition of the streets, sidewalks, culverts,
alleys and bridges of the city and shall direct their attention to such
improvements, repairs and extension thereof as he or she may think proper.
   (D)   The Municipal Street Superintendent shall issue such permits and
perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance.
Statutory reference:
   Incentive payments to street superintendents, see Neb. RS 39-2512
§ 1-217 MUNICIPAL UTILITIES SUPERINTENDENT.
   (A)   The Municipal Utilities Superintendent shall have immediate control
over all municipal utilities. The Utilities Superintendent shall be under the
direction and supervision of the Mayor. Any vacancy in the position of
Utilities Superintendent shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor, by and
with the consent of a majority of the City Council.
   (B)   The duties of the Municipal Utilities Superintendent shall be as
follows:
      (1)   To ensure that city-owned utilities remain in operational
condition;
      (2)   To supervise and assist city employees in electric, water, garbage,
streets, parks, cemetery and tree and grass disposal operations as assigned by
the Mayor;
      (3)   To respond to emergency calls concerning city-owned utilities;
      (4)   To coordinate the work schedule of outside city employees;
      (5)   To require the power plant operators to successfully demonstrate
proficiency in all aspects of operation and maintenance of the power plant
machines twice each year;
      (6)   To ensure all power plant machines are properly maintained;
      (7)   To ensure that there is an adequate supply of fuel for the power
plant;
      (8)   To check or assign the checking of the wastewater plant every day
to ensure it is operating effectively;
      (9)   To check or assign the checking of the water wells and water tower
on a regular schedule to ensure that they are operating correctly;
      (10)   To ensure tests at the wastewater and water plants are properly
conducted in accordance with state and federal regulations;
      (11)   To perform and oversee preventive maintenance at the wastewater
and water plants as well as on all public works equipment;
      (12)   To monitor and maintain all water, sewer and electric lines, poles
and transformers;
      (13)   To assume or assign all state statutory authority for the City
Water Commissioner;
      (14)   To monitor the tree and grass disposal area and sanitary sewer
lagoons and to ensure compliance as required by state and federal regulations;
and
      (15)   To perform such other duties as may be required and assigned by
the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 685, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 1-218 MUNICIPAL BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   The Municipal Building Inspector shall conduct surveys and make inspections
in any area of the municipality to determine whether all buildings and
structures are in compliance with the municipal ordinances. He or she shall
investigate all complaints whether they are verbal, written or in the form of a
petition alleging and charging that a violation of the municipal ordinances
exists and that a building, or structure is unfit or unsafe for human
habitation. The Building Inspector is authorized, upon properly identifying
himself or herself, to enter, inspect, survey and investigate between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., or at any time if an emergency exists, or if
requested by the owner or occupant thereof. He or she shall keep records of all
complaints received, inspection reports, orders and complaints issued. The
records shall be available for public inspection, and he or she shall prepare
an annual report, including statistics based on the records kept. The Building
Inspector shall have no financial interest in the furnishing of labor,
materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a
building, except where he or she is the owner of a building, and he or she
shall not act as an agent for any said dealer or as an agent for the sale,
lease or rental of any real estate. The Building Inspector shall report to the
governing body as often as it may deem necessary and shall have such other
duties and issue such permits as it may direct. The Building Inspector may be
removed at any time for good and sufficient cause by the governing body. In the
event a Building Inspector, as such, is not specifically appointed, the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the Council, may appoint an individual to be ex
officio Building Inspector.
§ 1-219 BONDS; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The city may enact ordinances or bylaws to require from all officers
and servants, elected or appointed, bonds and security or evidence of
equivalent insurance for the faithful performance of their duties. The city may
pay the premium for such bonds or insurance coverage.
(Neb. RS 17-604)
   (B)   (1)   All official bonds of officers of the city shall be in form
joint and several and made payable to the city in such penalty as the City
Council may fix.
      (2)   In place of the individual bonds required to be furnished by
municipal officers, a schedule, position, blanket bond or undertaking, or
evidence of equivalent insurance may be given by municipal officers, or a
single corporate surety fidelity, schedule, position or blanket bond or
undertaking, or evidence of insurance coverage covering all the officers,
including officers required by law to furnish an individual bond or
undertaking, may be furnished. The municipality may pay the premium for the
bond or insurance coverage. The bond or insurance coverage shall be, at a
minimum, an aggregate of the amounts fixed by law or by the City Council, and
with such terms and conditions as may be required.
(Neb. RS 11-104)
      (3)   The penalty amount on any bond shall not fall below the legal
minimum, when one has been set by the state, for each particular official.
   (C)   (1)   Official bonds, with the oath endorsed thereon, shall be filed
in the City Clerk’s office within the following time:
         (a)    Of all officers elected at any general election, following
receipt of their election certificate and not later than ten days before the
first Thursday after the first Tuesday in January next succeeding the election;
         (b)   Of all appointed officers, within 30 days after their
appointment; and
         (c)   Of officers elected at any special election and city officers,
within 30 days after the canvass of the votes of the election at which they
were chosen.
      (2)   The filing of the bond with the oath endorsed thereon does not
authorize a person to take any official action prior to the beginning of his or
her term of office pursuant to Article XVII, section 5, of the Constitution of
the state.
(Neb. RS 11-105)
   (D)   All official bonds of city officers shall be executed by the principal
named in such bonds and by at least two sufficient sureties who shall be
freeholders of the county in which such bonds are given, or any official bond
of a city officer may be executed by the officer as principal and by a
guaranty, surety, fidelity or bonding company as surety, or by two or more such
companies. Only such companies as are legally authorized to transact business
in this state shall be eligible to suretyship on the bond of a city officer.
(Neb. RS 11-109)
   (E)   The City Clerk shall carefully record and preserve the bonds in his or
her office and shall give certified copies thereof, when required, under the
seal of his or her office, and shall be entitled to receive for the same the
usual fee allowed by law for certified copies of records in other cases.
(Neb. RS 11-110)
   (F)   (1)   The approval of each official bond shall be endorsed upon such
bond by the officer approving the same, and no bond shall be filed and recorded
until so approved.
(Neb. RS 11-111)
      (2)   No bond shall be deemed to be given or complete until the approval
of the City Council and all sureties are endorsed in writing on the instrument
by the Mayor and City Clerk pursuant to the approval of the City Council.
   (G)   All official bonds shall obligate the principal and sureties for the
faithful discharge of all duties required by law of such principal and shall
inure to the benefit of any persons injured by a breach of the conditions of
such bonds.
(Neb. RS 11-112)
   (H)   No official bond shall be rendered void by reason of any informality
of irregularity in its execution or approval.
(Neb. RS 11-113)
   (I)   No city official shall be taken as security on the bond of any
administrator, executor or other officer from whom by law bond is or may be
required.
(Neb. RS 11-114)
   (J)   If any person elected or appointed to any office neglects to have his
or her official bond executed and approved as provided by law and filed for
record within the time limited by this section, the City Clerk shall
immediately issue an order to such person to show cause why he or she has
failed to properly file such bond and why his or her office should not be
declared vacant. If such person properly files the official bond within ten
days of the issuance of the show cause order for appointed officials or before
the date for taking office for elected officials, such filing shall be deemed
to be in compliance with this section. If such person does not file the bond
within ten days of the issuance of such order for appointed officials or before
the date for taking office for elected officials and sufficient cause is not
shown within that time, his or her office shall thereupon ipso facto become
vacant and such vacancy shall thereupon immediately be filled by election or
appointment as the law may direct in other cases of vacancy in the same office.
(Neb. RS 11-115)
   (K)   Any person appointed to fill a vacancy, before entering upon the
duties of the office, must give a bond corresponding in substance and form with
the bond required of the officer originally elected or appointed, as herein
provided.
(Neb. RS 11-116)
   (L)   When the incumbent of an office is reelected or reappointed, he or she
shall qualify by taking the oath and giving the bond as above directed, but
when such officer has had public funds or property in his or her control, his
or her bond shall not be approved until he or she has produced and fully
accounted for such funds and property. When it is ascertained that the
incumbent of an office holds over by reason of the nonelection or
nonappointment of a successor or of the neglect or refusal of the successor to
qualify, he or she shall qualify anew within ten days from the time at which
his or her successor, if elected, should have qualified.
(Neb. RS 11-117)
   (M)   No person shall be surety for the same officer for more than two
successive terms of the same office, but this provision shall not apply to
incorporated surety companies.
(Neb. RS 11-118)
   (N)   If the sureties on the official bond of any appointed officer of the
city, in the opinion of the City Council, become insufficient, the Council may,
by resolution, fix a reasonable time within which the officer may give a new
bond or additional sureties as directed. If the officer fails, refuses or
neglects to give a new bond or additional sureties to the satisfaction and
approval of the Council, the office shall, by such failure, refusal or neglect,
become vacant and it shall be the duty of the Council to appoint a competent
and qualified person to fill the office.
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 838, passed
4-1-2014, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
ARTICLE 3: CORPORATE SEAL
Section
   
1-301   Seal; official corporate
§ 1-301 SEAL; OFFICIAL CORPORATE.
   The official corporate seal of the municipality shall be kept in the office
of the Municipal Clerk, and shall bear the following inscription, “City of
Deshler, Seal, Thayer County, Nebraska.” The Municipal Clerk shall affix an
impression of said official seal to all warrants, licenses, permits, ordinances
and all other official papers issued by order of the governing body and
countersigned by the Municipal Clerk.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-502
ARTICLE 4: ORDINANCES
Section
   
1-401   Ordinances, rules and resolutions; grant of power
   
1-402   Introduction
   
1-403   Resolutions and motions
   
1-404   Style
   
1-405   Title
   
1-406   Ordinances, resolutions, orders, bylaws; reading; passage
   
1-407   Publication or posting
   
1-408   Certificate of publication or posting
   
1-409   Effective date; emergency ordinances
   
1-410   Amendments and revisions
§ 1-401 ORDINANCES, RULES AND RESOLUTIONS; GRANT OF POWER.
   The governing body may make all ordinances, bylaws, rules, regulations and
resolutions, not inconsistent with the laws of the state, as may be expedient
for maintaining the peace, good government and welfare of the municipality and
its trade, commerce and manufactories.
(Ord. 543, passed 6-3-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-505
§ 1-402 INTRODUCTION.
   Ordinances shall be introduced by members of the governing body in one of
the following ways.
   (A)   With the recognition of the Mayor, a member may, in the presence and
hearing of a majority of the members elected to the governing body, read aloud
the substance of the proposed ordinance and file a copy of the same with the
Municipal Clerk for future consideration.
   (B)   With the recognition of the Mayor, a member may present the proposed
ordinance to the Clerk who, in the presence and hearing of a majority of the
members elected to the governing body, shall read aloud the substance of the
ordinance and file it for future consideration.
(Ord. 544, passed 6-3-1997)
§ 1-403 RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS.
   Unless the City Council provides otherwise, resolutions and motions shall be
introduced in one of the methods prescribed in §
1-402 for the introduction of ordinances. The issue raised by the resolution or
motion shall be disposed of in accordance with the usage of parliamentary law
adopted for the guidance of the City Council. A majority vote shall be required
to pass any resolution or motion. The vote on any resolution or motion shall be
by roll call vote.
§ 1-404 STYLE.
   The style of all city ordinances shall be: “Be it ordained by the Mayor and
Council of the City of Deshler, Nebraska:….”
(Neb. RS 17-613)
§ 1-405 TITLE.
   No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not clearly expressed in the
title.
(Neb. RS 17-614)
§ 1-406 ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, ORDERS, BYLAWS; READING; PASSAGE.
   (A)   (1)   All ordinances and resolutions or orders for the appropriation
or payment of money shall require for their passage or adoption the concurrence
of a majority of all elected members of the City Council. The Mayor may vote on
any such matter if the Mayor’s vote is required due to the City Council members
being equally divided or a majority vote of all the elected members of the City
Council cannot be reached due to absence, vacancy or abstention of one or more
City Council members. For purposes of such vote, the Mayor is deemed to be a
member of the City Council.
      (2)   Ordinances of a general or permanent nature shall be read by title
on three different days unless three-fourths of the City Council vote to
suspend this requirement. Such requirement shall not be suspended for any
ordinance for the annexation of territory, or the redrawing of boundaries for
City Council election districts or wards or as otherwise provided by law.
      (3)   In case this requirement is suspended, the ordinance shall be read
by title and then moved for final passage.
      (4)   Three-fourths of the City Council may require a reading of any such
ordinance in full before enactment under either procedure set out in this
section.
(Neb. RS 17-614)
   (B)   On the passage or adoption of every bylaw or ordinance, and every
resolution or order to enter into a contract by the City Council, the yeas and
nays shall be called and recorded. To pass or adopt any bylaw, ordinance or any
such resolution or order, a concurrence of a majority of the whole number of
members elected to the City Council shall be required. All appointments of the
officers by the City Council shall be made viva voce, and the concurrence of a
like majority shall be required, and the names of those, and for whom they
voted, on the vote resulting in an appointment, shall be recorded. The
requirements of a roll call or viva voce vote shall be satisfied by a city
which utilizes an electronic voting device which allows the yeas and nays of
each member of the City Council to be readily seen by the public.
(Neb. RS 17-616)
Statutory reference:
   Adjustments to boundaries of election districts, see Neb. RS 17-614
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 848, passed
4-1-2014, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 1-407 PUBLICATION OR POSTING.
   All ordinances of a general nature shall, before they take effect, be
published one time within 15 days after they are passed:
    (A)   In some newspaper published in the municipality, or if no paper is
published in the municipality, then by posting a written or printed copy
thereof in each of three public places in the municipality; or
   (B)   In book or pamphlet form.
(Ord. 366, passed 6-1-1987; Ord. 546, passed 6-3-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-613
§ 1-408 CERTIFICATE OF PUBLICATION OR POSTING.
   The passage, approval and publication or posting of an ordinance shall be
sufficiently proved by a certificate under the seal of the city from the City
Clerk showing that the ordinance was passed and approved, and when and in what
paper the ordinance was published, or when and by whom and where the ordinance
was posted.
(Neb. RS 17-613)
Statutory reference:
   Passage; rules and regulations, see Neb. RS 17-615
§ 1-409 EFFECTIVE DATE; EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (B) below, an ordinance for the
government of the municipality which has been adopted by the governing body
without submission to the voters of the municipality shall not go into effect
until 15 days after the passage of the ordinance.
   (B)   In the case of riot, infectious or contagious diseases, or other
impending danger, failure of a public utility or any other emergency requiring
its immediate operation, an ordinance shall take effect upon the proclamation
of the Mayor and the posting thereof in at least three of the most public
places in the municipality. Such emergency ordinance shall recite the
emergency, be passed by a three-fourths’ vote of the governing body and be
entered of record on the Municipal Clerk’s minutes.
(Ord. 547, passed 6-3-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-613 and 19-3701
§ 1-410 AMENDMENTS AND REVISIONS.
   No ordinance or section thereof shall be revised or amended unless the new
ordinance contains the entire ordinance or section as revised or amended, and
the ordinance or section so amended is repealed, except that an ordinance
revising all the ordinances of the municipality and modifications to zoning or
building districts may be adopted as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. 548, passed 6-3-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-614
ARTICLE 5: ELECTIONS
Section
   
1-501   Generally
   
1-502   Filing fee
   
1-503   Joint, general, notice
   
1-504   Special elections
   
1-505   Petition, write-in and other candidates for general election ballot;
procedures
   
1-506   Council members
   
1-507   Registered voter qualifications
   
1-508   Exit polls; poll watchers
   
1-509   Wards
   
1-510   Ballots
   
1-511   Extension of terms
   
1-512   Primary election, number of candidates filing
   
1-513   Tie votes
   
1-514   General election, preparation of ballot
   
1-515   Election to terms
   
1-516   Primary election, write-in candidates
   
1-517   Recall procedure
   
1-518   Candidate qualifications
   
1-519   Certificate of nomination or election
   
1-520   Election of officers; certifications required
   
1-521   Candidate filing forms; deadlines; filing officer
§ 1-501 GENERALLY.
   (A)   (1)   All municipal issues and offices shall be combined on the
statewide primary and general election ballots whenever possible. The issuance
of separate ballots shall be avoided in a statewide election if municipal
offices or issues can reasonably be combined with the nonpartisan ballot and
state law does not require otherwise.
      (2)   All municipal elections involving the election of officers shall be
held in accordance with the Election Act and in conjunction with the statewide
primary or general election.
   (B)   When the municipality holds an election in conjunction with the
statewide primary or general election, the election shall be held as provided
in the Election Act, being Neb. RS 32-101 et seq. Any other election held by
the municipality shall be held as provided in the Election Act, being Neb. RS
32-101 et seq. unless otherwise provided by the charter, code or bylaws of the
municipality.
(Ord. 255, passed 5-15-1979; Ord. 734, passed 12-7-2004)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 32-404 and 32-556
§ 1-502 FILING FEE.
   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (D) or (E) below, a filing fee shall
be paid to the City Treasurer by or on behalf of each candidate for city office
prior to filing for office. The fee shall be placed in the General Fund of the
city. No candidate filing forms shall be filed until the proper payment or the
proper receipt showing the payment of such filing fee is presented to the
filing officer. On the day of the filing deadline, the City Treasurer’s office
shall remain open to receive filing fees until the hour of the filing deadline.
   (B)   Except as provided in subsection (D) or (E) below, the filing fee
shall be a sum equal to 1% of the annual salary as of November 30 of the year
preceding the election for the office for which he or she files as a candidate.
   (C)   All declared write-in candidates shall pay the filing fees that are
required for the office at the time that they present the write-in affidavit to
the filing officer.
   (D)   No filing fee shall be required for any candidate filing for an office
in which a per diem is paid rather than a salary or for which there is a salary
of less than $500 per year.
   (E)   (1)   No filing fee shall be required of any candidate completing an
affidavit requesting to file for elective office in forma pauperis.
      (2)    For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         AVAILABLE RESOURCES. Includes every type of property or interest in
property that an individual owns and may convert into cash except:
            1.   Real property used as a home;
            2.   Household goods of a moderate value used in the home; and
            3.   Assets to a maximum value of $3,000 used by a recipient in a
planned effort directed towards self-support.
         PAUPER. A person whose income and other resources for maintenance are
found under assistance standards to be insufficient for meeting the cost of his
or her requirements and whose reserve of cash or other available resources does
not exceed the maximum available resources that an eligible individual may own.
   (F)   If any candidate dies prior to an election, the spouse of the
candidate may file a claim for refund of the filing fee with the City Council
prior to the date of the election. Upon approval of the claim by the City
Council, the filing fee shall be refunded.
(Neb. RS 32-608)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 859, passed
3-3-2015, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 1-503 JOINT, GENERAL, NOTICE.
   The County Clerk shall publish in a newspaper designated by the County Board
the notice of the election no less than 40 days prior to the primary or general
election. This notice will serve the notice requirement for all municipal
elections which are held in conjunction with the county, if such notice is
signed by the Mayor.
(Ord. 257, passed 5-15-1979)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 32-802
§ 1-504 SPECIAL ELECTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 77-3444, any issue to be submitted
to the registered voters at a special election by the city shall be certified
by the City Clerk to the Election Commissioner or County Clerk on or before the
eighth Friday prior to the election. A special election may be held by mail as
provided in Neb. RS 32-952 through 32-959. Any other special election under
this section shall be subject to subsection (B) below.
      (2)   In lieu of submitting the issue at a special election, the city may
submit the issue at a statewide primary or general election or at any scheduled
county election, except that no such issue shall be submitted at a statewide
election or scheduled county election unless the issue to be submitted has been
certified by the City Clerk to the Election Commissioner or County Clerk by
March 1 for the primary election and by September 1 for the general election.
      (3)   After the Election Commissioner or County Clerk has received the
certification of the issue to be submitted, he or she shall be responsible for
all matters relating to the submission of the issue to the registered voters,
except that the City Clerk shall be responsible for the publication or posting
of any required special notice of the submission of the issue other than the
notice required to be given of the statewide election issues. The Election
Commissioner or County Clerk shall prepare the ballots and issue ballots for
early voting and shall also conduct the submission of the issue, including the
receiving and counting of ballots on the issue. The election returns shall be
made to the Election Commissioner or County Clerk. The ballots shall be counted
and canvassed at the same time and in the same manner as the other ballots.
Upon completion of the canvass of the vote by the County Canvassing Board, the
Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall certify the election results to the
City Council. The canvass by the County Canvassing Board shall have the same
force and effect as if made by the City Council.
   (B)   (1)   A city that has submitted an issue for a special election under
subsection (A)(1) above may cancel the special election if the Secretary of
State, Election Commissioner or County Clerk receives a resolution adopted by
the political subdivision canceling the special election on or before the
fourth Thursday prior to the election. No cancellation shall be effective after
such date. If a special election is canceled in such manner, the city shall be
responsible for the costs incurred that are related to the canceled election.
Such costs shall include all chargeable costs as provided in Neb. RS 32-1202
associated with preparing for and conducting a special election.
      (2)   A city that has submitted an issue at a statewide primary or
general election or at any scheduled county election under subsection (A)(2)
above may withdraw the issue from the ballot if the Secretary of State,
Election Commissioner or County Clerk receives a resolution adopted by the city
withdrawing the issue from the ballot no later than March 1 prior to a
statewide primary election or September 1 prior to a statewide general
election. No withdrawal shall be effective after such date. Any issue withdrawn
in this manner shall not be printed on the ballot.
(Neb. RS 32-559)
   (C)   Any special election under the Election Act, being Neb. RS 32-101 et
seq. shall be held on the first Tuesday following the second Monday of the
selected month unless otherwise specifically provided. No special election
shall be held under the Election Act, being Neb. RS 32-101 et seq. in April,
May, June, October, November or December of an even-numbered year unless it is
held in conjunction with the statewide primary or general election. No special
election shall be held under the Election Act, being Neb. RS 32-101 et seq. in
September of an even-numbered year except for a special election by a political
subdivision pursuant to Neb. RS 13-519 or 77-3444 to approve a property tax
levy or exceed a property tax levy limitation.
(Neb. RS 32-405)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 952, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 1-505 PETITION, WRITE-IN AND OTHER CANDIDATES FOR GENERAL ELECTION BALLOT;
PROCEDURES.
   (A)   (1)   Any registered voter who was not a candidate in the primary
election and who was not registered to vote with a party affiliation on or
after March 1 and before the general election in the calendar year of the
general election may have his or her name placed on the general election ballot
for a partisan office by filing petitions as prescribed in this section and
Neb. RS 32-621 or by nomination by political party convention or committee
pursuant to Neb. RS 32-627 or 32-710.
      (2)   Any candidate who was defeated in the primary election and any
registered voter who was not a candidate in the primary election may have his
or her name placed on the general election ballot if a vacancy exists on the
ballot under Neb. RS 32-625(2) and the candidate files for the office by
petition as prescribed in subsections (B) and (C) below, files as a write-in
candidate as prescribed in Neb. RS 32-615 or is nominated by political party
convention or committee pursuant to Neb. RS 32-710.
(Neb. RS 32-616)
   (B)   Petitions for nomination shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS
32-628. Petitions shall state the office to be filled and the name and address
of the candidate. Petitions for partisan office shall also indicate the party
affiliation of the candidate. A sample copy of the petition shall be filed with
the filing officer prior to circulation. Petitions shall be signed by
registered voters residing in the city, if candidates are chosen at large, or
in the ward in which the officer is to be elected, if candidates are chosen by
ward, and shall be filed with the filing officer in the same manner as provided
for candidate filing forms in §
1-521. Petition signers and petition circulators shall conform to the
requirements of Neb. RS 32-629 and 32-630. No petition for nomination shall be
filed unless there is attached thereto a receipt showing the payment of the
filing fee required pursuant to Neb. RS 32-608. The petitions shall be filed by
September 1 in the year of the general election.
(Neb. RS 32-617)
   (C)   (1)   The number of signatures of registered voters needed to place
the name of a candidate upon the nonpartisan ballot for the general election
shall be at least 10% of the total number of registered voters voting for
Governor or President of the United States at the immediately preceding general
election in the city or in the ward in which the officer is to be elected, not
to exceed 2,000.
      (2)   The number of signatures of registered voters needed to place the
name of a candidate for an office upon the partisan ballot for the general
election shall be as follows:
         (a)   For each partisan office to be filled by the registered voters
of the entire state, at least 4,000, and at least 750 signatures shall be
obtained in each congressional district in the state;
         (b)   For each partisan office to be filled by the registered voters
of a county, at least 20% of the total number of registered voters voting for
Governor or President of the United States at the immediately preceding general
election within the county, not to exceed 2,000, except that the number of
signatures shall not be required to exceed 25% of the total number of
registered voters voting for the office at the immediately preceding general
election; and
         (c)   For each partisan office to be filled by the registered voters
of a political subdivision other than a county, at least 20% of the total
number of registered voters voting for Governor or President of the United
States at the immediately preceding general election within the political
subdivision, not to exceed 2,000.
(Neb. RS 32-618)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 923, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 1-506 COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   Council members shall be elected from the municipality at large unless the
governing body provides by ordinance for the election of all or some of its
Council members by wards. Council members shall serve for a term of four years
and shall be a resident and qualified elector. If the election of Council
members takes place by wards, each nominee for Council member shall be a
resident and qualified elector of the ward for which he or she is a candidate,
and only residents of that ward may sign the candidate’s nomination petitions.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 13-2803
§ 1-507 REGISTERED VOTER QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      REGISTERED VOTER. An elector who has a current voter registration record
on file with the Election Commissioner or County Clerk in the county of his or
her residence.
(Neb. RS 32-115)
   (B)   All registered voters residing within the corporate limits of the city
on or before election day shall be entitled to vote at all city elections.
(Neb. RS 17-602)
Statutory reference:
   Definition of elector, see Neb. RS 32-110
§ 1-508 EXIT POLLS; POLL WATCHERS.
   (A)   No person shall conduct an exit poll, a public opinion poll or any
other interview with voters on election day seeking to determine voter
preference within 20 feet of the entrance of any polling place or, if inside
the polling place or building, within 100 feet of any voting booth.
   (B)   (1)   No poll watcher shall interfere with any voter in the
preparation or casting of such voter’s ballot or prevent any election worker
from performing the worker’s duties.
      (2)   A poll watcher shall not provide assistance to a voter as described
in Neb. RS 32-918 unless selected by the voter to provide assistance as
provided in Neb. RS 32-918.
      (3)   A poll watcher shall not engage in electioneering as defined in
Neb. RS 32-1524 while engaged in observing at a polling place.
      (4)   A poll watcher shall maintain a distance of at least eight feet
from the sign-in table, the sign-in register, the polling booths, the ballot
box and any ballots which have not been cast, except that if the polling place
is not large enough for a distance of eight feet, the judge of election shall
post a notice of the minimum distance the poll watcher must maintain from the
sign-in table, the sign-in register, the polling booths, the ballot box and any
ballots which have not been cast. The posted notice shall be clearly visible to
the voters and shall be posted prior to the opening of the polls on election
day. The minimum distance shall not be determined to exclude a poll watcher
from being in the polling place.
(Neb. RS 32-1525) Penalty, see § 1-1201
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 949, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 1-509 WARDS.
   (A)   The municipality shall redistrict as often as necessary using the most
recent Federal Census to ensure that each ward is substantially equal in
population.
   (B)   The municipality shall stand divided into the following wards as set
forth herein:
      (1)   North Ward. The North Ward of the city shall consist of all land
within the corporate limits of the municipality that lies north of the
centerline of Bryson Street.
      (2)   South Ward. The South Ward of the city shall consist of all land
within the corporate limits of the municipality that lies south of the
centerline of Bryson Street.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-102
§ 1-510 BALLOTS.
   It shall be the duty of the County Clerk to provide printed ballots for
every general municipal election, and the expense of printing and delivering
the ballots and cards of instruction shall be a charge upon the municipality.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 32-558
§ 1-511 EXTENSION OF TERMS.
   The term of office of any member of the governing body that would expire
prior to the first regular Council meeting in December 1976, is hereby extended
to December 1976. The term of office of any member that would expire after
December 1976, but prior to the first regular Council meeting in December,
1978, is hereby extended to the first regular meeting in December 1978.
(Ord. 255, passed 5-15-1979)
§ 1-512 PRIMARY ELECTION, NUMBER OF CANDIDATES FILING.
   If the number of candidates properly filed for nomination at the primary
election does not exceed two for each vacancy to be filled, all candidates
properly filed shall be considered nominated, and no primary election for their
nomination shall be required.
(Ord. 255, passed 5-15-1979)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 32-702
§ 1-513 TIE VOTES.
   In the case of a tie vote of any of the candidates in either the primary or
general election, the County Clerk shall notify such candidates to appear at
his or her office on a given day and hour to determine the same by lot before
the Canvassing Board, and the certificate of nomination or election shall be
given accordingly. Notice to appear shall be given by certified mail.
(Ord. 255, passed 5-15-1979)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 32-1122
§ 1-514 GENERAL ELECTION, PREPARATION OF BALLOT.
   When more than one person becomes a candidate by filing, petition or write-
in procedures for the same position in the primary, the County Clerk, in
preparing the official ballot for the general election shall place thereon the
names of the persons who received the greatest number of votes in the primary,
but in no event shall the names on the general election ballot be more than
twice the number of vacancies to be filled at the general election.
(Ord. 255, passed 5-15-1979)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 32-328
§ 1-515 ELECTION TO TERMS.
   (A)   (1)   The candidates shall be placed on the general election ballot
and the candidates receiving the greatest number of votes shall be elected to
terms of the longest duration, and those receiving the next greatest number of
votes shall be elected to the remaining term or terms.
      (2)   The County Clerk shall place the names of the candidates on the
general election ballot in the direct order according to the number of votes
received at the primary election.
   (B)   If no primary election was held, the names of the candidates shall be
placed upon the general election ballot in the order of their filing. The term
of office of all such members shall commence on the first regular meeting of
the Council in December following their election.
(Ord. 255, passed 5-15-1979)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 32-404
§ 1-516 PRIMARY ELECTION, WRITE-IN CANDIDATES.
   When the name of a candidate who did not file or become a petition candidate
for nomination is written in and voted for as a candidate for a Council member,
such person shall not be entitled to a certificate of nomination at the
statewide primary election nor have his or her name placed on the general
election ballot unless he or she shall have received not less than 20% of the
total votes cast for the candidate receiving the greatest number of votes in
the precinct or ward or the candidate receiving the greatest number of votes of
the at-large candidates, whichever the case may be, at the preceding election
in which candidates were elected to serve the ward, or of the at-large
candidates if the election was held at large.
(Ord. 255, passed 5-15-1979)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 32-615
§ 1-517 RECALL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      FILING CLERK. The Election Commissioner or County Clerk.
(Neb. RS 32-1301)
   (B)   (1)   The Mayor, any member of the City Council, and any other elected
official of the city may be removed from office by recall pursuant to this
section.
      (2)   The recall procedure and special election provisions of this
section shall apply to members of the City Council who are elected by ward.
Only registered voters of such member’s ward may sign a recall petition or vote
at the recall election. The recall election shall be held within the member’s
ward. When a member of the City Council is nominated by ward in the primary
election and elected at large in the general election, the recall provisions
shall apply to the registered voters at the general election.
(Neb. RS 32-1302)
   (C)   (1)   A petition demanding that the question of removing the Mayor, a
member of the City Council or any other elected official be submitted to the
registered voters shall be signed by registered voters equal in number to at
least 35% of the total vote cast for that office in the last general election,
except that for City Council office for which more than one candidate is
chosen, the petition shall be signed by registered voters equal in number to at
least 35% of the number of votes cast for the person receiving the most votes
for such office in the last general election. The signatures shall be affixed
to petition papers and shall be considered part of the petition.
      (2)   Petition circulators shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS
32-629 and 32-630.
      (3)   The petition papers shall be procured from the filing clerk. Prior
to the issuance of such petition papers, a recall petition filing form shall be
signed and filed with the filing clerk by at least one registered voter. Such
voter or voters shall be deemed to be the principal circulator or circulators
of the recall petition. The filing form shall state the name and office of the
official sought to be removed, shall include in concise language of 60 words or
less the reason or reasons for which recall is sought, and shall request that
the filing clerk issue initial petition papers to the principal circulator for
circulation. The filing clerk shall notify the official sought to be removed by
any method specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01 or, if notification cannot be made
with reasonable diligence by any of the methods specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01,
by leaving a copy of the filing form at the official’s usual place of residence
and mailing a copy by first-class mail to the official’s last known address. If
the official chooses, he or she may submit a defense statement in concise
language of 60 words or less for inclusion on the petition. Any such defense
statement shall be submitted to the filing clerk within 20 days after the
official receives the copy of the filing form. The filing clerk shall prepare
the petition papers within five business days after receipt of the defense
statement. The principal circulator or circulators shall gather the petition
papers within 20 days after being notified by the filing clerk that the
petition papers are available. The filing clerk shall notify the principal
circulator or circulators that the necessary signatures must be gathered within
30 days from the date of issuing the petitions.
      (4)   The filing clerk, upon issuing the initial petition papers or any
subsequent petition papers, shall enter in a record, to be kept in his or her
office, the name of the principal circulator or circulators to whom the papers
were issued, the date of issuance and the number of papers issued. The filing
clerk shall certify on the papers the name of the principal circulator or
circulators to whom the papers were issued and the date they were issued. No
petition paper shall be accepted as part of the petition unless it bears such
certificate. The principal circulator or circulators who check out petitions
from the filing clerk may distribute such petitions to persons who may act as
circulators of such petitions.
      (5)   Petition signers shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS 32-
629 and 32-630. Each signer of a recall petition shall be a registered voter
and qualified by his or her place of residence to vote for the office in
question.
(Neb. RS 32-1303)
   (D)   Each petition paper shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS 32-
1304.
   (E)   (1)   The principal circulator or circulators shall file, as one
instrument, all petition papers comprising a recall petition for signature
verification with the filing clerk within 30 days after the filing clerk issues
the initial petition papers to the principal circulator or circulators as
provided in subsection (C) above.
      (2)   Within 15 business days after the filing of the petition, the
filing clerk shall ascertain whether or not the petition is signed by the
requisite number of registered voters. No new signatures may be added after the
initial filing of the petition papers. No signatures may be removed unless the
filing clerk receives an affidavit signed by the person requesting his or her
signature be removed before the petitions are filed with the filing clerk for
signature verification. If the petition is found to be sufficient, the filing
clerk shall attach to the petition a certificate showing the result of such
examination. If the requisite number of signatures has not been gathered, the
filing clerk shall file the petition in his or her office without prejudice to
the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
(Neb. RS 32-1305)
   (F)   (1)   If the recall petition is found to be sufficient, the filing
clerk shall notify the official whose removal is sought and the City Council
that sufficient signatures have been gathered. Notification of the official
sought to be removed may be by any method specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01 or, if
notification cannot be made with reasonable diligence by any of the methods
specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01, by leaving such notice at the official’s usual
place of residence and mailing a copy by first-class mail to the official’s
last known address.
      (2)   The City Council shall, within 21 days after receipt of the
notification from the filing clerk pursuant to subsection (F)(1) above, order
an election. The date of the election shall be the first available date that
complies with Neb. RS 32-405 and that can be certified to the Election
Commissioner or County Clerk at least 50 days prior to the election, except
that if any other election is to be held in the city within 90 days after such
notification, the City Council shall provide for the holding of the recall
election on the same day.
      (3)   All resignations shall be tendered as provided in Neb. RS 32-562.
If the official whose removal is sought resigns before the recall election is
held, the City Council may cancel the recall election if the City Council
notifies the Election Commissioner or County Clerk of the cancellation on or
before the fourth Thursday prior to the election, otherwise, the recall
election shall be held as scheduled.
      (4)   If a filing clerk is subject to a recall election, the Secretary of
State shall conduct the recall election.
(Neb. RS 32-1306)
   (G)   The form of the official ballot at a recall election held pursuant to
subsection (F) above shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS 32-1307.
   (H)   (1)   If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election are against
the removal of the official named on the ballot or the election results in a
tie, the official shall continue in office for the remainder of his or her term
but may be subject to further recall attempts as provided in subsection (I)
below.
      (2)   If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election are for the
removal of the official named on the ballot, he or she shall, regardless of any
technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office unless
a recount is ordered. If the official is deemed removed, the removal shall
result in a vacancy in the office which shall be filled as otherwise provided
in this section and Neb. RS 32-567 through 32-570 and 32-574.
      (3)   If the election results show a margin of votes equal to 1% or less
between the removal or retention of the official in question, the Secretary of
State, Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall order a recount of the votes
cast unless the official named on the ballot files a written statement with the
filing clerk that he or she does not want a recount.
      (4)   If there are vacancies in the offices of one-half or more of the
members of the City Council or any other governing body at one time due to the
recall of such members, a special election to fill such vacancies shall be
conducted as expeditiously as possible by the Secretary of State, Election
Commissioner or County Clerk.
      (5)   No official who is removed at a recall election or who resigns
after the initiation of the recall process shall be appointed to fill the
vacancy resulting from his or her removal or the removal of any other member of
the same governing body during the remainder of his or her term of office.
(Neb. RS 32-1308)
   (I)   No recall petition filing form shall be filed against an elected
official within 12 months after a recall election has failed to remove him or
her from office or within six months after the beginning of his or her term of
office or within six months prior to the incumbent filing deadline for the
office.
(Neb. RS 32-1309)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 960, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 1-518 CANDIDATE QUALIFICATIONS.
   Any person seeking elected office in the municipality shall be a registered
voter prior to holding such office and in addition shall have reached the age
of majority. The Mayor and members of the Council shall be residents and
qualified electors of the city. They shall not hold any other public elective
public office, except for officers of public power districts, public power and
irrigation districts and public utility companies.
(Ord. 352, passed 10-1-1985)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-108.02 and 32-602
§ 1-519 CERTIFICATE OF NOMINATION OR ELECTION.
   (Repealed by Ord. 734, passed 12-7-2004)
§ 1-520 ELECTION OF OFFICERS; CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED.
   No later than January 5 of each even-numbered year, the City Council shall
certify to the Election Commissioner or the County Clerk, on forms prescribed
by such official, the name of the city, the number of officers to be elected,
the length of the terms of office, the vacancies to be filled by election and
length of remaining term and the number of votes to be cast by a registered
voter for each office.
(Ord. 734, passed 12-7-2004)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 32-404
§ 1-521 CANDIDATE FILING FORMS; DEADLINES; FILING OFFICER.
   (A)   Any candidate may place his or her name on the primary election ballot
by filing a candidate filing form prescribed by the Secretary of State as
provided in subsection (B) below. If a candidate is an incumbent of any
elective office, the filing period for filing the candidate filing form shall
be between December 1 and February 15 prior to the date of the primary
election. No incumbent who resigns from elective office prior to the expiration
of his or her term shall file for any office after February 15 of that election
year. All other candidates shall file for office between December 1 and March 1
prior to the date of the general election.
   (B)   Candidate filing forms shall be filed in the office of the Election
Commissioner or County Clerk.
(Ord. 816, passed 1-3-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Candidate filing forms, see Neb. RS 32-606 and 32-607
   Filling of vacancy on ballot, see Neb. RS 32-625 and 32-627
   Withdrawal after filing, see Neb. RS 32-622
ARTICLE 6: FISCAL MANAGEMENT
Section
   
1-601   Fiscal year
   
1-602   Proposed budget statement; contents; availability; correction
   
1-603   Proposed budget statement; hearing; adoption; certification of tax
amount
   
1-604   Adopted budget statement; filing; certification of amount of tax
   
1-604.01   Expenditures prior to adoption of budget
   
1-605   Budget procedure
   
1-606   Appropriations
   
1-607   Property tax; certification of amount
   
1-608   Expenditures
   
1-609   Contracts and purchases; bidding and other requirements
   
1-610   Annual audit
   
1-611   Claims and accounts payable
   
1-612   Warrants
   
1-613   Transfer of funds
   
1-614   Special assessment fund
   
1-615   Sinking funds
   
1-616   General Fund
   
1-617   Deposit of funds
   
1-618   Investment of funds
   
1-619   Bond issues
   
1-620   Motor vehicle fee
   
1-621   Proprietary functions; fiscal year; budget statements; filing; hearing;
adoption; reconciliation
   
1-622   Property tax levy; maximum; authority to exceed
   
1-623   Property tax request; procedure for setting
   
1-624   Certificates of deposit; time deposits; conditions
   
1-625   Fiscal management; credit cards and electronic funds transfers;
authority to accept
   
1-626   Budget revision
   
1-627   Debt collection; authority to contract with collection agency
   
1-628   Definitions
§ 1-601 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the municipality and any public utility of the
municipality commences on October 1 and extends through the following September
30 except as provided in the Municipal Proprietary Function Act, being Neb. RS
18-2801 et seq.
(Ord. 514, passed 12-7-1995)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-701
§ 1-602 PROPOSED BUDGET STATEMENT; CONTENTS; AVAILABILITY; CORRECTION.
   (A)   The City Council shall annually or biennially prepare a proposed
budget statement on forms prescribed and furnished by the Auditor of Public
Accounts. The proposed budget statement shall be made available to the public
prior to publication of the notice of the hearing on the proposed budget
statement pursuant to § 1-603. A proposed budget statement shall contain the
following information, except as provided by state law:
      (1)   For the immediately preceding fiscal year or biennial period, the
revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other than revenue
received from personal and real property taxation, allocated to the funds and
separately stated as to each such source: the unencumbered cash balance at the
beginning and end of the year or biennial period; the amount received by
taxation of personal and real property; and the amount of actual expenditures;
      (2)   For the current fiscal year or biennial period, actual and
estimated revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, allocated to
the funds and separately stated as to each such source: the actual unencumbered
cash balance available at the beginning of the year or biennial period; the
amount received from personal and real property taxation; and the amount of
actual and estimated expenditures, whichever is applicable. This statement
shall contain the cash reserve for each fiscal year or biennial period and
shall note whether or not the reserve is encumbered. The cash reserve
projections shall be based upon the actual experience of prior years or
biennial periods. The cash reserve shall not exceed 50% of the total budget
adopted exclusive of capital outlay items;
      (3)   For the immediately ensuing fiscal year or biennial period, an
estimate of revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other than
revenue to be received from taxation of personal and real property, separately
stated as to each such source: the actual or estimated unencumbered cash
balances, whichever is applicable, to be available at the beginning of the year
or biennial period; the amounts proposed to be expended during the year or
biennial period; and the amount of cash reserve, based on actual experience of
prior years or biennial period, which cash reserve shall not exceed 50% of the
total budget adopted exclusive of capital outlay items;
      (4)   A statement setting out separately the amount sought to be raised
from the levy of a tax on the taxable value of real property:
         (a)   For the purpose of paying the principal or interest on bonds
issued or authorized to be issued by the City Council or the legal voters of
the political subdivision; and
         (b)   For all other purposes.
      (5)   A uniform summary of the proposed budget statement, including each
proprietary function fund included in a separate proprietary budget statement
prepared pursuant to the Municipal Proprietary Function Act, being Neb. RS 18-
2801 et seq., and a grand total of all funds maintained by the City Council;
and
      (6)   A list of the proprietary functions which are not included in the
budget statement. These proprietary functions shall have a separate budget
statement which is approved by the City Council as provided in the Municipal
Proprietary Function Act.
   (B)   The actual or estimated unencumbered cash balance required to be
included in the budget statement by this section shall include deposits and
investments of the city as well as any funds held by the County Treasurer for
the city and shall be accurately stated on the proposed budget statement.
   (C)   The city shall correct any material errors in the budget statement
detected by the Auditor of Public Accounts or by other sources.
(Neb. RS 13-504)
   (D)   The estimated expenditures plus the required cash reserve for the
ensuing fiscal year or biennial period less all estimated and actual
unencumbered balances at the beginning of the year or biennial period and less
the estimated income from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other
than taxation of personal and real property shall equal the amount to be
received from taxes, and that amount shall be shown on the proposed budget
statement pursuant to this section. The amount to be raised from taxation of
personal and real property, as determined above, plus the estimated revenue
from other sources, including motor vehicle taxes, and the unencumbered
balances shall equal the estimated expenditures, plus the necessary required
cash reserve, for the ensuing year or biennial period.
(Neb. RS 13-505)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 839, passed
4-1-2014, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 1-603 PROPOSED BUDGET STATEMENT; HEARING; ADOPTION; CERTIFICATION OF TAX
AMOUNT.
   (A)   The City Council shall each year or biennial period conduct a public
hearing on its proposed budget statement. Such hearing shall be held separately
from any regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body and shall not be
limited by time. Notice of the place and time of the hearing, together with a
summary of the proposed budget statement, shall be published four calendar days
prior to the date set for hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within
the city’s jurisdiction. For purposes of such notice, the four calendar days
shall include the day of publication but not the day of hearing. When the total
operating budget, not including reserves, does not exceed $10,000 per year or
$20,000 per biennial period, the proposed budget summary may be posted at the
City Council’s principal headquarters. At such hearing, the governing body
shall make at least three copies of the proposed budget statement available to
the public and shall make a presentation outlining key provisions of the
proposed budget statement, including, but not limited to, a comparison with the
prior year’s budget. Any member of the public desiring to speak on the proposed
budget statement shall be allowed to address the governing body at the hearing
and shall be given a reasonable amount of time to do so.
   (B)   After the hearing, the proposed budget statement shall be adopted, or
amended and adopted as amended, and a written record shall be kept of the
hearing. The amount to be received from personal and real property taxation
shall be certified to the levying board after the proposed budget statement is
adopted or is amended and adopted as amended. The certification of the amount
to be received from personal and real property taxation shall specify
separately the amount to be applied to the payment of principal or interest on
bonds issued or authorized to be issued by the City Council or the legal voters
of the political subdivision and the amount to be received for all other
purposes.
   (C)   If the adopted budget statement reflects a change from that shown in
the published proposed budget statement, a summary of the changes shall be
published within 20 calendar days after its adoption in the manner provided in
this section, but without provision for hearing, setting forth the items
changed and the reasons for the changes.
   (D)   Upon approval by City Council, the budget shall be filed with the
Auditor of Public Accounts. The Auditor may review the budget for errors in
mathematics, improper accounting and noncompliance with the State Budget Act,
being Neb. RS 13-501 et seq. or Neb. RS 13-518 through 13-522. If the Auditor
detects such errors, he or she shall immediately notify the Council of such
errors. The Council shall correct any such error as provided in § 1-626.
Warrants for the payment of expenditures provided in the budget adopted under
this section shall be valid notwithstanding any errors or noncompliance for
which the Auditor has notified the Council.
(Neb. RS 13-506)
   (E)   When a levy increase has been authorized by vote of the electors, the
adopted budget statement shall indicate the amount of the levy increase.
(Neb. RS 13-507)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 950, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 1-604 ADOPTED BUDGET STATEMENT; FILING; CERTIFICATION OF AMOUNT OF TAX.
   (A)   (1)   After publication and hearing on the proposed budget statement
and within the time prescribed by law, the City Council shall file with and
certify to the levying board or boards on or before September 30 of each year
or September 30 of the final year of a biennial period and file with the
Auditor of Public Accounts a copy of the adopted budget statement which
complies with Neb. RS 13-518 through 13-522, together with the amount of the
tax required to fund the adopted budget, setting out separately:
         (a)   The amount to be levied for the payment of principal or interest
on bonds issued or authorized to be issued by the City Council or the legal
voters of the political subdivision; and
         (b)   The amount to be levied for all other purposes.
      (2)   Proof of publication shall be attached to the statements.
   (B)   If the prime rate published by the Federal Reserve Board is 10% or
more at the time of the filing and certification required under this subsection
(B), the City Council, in certifying the amount required, may make allowance
for delinquent taxes not exceeding 5% of the amount required plus the actual
percentage of delinquent taxes for the preceding tax year or biennial period
and for the amount of estimated tax loss from any pending or anticipated
litigation which involves taxation and in which tax collections have been or
can be withheld or escrowed by court order. For purposes of this section,
anticipated litigation shall be limited to the anticipation of an action being
filed by a taxpayer who or which filed a similar action for the preceding year
or biennial period which is still pending. Except for such allowances, the City
Council shall not certify an amount of tax more than 1% greater or lesser than
the amount determined under § 1-602.
   (C)   The City Council shall use the certified taxable values as provided by
the County Assessor pursuant to Neb. RS 13-509 for the current year in setting
or certifying the levy. The City Council may designate one of its members to
perform any duty or responsibility required of the Council by this section.
(Neb. RS 13-508)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 843, passed
4-1-2014, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 1-604.01 EXPENDITURES PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF BUDGET.
   (A)   On and after the first day of its fiscal year in 1993 and of each
succeeding year or on or after the first day of its biennial period and until
the adoption of the budget by the City Council in September, the City Council
may expend any balance of cash on hand for the current expenses of the city.
Except as provided in subsection (B) below, these expenditures shall not exceed
an amount equivalent to the total amount expended under the last budget in the
equivalent period of the prior budget year or biennial period. These
expenditures shall be charged against the appropriations for each individual
fund or purpose as provided in the budget when adopted.
(Neb. RS 13-509.01)
   (B)   The restriction on expenditures in subsection (A) above may be
exceeded upon the express finding of the City Council that expenditures beyond
the amount authorized are necessary to enable the city to meet its statutory
duties and responsibilities. The finding and approval of the expenditures in
excess of the statutory authorization shall be adopted by the City Council in
open public session. Expenditures authorized by this section shall be charged
against appropriations for each individual fund or purpose as provided in the
budget when adopted, and nothing in this section shall be construed to
authorize expenditures by the city in excess of that authorized by any other
statutory provision.
(Neb. RS 13-509.02)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 841, passed
4-1-2014, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 1-605 BUDGET PROCEDURE.
   The budget instruction manual prepared by the Auditor of Public Accounts is
incorporated by reference for the purpose of proper budget preparation.
§ 1-606 APPROPRIATIONS.
   The governing body shall adopt a budget statement pursuant to the State
Budget Act, being Neb. RS 13-501 et seq., to be termed “The Annual
Appropriation Bill,” in which are appropriated such sums of money as may be
deemed necessary to defray all necessary expenses and liabilities of the city.
(Ord. 469, passed 5-3-1994; Ord. 516, passed 12-7-1995)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-706
§ 1-607 PROPERTY TAX; CERTIFICATION OF AMOUNT.
   The governing body shall, at the time and in the manner provided by law,
cause to be certified to the County Clerk the amount of tax to be levied upon
the taxable value of all the taxable property of the municipality which the
municipality requires for the purposes of the adopted budget statement for the
ensuing year, including all special assessments and taxes assessed as otherwise
provided. Subject to Neb. RS 77-3442, the maximum amount of tax which may be so
certified, assessed and collected shall not require a tax levy in excess of the
amounts specified in Neb. RS 17-702.
(Ord. 585, passed 8-11-1998)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-702
§ 1-608 EXPENDITURES.
   The Mayor and City Council shall have no power to appropriate, issue or draw
any order or warrant on the City Treasurer for money, unless the same has been
appropriated or ordered by ordinance, or the claim for the payment of which
such order or warrant is issued has been allowed according to the provisions of
§
1-611, and funds for the class or object out of which such claim is payable
have been included in the adopted budget statement or transferred according to
law.
(Neb. RS 17-708)
§ 1-609 CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES; BIDDING AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 18-412.01 for a contract with a public
power district to operate, renew, replace or add to the electric distribution,
transmission or generation system of the city, no contract for enlargement or
general improvements, such as water extensions, sewers, public heating system,
bridges, work on streets or any other work or improvement when the cost of the
enlargement or improvement is assessed to the property, costing over $30,000,
shall be made unless it is first approved by the governing body.
   (B)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 18-412.01 before the governing body
makes any contract in excess of $30,000 for enlargement or general
improvements, such as water extensions, sewers, public heating system, bridges,
work on streets or any other work or improvement when the cost of the
enlargement or improvement is assessed to the property, an estimate of the cost
shall be made by the Municipal Engineer and submitted to the governing body. In
advertising for bids as provided in subsections (C) and (E) below, the
governing body may publish the amount of the estimate.
   (C)   Advertisements for bids shall be required for any contract costing
over $30,000 entered into:
      (1)   For enlargement or general improvements, such as water extensions,
sewers, public heating system, bridges, work on streets or any other work or
improvement when the cost of the enlargement or improvement is assessed to the
property; or
      (2)   For the purchase of equipment used in the construction of the
enlargement or general improvements.
   (D)   A municipal electric utility may enter into a contract for the
enlargement or improvement of the electric system or for the purchase of
equipment used for the enlargement or improvement without advertising for bids
if the price is:
      (1)   Thirty thousand dollars or less;
      (2)   Sixty thousand dollars or less and the city electric utility has
gross annual revenue from retail sales in excess of $1,000,000;
      (3)   Ninety thousand dollars or less and the city electric utility has
gross annual revenue from retail sales in excess of $5,000,000; or
      (4)   One hundred twenty thousand dollars or less and the city electric
utility has gross annual revenue from retail sales in excess of $10,000,000.
   (E)   The advertisement provided for in subsection (C) above shall be
published at least seven days prior to the bid closing in a legal newspaper
published in or of general circulation in the municipality, and if there is no
legal newspaper published in or of general circulation in the municipality,
then in some newspaper of general circulation published in the county in which
the municipality is located, and if there is no legal newspaper of general
circulation published in the county in which the municipality is located, then
in a newspaper, designated by the County Board, having a general circulation
within the county where bids are required, and if no newspaper is published in
the municipality or county, or if no newspaper has general circulation in the
county, then by posting a written or printed copy thereof in each of three
public places in the municipality at least seven days prior to the bid closing.
In case of a public emergency resulting from infectious or contagious diseases,
destructive windstorms, floods, snow, war or an exigency or pressing necessity
or unforeseen need calling for immediate action or remedy to prevent a serious
loss of or serious injury or damage to life, health or property, estimates of
costs and advertising for bids may be waived in the emergency ordinance
authorized by Neb. RS 17-613 when adopted by a three-fourths’ vote of the
governing body and entered of record.
   (F)   If, after advertising for bids as provided in this section, the
governing body receives fewer than two bids on a contract or if the bids
received by the governing body contain a price which exceeds the estimated
cost, the governing body may negotiate a contract in an attempt to complete the
proposed enlargement or general improvements at a cost commensurate with the
estimate given.
   (G)   If the materials are of such a nature that, in the opinion of the
manufacturer and with the concurrence of the governing body or Board of Public
Works, no cost can be estimated until the materials have been manufactured or
assembled to the specific qualifications of the city, the governing body or
Board of Public Works may authorize the manufacture and assemblage of those
materials and may thereafter approve the estimated cost expenditure when it is
provided by the manufacturer.
   (H)   Any bidding procedure may be waived by the governing body or Board of
Public Works:
      (1)   When materials or equipment are purchased at the same price and
from the same seller as materials or equipment which have formerly been
obtained pursuant to the state bidding procedure in Neb. RS 81-145 through 81-
162;
      (2)   When the contract is negotiated directly with a sheltered workshop
pursuant to Neb. RS 48-1503; or
      (3)   When required to comply with any federal grant, loan or program.
   (I)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law or a home rule
charter, a municipality which has established, by an interlocal agreement with
any county, a joint purchasing division or agency may purchase personal
property without competitive bidding if the price for the property has been
established by the federal General Services Administration or the materiel
division of the Department of Administrative Services.
      (2)   For the purpose of this subsection (I), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes, but is not limited to, supplies,
materials and equipment used by or furnished to any officer, office,
department, institution, board or other agency.
         PURCHASING or PURCHASE. The obtaining of personal property by sale,
lease or other contractual means.
(Ord. 261, passed 5-15-1979; Ord. 336, passed 11-1-1983; Ord. 590, passed 8-11-
1998; Ord. 821, passed 1-3-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal bidding procedure, see Neb. RS 17-568.02
   Public works estimate of cost, see Neb. RS 17-568.01
   Purchase of personal property without bidding, see Neb. RS 18-1756
   Requirements for public lettings, see Neb. RS 73-101 et seq.
§ 1-610 ANNUAL AUDIT.
   The governing body shall cause an audit of the municipal accounts to be made
by a qualified accountant as expeditiously as possible following the close of
the fiscal year. Such audit shall be made on a cash or accrual method at the
discretion of the governing body. Said audit shall be completed and the annual
audit report made not later than six months after the close of the fiscal year.
The accountant making the audit shall submit not less than three copies of the
audit report to the governing body. All public utilities or other enterprises
which substantially generate their own revenue shall be audited separately, and
the results of such audits shall appear separately in the annual audit report,
and such audits shall be on an accrual basis and shall contain statements and
materials which conform to generally accepted accounting principles. The audit
report shall set forth the financial position and results of financial
operations for each fund or group of accounts of the municipality as well as an
opinion by the accountant with respect to the financial statements. Two copies
of the annual audit report shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk and shall
become a part of the public records of the Municipal Clerk’s office and will,
at all times thereafter, be open for public inspection. One copy shall be filed
with the Auditor of Public Accounts.
(Ord. 262, passed 5-15-1979)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2901 through 19-2909
§ 1-611 CLAIMS AND ACCOUNTS PAYABLE.
   (A)   (1)   All liquidated and unliquidated claims and accounts payable
against the city shall:
         (a)   Be presented in writing;
         (b)   State the name and address of the claimant and the amount of the
claim; and
         (c)   Fully and accurately identify the items or services for which
payment is claimed or the time, place, nature and circumstances giving rise to
the claim.
      (2)   As a condition precedent to maintaining an action for a claim,
other than a tort claim as defined in Neb. RS 13-903, the claimant shall file
such claim within 90 days of the accrual of the claim in the office of the City
Clerk.
      (3)   The City Clerk shall notify the claimant or his or her agent or
attorney by letter mailed to the claimant’s address within five days if the
claim is disallowed by the City Council.
      (4)   No costs shall be recovered against the city in any action brought
against it for any claim or for any claim allowed in part which has not been
presented to the City Council to be audited, unless the recovery is for a
greater sum than the amount allowed with the interest due.
(Neb. RS 17-714)
   (B)   Upon the allowance of claims by the City Council, the order for their
payment shall specify the particular fund or appropriation out of which they
are payable as specified in the adopted budget statement; and no order or
warrant shall be drawn in excess of 85% of the current levy for the purpose for
which it is drawn, unless there is sufficient money in the Treasury at the
credit of the proper fund for its payment; provided, that if there exists at
the time such warrant is drawn, obligated funds from the federal government or
the state, or both from the federal government and the state, for the general
purpose or purposes of such warrant, then such warrant may be drawn in excess
of 85% of the current levy for the purpose for which it is drawn to the
additional extent of 100% of such obligated federal or state funds. No claim
shall be audited or allowed unless an order or warrant for the payment thereof
may legally be drawn.
(Neb. RS 17-715)
§ 1-612 WARRANTS.
   All warrants drawn upon the City Treasurer must be signed by the Mayor and
countersigned by the City Clerk, stating the particular fund to which the same
is chargeable, the person to whom payable and for what particular object. No
money shall be otherwise paid than upon such warrants so drawn. Each warrant
shall specify the amount included in the adopted budget statement for such fund
upon which it is drawn and the amount already expended of such fund.
(Neb. RS 17-711)
§ 1-613 TRANSFER OF FUNDS.
    (A)   Whenever, during the current fiscal year, it becomes apparent to the
governing body that, due to unforeseen emergencies, there is temporarily
insufficient money in a particular fund to meet the requirements of the adopted
budget of expenditures for that fund, the governing body may by a majority
vote, unless otherwise provided by state law, transfer money from other funds
to such fund.
   (B)   No expenditure during any fiscal year shall be made in excess of the
amounts indicated in the adopted budget statement, except as authorized in § 1-
626 or by state law.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any officer or officers of the governing body to
obligate funds contrary to the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 635, passed 5-10-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 13-510
§ 1-614 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUND.
   All money received on special assessments shall be held by the City
Treasurer as a special fund to be applied to the payment of the improvement for
which the assessment was made, and this money shall be used for no other
purpose whatever, unless to reimburse the city for money expended for any such
improvement.
(Neb. RS 17-710)
§ 1-615 SINKING FUNDS.
   (A)   The city is hereby empowered to receive money or property by donation,
bequest, gift, devise or otherwise for the benefit of any one or more of the
public purposes for which sinking funds are established by this section, as
stipulated by the donor. Title to any money or property so donated shall vest
in the City Council, or in its successors in office, who shall become the
owners thereof in trust to the uses of the sinking fund or funds. In the event
of a donation of real estate, the City Council may manage such real estate as
in the case of real estate donated to the city for city library purposes under
the provisions of Neb. RS 51-215 and 51-216.
(Neb. RS 19-1301)
   (B)   The City Council, subject to all the limitations set forth in this
section, shall have the power to levy a tax of not to exceed $0.105 on each
$100 in any one year upon the taxable value of all the taxable property within
the city for a term of not to exceed ten years, in addition to the amount of
tax which may be annually levied for the purposes of the adopted budget
statement of the city, for the purpose of establishing a sinking fund for the
construction, purchase, improvement, extension, original equipment or repair,
not including maintenance, of any one or more of the following public
improvements, including acquisition of any land incident to the making thereof:
city libraries; city auditoriums or community houses for social or recreational
purposes; city halls; city public libraries, auditoriums or community houses in
a single building; city swimming pools; city jails; city fire stations,
together with firefighting equipment or apparatus; city parks; city cemeteries;
city medical buildings, together with furnishings and equipment; or city
hospitals. The city shall not be authorized to levy the tax or to establish the
sinking fund as provided in this subsection (B) if, having bonded indebtedness,
such city has been in default in the payment of interest thereon or principal
thereof for a period of ten years prior to the date of the passage of the
resolution providing for the submission of the proposition for establishment of
the sinking fund as required in subsection (C) below.
(Neb. RS 19-1302)
   (C)   Before any sinking fund or funds are established or before any annual
tax is levied for any such planned city improvements mentioned in subsection
(B) above by the city, the City Council shall declare its purpose by resolution
to submit to the qualified electors of the city at the next general city
election the proposition to provide the city with the specific city improvement
planned under this section. The resolution of submission shall, among other
things, set forth a clear description of the improvement planned, the estimated
cost according to the prevailing costs, the amount of annual levy over a
definite period of years, not exceeding ten years, required to provide such
cost, and the specific name or designation for the sinking fund sought to be
established to carry out the planned improvement, together with a statement of
the proposition for placement upon the ballot at the election. Notice of the
submission of the proposition, together with a copy of the official ballot
containing the proposition, shall be published in its entirety three successive
weeks before the day of the election in a legal newspaper in or of general
circulation in the city or, if no legal newspaper is in or of general
circulation in the city, in a legal newspaper in or of general circulation in
the county in which the city is located. No such sinking fund shall be
established unless the same has been authorized by a majority or more of the
legal votes of the city cast for or against the proposition. If less than a
majority of the legal votes favor the establishment of the sinking fund, the
planned improvement shall not be made, no annual tax shall be levied therefor,
and no sinking fund or sinking funds shall be established in connection
therewith, but such resolution of submission shall immediately be repealed. If
the proposition shall carry at such election in the manner prescribed in this
subsection (C), the City Council and its successors in office shall proceed to
do all things authorized under such resolution of submission but never
inconsistent with this section. The election provided for under this section
shall be conducted as provided under the Election Act, being Neb. RS 32-101 et
seq.
(Neb. RS 19-1303)
   (D)   All funds received by the City Treasurer, by donation or by tax levy,
as hereinbefore provided, shall, as they accumulate, be immediately invested by
the Treasurer, with the written approval of the City Council, in the manner
provided in this article. Whenever investments of such sinking fund or funds
are made, as aforesaid, the nature and character of the same shall be reported
to the City Council, and the investment report shall be made a matter of record
by the City Clerk in the proceedings of the City Council. The sinking fund, or
sinking funds, accumulated under the provisions of this section, shall
constitute a special fund, or funds, for the purpose or purposes for which the
same was authorized and shall not be used for any other purpose unless
authorized by 60% of the qualified electors of the city voting at a general
election favoring such change in the use of the sinking fund or sinking funds.
The question of the change in the use of the sinking fund or sinking funds,
when it fails to carry, shall not be resubmitted in substance for a period of
one year from and after the date of such election.
(Neb. RS 19-1304)
Statutory reference:
   Additional levy limitations, see Neb. RS 17-702
   Investment in warrants, see Neb. RS 77-2337
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 925, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 1-616 GENERAL FUND.
   If the city has not decided to follow the all-purpose levy method of
financing for the fiscal year, all money not specifically appropriated in the
annual appropriation bill shall be deposited in and known as the General Fund.
§ 1-617 DEPOSIT OF FUNDS.
   (A)   The City Treasurer shall deposit and at all times keep on deposit for
safekeeping, in banks, capital stock financial institutions or qualifying
mutual financial institutions of approved and responsible standing, all money
collected, received or held by him or her as City Treasurer. Such deposits
shall be subject to all regulations imposed by law or adopted by the City
Council for the receiving and holding thereof. The fact that a stockholder,
director or other officer of such bank, capital stock financial institution or
qualifying mutual financial institution is also serving as Mayor, as a member
of the City Council or as any other officer of the city shall not disqualify
such bank, capital stock financial institution or qualifying mutual financial
institution from acting as a depository for such municipal funds.
   (B)   The City Council shall require from all banks, capital stock financial
institutions or qualifying mutual financial institutions a bond in such penal
sum as may be the maximum amount on deposit at any time less the amount insured
by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or, in lieu thereof, security
given as provided in the Public Funds Deposit Security Act, being Neb. RS 77-
2386 et seq. to secure the payment of all such deposits and accretions. The
City Council shall approve such bond or giving of security. The City Treasurer
shall not be liable for any loss of any money sustained by reason of the
failure of any such depository so designated and approved.
   (C)   The insurance afforded to depositors in banks, capital stock financial
institutions or qualifying mutual financial institutions through the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation shall be deemed and construed to be a surety bond
to the extent that the deposits are insured by such corporation, and, for
deposits so insured, no other surety bond or other security shall be required.
   (D)   Neb. RS 77-2366 shall apply to deposits in capital stock financial
institutions. Neb. RS 77-2365.01 shall apply to deposits in qualifying mutual
financial institutions.
(Ord. 588, passed 8-11-1998; Ord. 697, passed 5-6-2003; Ord. 715, passed 3-2-
2004)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-607 and 77-2362
§ 1-618 INVESTMENT OF FUNDS.
   Whenever a city has accumulated a surplus of any fund in excess of its
current needs or has accumulated a sinking fund for the payment of its bonds
and the money in such sinking fund exceeds the amount necessary to pay the
principal and interest of any such bonds which become due during the current
year, the governing body of such city may invest any such surplus in
certificates of deposit, in time deposits, and in any securities in which the
state investment officer is authorized by law and as provided in the authorized
investment guidelines of the State Investment Council in effect on the date the
investment is made.
(Ord. 403, passed 3-6-1990)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-608, 17-609 and 77-2341
§ 1-619 BOND ISSUES.
   The City Council may, after meeting all the requirements of state law, issue
bonds, fund bonds and retire bonds for such purposes as may be permitted by
state law. The City Council shall have the authority to levy special
assessments for the payment of interest and principal on these bonds and may
spread the payments up to the maximum number of years permitted by state law.
Statutory reference:
   Bonds in general, see Neb. RS 18-1801 through 18-1805
   Funding and refunding bonds, see Neb. RS 10-606 through 10-612
   General provisions, see Neb. RS 10-101 through 10-143
§ 1-620 MOTOR VEHICLE FEE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LIMITS OF THE CITY. Includes the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of
the city.
      PERSON. Includes bodies corporate, societies, communities, the public
generally, individuals, partnerships, limited liability companies, joint-stock
companies, cooperatives and associations. PERSON does not include any federal,
state or local government or any political subdivision thereof.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (D) below, the
governing body of the city shall have power to require any individual whose
primary residence or person who owns a place of business which is within the
limits of the city and that owns and operates a motor vehicle within such
limits to pay an annual motor vehicle fee and to require the payment of such
fee upon the change of ownership of such vehicle. All such fees which may be
provided for under this section shall be used exclusively for constructing,
repairing, maintaining or improving streets, roads, alleys, public ways or
parts thereof or for the amortization of bonded indebtedness when created for
such purposes.
      (2)   To ensure compatibility with the Vehicle Title and Registration
System maintained by the Department of Motor Vehicles:
         (a)   Any city that collects the annual motor vehicle fee authorized
under this section shall use the plate types listed under Neb. RS 60-3,104 and,
as applicable, weight categories listed under the Motor Vehicle Registration
Act, being Neb. RS 60-301 et seq. when reporting information to the Vehicle
Title and Registration System; and
         (b)   Any city that adopts an annual motor vehicle fee under this
section or that modifies an existing motor vehicle fee shall notify the
Department of Motor Vehicles of such new or modified fee within ten business
days after the passage of the ordinance authorizing such new or modified fee
and at least 60 days prior to the implementation of such new or modified fee.
   (C)   No motor vehicle fee shall be required under this section if:
      (1)   A vehicle is used or stored but temporarily in the city for a
period of six months or less in a 12-month period;
      (2)   An individual does not have a primary residence or a person does
not own a place of business within the limits of the city and does not own and
operate a motor vehicle within the limits of the city; or
      (3)   An individual is a full-time student attending a post-secondary
institution within the limits of the city and the motor vehicle’s situs under
the Motor Vehicle Certificate of Title Act, being Neb. RS 60-101 et seq. is
different from the place at which he or she is attending such institution.
   (D)   After December 31, 2012, no motor vehicle fee shall be required of any
individual whose primary residence is or person who owns a place of business
within the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of the city.
   (E)   The fee shall be paid to the County Treasurer of the county in which
the city is located when the registration fees as provided in the Motor Vehicle
Registration Act are paid. These fees shall be credited by the County Treasurer
to the road fund of the city.
(Neb. RS 18-1214)
Statutory reference:
   Motor Vehicle Registration Act, see Neb. RS 60-301
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 948, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 1-621 PROPRIETARY FUNCTIONS; FISCAL YEAR; BUDGET STATEMENTS; FILING; HEARING;
ADOPTION; RECONCILIATION.
   (A)   Pursuant to the Municipal Proprietary Function Act, being Neb. RS 18-
2801 et seq., the governing body may prepare a proprietary budget statement for
its proprietary functions separate and apart from its municipal budget
statement prepared pursuant to the State Budget Act, being Neb. RS 13-501 et
seq. For the purpose of this section, PROPRIETARY FUNCTION shall mean a water
supply or distribution utility, a wastewater collection or treatment utility,
an electric generation, transmission or distribution utility, a gas supply,
transmission or distribution utility, an integrated solid waste management
collection, disposal or handling utility or a hospital or a nursing home owned
by the municipality.
   (B)   The governing body may establish a separate fiscal year for each
proprietary function, except that any proprietary function which is subsidized
by appropriations from the municipality’s General Fund shall have the same
fiscal year as the municipality. For the purpose of this section, SUBSIDIZATION
shall mean that the costs of operation of a proprietary function are regularly
financed by appropriations from the municipality’s General Fund in excess of
the amount paid by the municipality to the proprietary function for actual
service or services received.
   (C)   (1)   If the municipality does not include its proprietary functions
in its municipal budget statement, a proposed proprietary statement shall be
prepared in writing on forms provided by the State Auditor and filed with the
Municipal Clerk, at least 30 days prior to the start of the fiscal year of each
proprietary function, containing the following information:
         (a)   For the immediate two prior fiscal years, the revenue from all
sources, the unencumbered cash balance at the beginning and end of the year,
the amount received by taxation and the amount of actual expenditure;
         (b)   For the current fiscal year, actual and estimated revenue from
all sources separately stated as to each such source, the actual unencumbered
cash balance available at the beginning of the year, the amount received from
taxation and the amount of actual and estimated expenditure, whichever is
applicable;
         (c)   For the immediately ensuing fiscal year, an estimate of revenue
from all sources separately stated as to each such source, the actual or
estimated unencumbered cash balance, whichever is applicable, to be available
at the beginning of the year, the amounts proposed to be expended during the
fiscal year and the amount of cash reserve based on actual experience of prior
years; and
         (d)   A uniform summary of the proposed budget statement which shall
include a total of all funds maintained for the proprietary function.
      (2)   Such statement shall contain the estimated cash reserve for each
fiscal year and shall note whether or not such reserve is encumbered. The cash
reserve projections shall be based upon the actual experience of prior years.
   (D)   (1)   After the proposed proprietary budget statement is filed with
the Municipal Clerk, the governing body shall conduct a public hearing on such
statement. Notice of the time and place of the hearing, a summary of the
proposed proprietary budget statement and notice that the full proposed
proprietary budget statement is available for public review with the Municipal
Clerk during normal business hours, shall be published at least five days prior
to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the governing
body’s jurisdiction or by mailing each resident within the governing body’s
jurisdiction.
      (2)   After such hearing, the proposed proprietary budget statement shall
be adopted or amended and adopted as amended, and a written report shall be
kept of such hearing. If the adopted proprietary budget statement reflects a
change from the proposed proprietary statement presented at the hearing, a copy
of the adopted proprietary budget statement shall be filed with the Municipal
Clerk within 20 days after its adoption and published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the governing body’s jurisdiction or by mailing to each
resident within the governing body’s jurisdiction.
   (E)   If the actual expenditures for a proprietary function exceed the
estimated expenditures in the proprietary budget statement during its fiscal
year, the governing body shall adopt a proprietary function reconciliation
statement within 90 days after the end of such fiscal year which reflects any
difference between the adopted proprietary budget statement for the previous
fiscal year and the actual expenditures and revenue for such fiscal year. After
the adoption of a proprietary function reconciliation statement, it shall be
filed with the Municipal Clerk and published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the governing body’s jurisdiction or by mailing to each
resident within the governing body’s jurisdiction. If the difference between
the adopted proprietary budget for the previous fiscal year and the actual
expenditures and revenues for such fiscal year is greater than 10%, the
proprietary function reconciliation statement shall only be adopted following a
public hearing.
   (F)   Any income from a proprietary function which is transferred to the
General Fund of the municipality shall be shown as a source of revenue in the
municipal budget statement created pursuant to the State Budget Act.
(Ord. 468, passed 5-3-1994)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2803 through 18-2808
§ 1-622 PROPERTY TAX LEVY; MAXIMUM; AUTHORITY TO EXCEED.
   (A)   Property tax levies for the support of the city for fiscal years
beginning on or after July 1, 1998, shall be limited to the amounts set forth
in this subsection (A), except as provided in subsection (C) below. The city
may levy a maximum levy of $0.45 per $100 of taxable valuation of property
subject to the levy plus an additional $0.05 per $100 of taxable valuation to
provide financing for the city’s share of revenue required under an agreement
or agreements executed pursuant to the Interlocal Cooperation Act, being Neb.
RS 13-801 et seq. or the Joint Public Agency Act, being Neb. RS 13-2501 et seq.
The maximum levy shall include amounts levied to pay for sums to support a
library, pursuant to Neb. RS 51-201, museum, pursuant to Neb. RS 51-501,
visiting community nurse, home health nurse or home health agency, pursuant to
Neb. RS 71-1637, or statue, memorial or monument, pursuant to Neb. RS 80-202.
Property tax levies for judgments, except judgments or orders from the
Commission of Industrial Relations, obtained against the city which require or
obligate the city to pay such judgment, to the extent such judgment is not paid
by liability insurance coverage of the city, for preexisting lease-purchase
contracts approved prior to July 1, 1998, for bonded indebtedness approved
according to law and secured by a levy on property and for payments by a public
airport to retire interest-free loans from the Department of Aeronautics in
lieu of bonded indebtedness at a lower cost to the public airport are not
included in the levy limits established by this subsection (A). The limitations
on tax levies provided in this subsection (A) are to include all other general
or special levies provided by law. Notwithstanding other provisions of law, the
only exceptions to the limits in this subsection (A) are those provided by or
authorized by this section. Tax levies in excess of the limitations in this
section shall be considered unauthorized levies under Neb. RS 77-1606 unless
approved under subsection (C) below.
   (B)   (1)   All city airport authorities established under the Cities
Airport Authorities Act, being Neb. RS 3-501 et seq., community redevelopment
authorities established under the Community Development Law, being Neb. RS 18-
2101 et seq. and off-street parking districts established under the Off-Street
Parking District Act, being Neb. RS 19-3301 et seq. may be allocated property
taxes as authorized by law which are authorized by the city and are counted in
the municipal levy limit provided by subsection (A) above, except that such
limitation shall not apply to property tax levies for preexisting lease-
purchase contracts approved prior to July 1, 1998, for bonded indebtedness
approved according to law and secured by a levy on property and for payments by
a public airport to retire interest-free loans from the Department of
Aeronautics in lieu of bonded indebtedness at a lower cost to the public
airport. For off-street parking districts established under the Off-Street
Parking District Act, being Neb. RS 19-3301 et seq., the tax shall be counted
in the allocation by the city proportionately by dividing the total taxable
valuation of the taxable property within the district by the total taxable
valuation of the taxable property within the city multiplied by the levy of the
district. The City Council shall review and approve or disapprove the levy
request of the political subdivisions subject to this subsection (B). The City
Council may approve all or a portion of the levy request and may approve a levy
request that would allow a levy greater than that permitted by law. The levy
allocated by the city may be exceeded as provided in subsection (C) below.
      (2)   On or before August 1, all political subdivisions subject to
municipal levy authority under this subsection (B) shall submit a preliminary
request for levy allocation to the City Council. The preliminary request of the
political subdivision shall be in the form of a resolution adopted by a
majority vote of members present of the political subdivision’s governing body.
The failure of a political subdivision to make a preliminary request shall
preclude such political subdivision from using procedures set forth in Neb. RS
77-3444 to exceed the final levy allocation as determined in this subsection
(B).
      (3)   (a)   The City Council shall:
            1.   Adopt a resolution by a majority vote of members present which
determines a final allocation of levy authority to its political subdivisions;
and
            2.   Forward a copy of such resolution to the Chairperson of the
governing body of each of its political subdivisions.
         (b)   No final levy allocation shall be changed after September 1
except by agreement between both the City Council and the governing body of the
political subdivision whose final levy allocation is at issue.
   (C)   (1)   The city may exceed the limits provided in subsection (A) above
by an amount not to exceed a maximum levy approved by a majority of registered
voters voting on the issue in a primary, general or special election at which
the issue is placed before the registered voters. A vote to exceed the limits
must be approved prior to October 10 of the fiscal year which is to be the
first to exceed the limits.
      (2)   The City Council may call for the submission of the issue to the
voters:
         (a)   By passing a resolution calling for exceeding the limits by a
vote of at least two-thirds of the members of the City Council and delivering a
copy of the resolution to the County Clerk or Election Commissioner of every
county which contains all or part of the city; or
         (b)   Upon receipt of a petition by the County Clerk or Election
Commissioner of every county containing all or part of the city requesting an
election signed by at least 5% of the registered voters residing in the city.
      (3)   The resolution or petition shall include the amount of levy which
would be imposed in excess of the limits provided in subsection (A) above and
the duration of the excess levy authority. The excess levy authority shall not
have a duration greater than five years. Any resolution or petition calling for
a special election shall be filed with the County Clerk or Election
Commissioner no later than 30 days prior to the date of the election, and the
time of publication and providing a copy of the notice of election required in
Neb. RS 32-802 shall be no later than 20 days prior to the election.
      (4)   The County Clerk or Election Commissioner shall place the issue on
the ballot at an election as called for in the resolution or petition which is
at least 30 days after receipt of the resolution or petition. The election
shall be held pursuant to the Election Act, being Neb. RS 32-101 et seq. For
petitions filed with the County Clerk or Election Commissioner on or after May
1, 1998, the petition shall be in the form as provided in Neb. RS 32-628
through 32-631.
      (5)   Any excess levy authority approved under this subsection (C) shall
terminate pursuant to its terms, on a vote of the City Council to terminate the
authority to levy more than the limits, at the end of the fourth fiscal year
following the first year in which the levy exceeded the limit, or as provided
in subsection (C)(8) below, whichever is earliest.
      (6)   The City Council may pass no more than one resolution calling for
an election pursuant to this subsection (C) during any one calendar year. Only
one election may be held in any one calendar year pursuant to a petition
initiated under this subsection (C). The ballot question may include any terms
and conditions set forth in the resolution or petition and shall include the
language specified in Neb. RS 77-3444.
      (7)   If a majority of the votes cast upon the ballot question are in
favor of such tax, the County Board shall authorize a tax in excess of the
limits in subsection (A) above, but such tax shall not exceed the amount stated
in the ballot question. If a majority of those voting on the ballot question
are opposed to such tax, the City Council shall not impose such tax.
      (8)   (a)   The city may rescind or modify a previously approved excess
levy authority prior to its expiration by a majority of registered voters
voting on the issue in a primary, general or special election at which the
issue is placed before the registered voters. A vote to rescind or modify must
be approved prior to October 10 of the fiscal year for which it is to be
effective.
         (b)   The City Council may call for the submission of the issue to the
voters:
            1.   By passing a resolution calling for the rescission or
modification by a vote of at least two-thirds of the members of the City
Council and delivering a copy of the resolution to the County Clerk or Election
Commissioner of every county which contains all or part of the city; or
            2.   Upon request of a petition by the County Clerk or Election
Commissioner of every county containing all or part of the city requesting an
election signed by at least 5% of the registered voters residing in the city.
         (c)   The resolution or petition shall include the amount and the
duration of the previously approved excess levy authority and a statement that
either such excess levy authority will be rescinded or such excess levy
authority will be modified. If the excess levy authority will be modified, the
amount and duration of such modification shall be stated. The modification
shall not have a duration greater than five years. The County Clerk or Election
Commissioner shall place the issue on the ballot at an election as called for
in the resolution or petition which is at least 30 days after receipt of the
resolution or petition, and the time of publication and providing a copy of the
notice of election required in Neb. RS 32-802 shall be no later than 20 days
prior to the election. The election shall be held pursuant to the Election Act,
being Neb. RS 32-101 et seq.
(Ord. 586, passed 8-11-1998; Ord. 634, passed 5-10-2000; Ord. 696, passed 5-6-
2003)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 77-3442, 77-3443 and 77-3444 
§ 1-623 PROPERTY TAX REQUEST; PROCEDURE FOR SETTING.
   (A)   If the annual assessment of property would result in an increase in
the total property taxes levied by a county, municipality, school district,
learning community, sanitary and improvement district, natural resources
district, educational service unit or community college, as determined using
the previous year’s rate of levy, the city’s property tax request for the
current year shall be no more than its property tax request in the prior year,
and the city’s rate of levy for the current year shall be decreased accordingly
when such rate is set by the County Board of Equalization pursuant to Neb. RS
77-1601. The City Council shall pass a resolution or ordinance to set the
amount of its property tax request after holding the public hearing required in
subsection (C) below. If the City Council seeks to set its property tax request
at an amount that exceeds its property tax request in the prior year, it may do
so to the extent allowed by law after holding the public hearing required in
subsection (C) below and by passing a resolution or ordinance that complies
with subsection (D) below. If any county, city, school district or community
college seeks to increase its property tax request by more than the allowable
growth percentage, such political subdivision shall comply with the
requirements of Neb. RS 77-1633 in lieu of the requirements in subsections (C)
and (D) below.
   (B)   If the annual assessment of property would result in no change or a
decrease in the total property taxes levied by a county, city, village, school
district, learning community, sanitary and improvement district, natural
resources district, educational service unit or community college, as
determined using the previous year’s rate of levy, the city’s property tax
request for the current year shall be no more than its property tax request in
the prior year, and the city’s rate of levy for the current year shall be
adjusted accordingly when such rate is set by the County Board of Equalization
pursuant to Neb. RS 77-1601. The City Council shall pass a resolution or
ordinance to set the amount of its property tax request after holding the
public hearing required in subsection (C) below. If the City Council seeks to
set its property tax request at an amount that exceeds its property tax request
in the prior year, it may do so to the extent allowed by law after holding the
public hearing required in subsection (C) below and by passing a resolution or
ordinance that complies with subsection (D) below. If any county, city, school
district or community college seeks to increase its property tax request by
more than the allowable growth percentage, such political subdivision shall
comply with the requirements of Neb. RS 77-1633 in lieu of the requirements in
subsections (C) and (D) below.
   (C)   The resolution or ordinance required under this section shall only be
passed after a special public hearing called for the purpose is held and after
notice is published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area of the
city at least four calendar days prior to the hearing. For purposes of such
notice, the four calendar days shall include the day of publication but not the
day of hearing. If the city’s total operating budget, not including reserves,
does not exceed $10,000 per year or $20,000 per biennial period, the notice may
be posted at the City Council’s principal headquarters.
   (D)   The hearing notice shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The certified taxable valuation under Neb. RS 13-509 for the prior
year, the certified taxable valuation under Neb. RS 13-509 for the current year
and the percentage increase or decrease in such valuations from the prior year
to the current year;
      (2)   The dollar amount of the prior year’s tax request and the property
tax rate that was necessary to fund that tax request;
      (3)   The property tax rate that would be necessary to fund last year’s
tax request if applied to the current year’s valuation;
      (4)   The proposed dollar amount of the tax request for the current year
and the property tax rate that will be necessary to fund that tax request;
      (5)   The percentage increase or decrease in the property tax rate from
the prior year to the current year; and
      (6)   The percentage increase or decrease in the total operating budget
from the prior year to the current year.
   (E)   Any resolution or ordinance setting a city’s property tax request
under Neb. RS 77-1632 at an amount that exceeds the city’s property tax request
in the prior year shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
      (1)   The name of the city;
      (2)   The amount of the property tax request;
      (3)   The following statements:
         (a)   The total assessed value of property differs from last year’s
total assessed value by              percent;
         (b)   The tax rate which would levy the same amount of property taxes
as last year, when multiplied by the new total assessed value of property,
would be $        per $100 of assessed value;
         (c)   The (name of city) proposes to adopt a property tax request that
will cause its tax rate to be $       per $100 of assessed value; and
         (d)   Based on the proposed property tax request and changes in other
revenue, the total operating budget of (name of city) will exceed last year’s
by         percent; and
      (4)   The record vote of the City Council in passing such resolution or
ordinance.
   (F)   Any resolution or ordinance setting a property tax request under this
section shall be certified and forwarded to the County Clerk on or before
October 15 of the year for which the tax request is to apply.
(Neb. RS 77-1632)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 926, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 1-624 CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT; TIME DEPOSITS; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   The Municipal Treasurer may, upon resolution of the governing body
authorizing the same, purchase certificates of deposit from and make time
deposits in any bank or capital stock financial institution in the state to the
extent that such certificates of deposit or time deposits are insured by the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Deposits may be made in excess of the
amounts so secured by the corporation, and the amount of the excess deposit
shall be secured by a bond or by security given in the manner provided in this
section. The provisions of Neb. RS 77-2366 shall apply to deposits in capital
stock financial institutions.
   (B)   For the security of the fund so deposited, the Municipal Treasurer
shall require each depository to give bond for the safekeeping and payment of
such deposits and the accretions thereof, which bond shall run to the
municipality and be approved by the Chairperson. The bond shall be conditioned
that such a depository shall, at the end of every quarter, render to the
Treasurer a statement in duplicate, showing the several daily balances, the
amount of money of the municipality held by it during the quarter, the amount
of the accretion thereto and how credited. The bond shall also be conditioned
that the depository shall generally do and perform whatever may be required by
the provisions of this section and all regulations imposed by law or adopted by
the governing body for the receiving and holding thereof and shall faithfully
discharge the trust reposed in the depository. The bond shall be as nearly as
practicable in the form provided in Neb. RS 77-2304. No person in any way
connected with any depository as an officer or stockholder shall be accepted as
a surety on any bond given by the depository of which he or she is an officer
or stockholder. The bond shall be deposited with the Municipal Clerk.
   (C)   In lieu of the bond required by subsection (B) above, any bank or
capital stock financial institution making application to become a depository
may give security as provided in the Public Funds Deposit Security Act, being
Neb. RS 77-2386 et seq. to the Municipal Clerk. The penal sum of such bond
shall be equal to or greater than the amount of the deposit in excess of that
portion of such deposit insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
   (D)   The Treasurer shall not have on deposit in any bank or capital stock
financial institution at any time more than the amount insured by the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation plus the maximum amount of the bond given by the
bank or capital stock financial institution if the bank or capital stock
financial institution gives a surety bond, nor in any bank or capital stock
financial institution giving a personal bond, more than the amount insured by
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation plus one-half of the amount of the
bond of such bank or capital stock financial institution, and the amount so on
deposit any time with any such bank or capital stock financial institution
shall not in either case exceed the amount insured by the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation plus the paid-up capital stock and surplus of such bank
or capital stock financial institution. The Treasurer shall not be liable for
any loss sustained by reason of the failure of any such bonded depository whose
bond has been duly approved by the Chairperson as provided in subsection (B)
above or which has, in lieu of a surety bond, given security as provided in
subsection (C) above.
(Ord. 589, passed 8-11-1998)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 16-714 through 16-716 and 17-720
§ 1-625 FISCAL MANAGEMENT; CREDIT CARDS AND ELECTRONIC FUNDS TRANSFERS;
AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT.
   (A)   The governing body may authorize municipal officials to accept credit
cards, charge cards or debit cards, whether presented in person or
electronically, or electronic funds transfers as a method of cash payment of
any tax, levy, excise, duty, custom, toll, interest, penalty, fine, license,
fee or assessment of whatever kind or nature, whether general or special, as
provided by Neb. RS 77-1702.
   (B)   The total amount of such taxes, levies, excises, duties, customs,
tolls, interest, penalties, fines, licenses, fees or assessments of whatever
kind or nature, whether general or special, paid for by credit card, charge
card, debit card or electronic funds transfer shall be collected by the
municipal official.
   (C)   With respect to a facility which it operates in a proprietary
capacity, the governing body may choose to accept credit cards, charge cards or
debit cards, whether presented in person or electronically, or electronic funds
transfers as a means of cash payment and may adjust the price for services to
reflect the handling and payment costs.
   (D)   The municipal official shall obtain, for each transaction,
authorization for use of any credit card, charge card or debit card used
pursuant to this section from the financial institution, vending service
company, credit card or charge card company or third-party merchant bank
providing such service.
   (E)   The governing body may choose to participate in the state contract for
such payment services. If the governing body chooses not to participate in the
state contract, it may choose types of credit cards, charge cards and debit
cards and may negotiate and contract independently or collectively as a
governmental entity with one or more financial institutions, vending service
companies, credit card, charge card or debit card companies or third-party
merchant banks for the provision of such services.
   (F)   When authorizing acceptance of credit card or charge card payments,
the governing body shall be authorized but not required to impose a surcharge
or convenience fee upon the person making a payment by credit card or charge
card so as to wholly or partially offset the amount of any discount or
administrative fees charged to the municipality, but the surcharge or
convenience fee shall not exceed the surcharge or convenience fee imposed by
the credit card or charge card companies or third-party merchant banks which
have contracted with the state or under subsection (E) above. The surcharge or
convenience fee shall be applied only when allowed by the operating rules and
regulations of the credit card or charge card involved or when authorized in
writing by the credit card or charge card company involved. When a person
elects to make a payment to the municipality by credit card or charge card and
such a surcharge or convenience fee is imposed, the payment of such surcharge
or convenience fee shall be deemed voluntary by such person and shall be in no
case refundable. If a payment is made electronically by credit card, charge
card, debit card or electronic funds transfer as part of a system for providing
or retrieving information electronically, the municipal official shall be
authorized but not required to impose an additional surcharge or convenience
fee upon the person making a payment.
   (G)   For the purpose of this section, ELECTRONIC FUNDS TRANSFER means the
movement of funds by non-paper means, usually through a payment system,
including, but not limited to, an automated clearinghouse or the Federal
Reserve’s Fedwire system.
(Ord. 591, passed 8-11-1998; Ord. 698, passed 5-6-2003)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 13-609
§ 1-626 BUDGET REVISION.
   (A)   (1)   Unless otherwise provided by law, the City Council may propose
to revise the previously adopted budget statement and shall conduct a public
hearing on that proposal whenever during the current fiscal year it becomes
apparent to the City Council that:
         (a)   There are circumstances which could not reasonably have been
anticipated at the time the budget for the current year was adopted;
         (b)   The budget adopted violated Neb. RS 13-518 through 13-522, such
that the revenue of the current fiscal year for any fund thereof will be
insufficient, additional expenses will be necessarily incurred, or there is a
need to reduce the budget requirements to comply with Neb. RS 13-518 through
13-522; or
         (c)   The City Council has been notified by the Auditor of Public
Accounts of a mathematical or accounting error or noncompliance with the State
Budget Act, being Neb. RS 13-501 et seq.
      (2)   The public hearing requirement shall not apply to emergency
expenditures pursuant to Neb. RS 81-829.51.
   (B)   Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published at
least four calendar days prior to the date set for hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation within the Council’s jurisdiction. For purposes of such
notice, the four calendar days shall include the day of publication but not the
day of hearing. This published notice shall set forth:
      (1)   The time and place of the hearing;
      (2)   The amount in dollars of additional or reduced money required and
for what purpose;
      (3)   A statement setting forth the nature of the unanticipated
circumstances and, if the budget requirements are to be increased, the reasons
why the previously adopted budget of expenditures cannot be reduced during the
remainder of the current year to meet the need for additional money in that
manner;
      (4)   A copy of the summary of the originally adopted budget previously
published; and
      (5)   A copy of the summary of the proposed revised budget.
   (C)   At the hearing, any taxpayer may appear or file a written statement
protesting any application for additional money. A written record shall be kept
of all such hearings.
   (D)   Upon conclusion of the public hearing on the proposed revised budget
and approval of the proposed revised budget by the City Council, the Council
shall file with the County Clerk of the county or counties in which the City
Council is located, and with the Auditor of Public Accounts, a copy of the
revised budget, as adopted. The City Council may then issue warrants in payment
for expenditures authorized by the adopted revised budget. These warrants shall
be referred to as registered warrants and shall be repaid during the next
fiscal year from funds derived from taxes levied therefor.
   (E)   Within 30 days after the adoption of the budget under § 1-603, the
City Council may, or within 30 days after notification of an error by the
Auditor of Public Accounts, the Council shall correct an adopted budget which
contains a clerical, mathematical or accounting error which does not affect the
total amount budgeted by more than 1% or increase the amount required from
property taxes. No public hearing shall be required for such a correction.
After correction, the City Council shall file a copy of the corrected budget
with the County Clerk of the county or counties in which the City Council is
located and with the Auditor of Public Accounts. The City Council may then
issue warrants in payment for expenditures authorized by the budget.
(Neb. RS 13-511)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 876, passed
3-1-2016, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 1-627 DEBT COLLECTION; AUTHORITY TO CONTRACT WITH COLLECTION AGENCY.
   (A)   The city may contract to retain a collection agency licensed pursuant
to the Collection Agency Act, being Neb. RS 45-601 et seq., within or without
this state, for the purpose of collecting public debts owed by any person to
the city.
   (B)   No debt owed pursuant to subsection (A) above may be assigned to a
collection agency unless:
      (1)   There has been an attempt to advise the debtor by first-class mail,
postage prepaid, at the last known address of the debtor:
         (a)   Of the existence of the debt; and
         (b)   That the debt may be assigned to a collection agency for
collection if the debt is not paid.
      (2)   At least 30 days have elapsed from the time the notice was sent.
   (C)   A collection agency which is assigned a debt under this section shall
have only those remedies and powers which would be available to it as an
assignee of a private creditor.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, DEBT shall include all delinquent
fees or payments except delinquent property taxes on real estate. In the case
of debt arising as a result of an order or judgment of a court in a criminal or
traffic matter, a collection fee may be added to the debt. The collection fee
shall be $25 or 4.5% of the debt, whichever is greater. The collection fee
shall be paid by the person who owes the debt directly to the person or agency
providing the collection service.
(Neb. RS 45-623)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 947, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been
    replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 1-628 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BIENNIAL BUDGET. A budget by the city that provides for a biennial period to
determine and carry on the city’s financial and taxing affairs.
   BIENNIAL PERIOD. The two fiscal years comprising a biennium commencing in
odd-numbered or even-numbered years used by the city in determining and
carrying on its financial and taxing affairs.
   PUBLIC FUNDS. All money, including non-tax money, used in the operation and
functions of governing bodies. If the city has a lottery established under the
State County and City Lottery Act, being Neb. RS 9-601 et seq., only those net
proceeds which are actually received by the city from a licensed lottery
operator shall be considered PUBLIC FUNDS, and PUBLIC FUNDS shall not include
amounts awarded as prizes.
(Neb. RS 13-503)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 840, passed
4-1-2014, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
ARTICLE 7: COMPENSATION
Section
   
1-701   How fixed; limitations
   
1-702   Conflict of interest involving contracts
§ 1-701 HOW FIXED; LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   The officers and employees of the city shall receive such compensation
as the Mayor and Council shall fix by ordinance.
(Neb. RS 17-108)
   (B)   The city may enact ordinances or bylaws to regulate and prescribe the
compensation of officers not provided for in state law.
(Neb. RS 17-604)
   (C)   No officer shall receive any pay or perquisites from the city other
than his or her salary. The City Council shall not pay or appropriate any money
or other valuable thing to any person not an officer for the performance of any
act, service or duty, the doing or performance of which shall come within the
proper scope of the duties of any officer of the city.
(Neb. RS 17-611)
   (D)   The salary of any elective officer shall not be increased or
diminished during the term for which he or she shall have been elected, except
when there has been a combination and merger of offices as provided in § 1-202,
except that when there are officers elected to the Council, or any other board
or commission having more than one member and the terms of one or more members
commence and end at different times, the compensation of all members of such
council, board or commission may be increased or diminished at the beginning of
the full term of any member thereof. No person who shall have resigned or
vacated any office shall be eligible to the same during the time for which he
or she was elected if during the same time the emoluments thereof were
increased.
(Neb. RS 17-612)
§ 1-702 CONFLICT OF INTEREST INVOLVING CONTRACTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BUSINESS ASSOCIATION.
         (a)   A business:
            1.   In which the individual is a partner, limited liability
company member, director or officer; or
            2.   In which the individual or a member of the individual’s
immediate family is a stockholder of closed corporation stock worth $1,000 or
more at fair market value or which represents more than a 5% equity interest or
is a stockholder of publicly traded stock worth $10,000 or more at fair market
value or which represents more than 10% equity interest.
         (b)   An individual who occupies a confidential professional
relationship protected by law shall be exempt from this definition. This
definition shall not apply to publicly traded stock under a trading account if
the filer reports the name and address of the stockbroker.
      IMMEDIATE FAMILY. A child residing in an individual’s household, a spouse
of an individual or an individual claimed by that individual or that
individual’s spouse as a dependent for federal income tax purposes.
      OFFICER.
         (a)   Includes:
            1.   A member of any board or commission of the municipality which
spends and administers its own funds, who is dealing with a contract made by
such board or commission; or
            2.   Any elected municipal official.
         (b)   OFFICER does not mean volunteer firefighters or ambulance
drivers with respect to their duties as firefighters or ambulance drivers.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 49-1499.04 or 70-624.04, no
officer may have an interest in any contract to which his or her governing
body, or anyone for its benefit, is a party. The existence of such an interest
in any contract shall render the contract voidable by decree of a court of
competent jurisdiction as to any person who entered into the contract or took
assignment of such contract with actual knowledge of the prohibited conflict.
An action to have a contract declared void under this section may be brought by
the County Attorney, the governing body or any resident within the jurisdiction
of the governing body and shall be brought within one year after the contract
is signed or assigned. The decree may provide for the reimbursement of any
person for the reasonable value of all money, goods, material, labor or
services furnished under the contract, to the extent that the governing body
has benefited thereby.
      (2)   The prohibition in this subsection (B) shall apply only when the
officer or his or her parent, spouse or child:
         (a)   Has a business association with the business involved in the
contract; or
         (b)   Will receive a direct pecuniary fee or commission as a result of
the contract.
   (C)   Subsection (B) above does not apply if the contract is an agenda item
approved at a meeting of the governing body and the interested officer:
      (1)   Makes a declaration on the record to the governing body responsible
for approving the contract regarding the nature and extent of his or her
interest prior to official consideration of the contract;
      (2)   Does not vote on the matters of granting the contract, making
payments pursuant to the contract or accepting performance of work under the
contract, or similar matters relating to the contract, except that if the
number of members of the governing body declaring an interest in the contract
would prevent the body with all members present from securing a quorum on the
issue, then all members may vote on the matters; and
      (3)   Does not act for the governing body which is a party to the
contract as to inspection or performance under the contract in which he or she
has an interest.
   (D)   An officer who has no business association with the business involved
in the contract or will not receive a direct pecuniary fee or commission as a
result of the contract shall not be deemed to have an interest within the
meaning of this section.
   (E)   The receiving of deposits, cashing of checks and buying and selling of
warrants and bonds of indebtedness of any such governing body by a financial
institution shall not be considered a contract for purposes of this section.
The ownership of less than 5% of the outstanding shares of a corporation shall
not constitute an interest within the meaning of this section.
   (F)   If an officer’s parent, spouse or child is an employee of the
officer’s governing body, the officer may vote on all issues of the contract
which are generally applicable to all employees or all employees within a
classification and do not single out his or her parent, spouse or child for
special action.
   (G)   Neb. RS 49-14,102 does not apply to contracts covered by this section.
   (H)   (1)   The person charged with keeping records for the governing body
shall maintain separately from other records a ledger containing the
information listed in this subsection (H)(1) about every contract entered into
by the governing body in which an officer of the body has an interest and for
which disclosure is made pursuant to subsection (C) above. Such information
shall be kept in the ledger for five years from the date of the officer’s last
day in office and shall include the:
         (a)   Names of the contracting parties;
         (b)   Nature of the interest of the officer in question;
         (c)   Date that the contract was approved by the governing body;
         (d)   Amount of the contract; and
         (e)   Basic terms of the contract.
      (2)   The information supplied relative to the contract shall be provided
no later than ten days after the contract has been signed by both parties. The
ledger kept pursuant to this subsection (H) shall be available for public
inspection during the normal working hours of the office in which it is kept.
   (I)   An open account established for the benefit of any governing body with
a business in which an officer has an interest shall be deemed a contract
subject to this section. The statement required to be filed by subsection (H)
above shall be filed within ten days after such account is opened. Thereafter,
the person charged with keeping records for the governing body shall maintain a
running account of amounts purchased on the open account. Purchases made from
petty cash or a petty cash fund shall not be subject to this section.
   (J)   Notwithstanding subsections (A) through (I) above, the governing body
may prohibit contracts over a specific dollar amount in which an officer of the
governing body may have an interest.
   (K)   The governing body may exempt from subsections (A) through (I) above
contracts involving $100 or less in which an officer of such body may have an
interest.
(Ord. 324, passed 9-7-1982; Ord. 335, passed 11-1-1983; Ord. 353, passed 10-1-
1985; Ord. 367, passed 6-1-1987)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 49-1408, 49-1425, 49-14,103.01, 49-
14,103.02, 49-14,103.03, 49-14,103.05 and 49-14,103.06
ARTICLE 8: MUNICIPAL FORMS
Section
   
1-801   Forms; official municipal
§ 1-801 FORMS; OFFICIAL MUNICIPAL.
   Unless otherwise provided, all municipal license applications, license forms
and notice forms shall be substantially as follows, unless otherwise provided
by the governing body.
 
Notice Form
      NOTICE TO ____________________
                                       _____________, Nebraska
                                       ___________, 20_______
 
 
      To: ____________________________________________ owner (occupant) of the premises known as No.
_______________________ Street, legally described as follows, to-wit:
____________________________________________________________________________
   _____________________________________________________________________________
 
 
      YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED to ________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________
 
 
      YOU ARE FURTHER NOTIFIED that failure to comply with this order constitutes a violation of the
ordinances of said __________________________ and that your failure renders you liable to prosecution and
fine in the proper Court of said __________________________
   ____________________________________________________________________________
   ____________________________________________________________________________
 
 
                                          _____________________
                                             Municipal Clerk
   RETURN
 
STATE OF NEBRASKA _____________________)
County of ________________________________) SS
      of ____________________________)
 
      I, ____________________________ Municipal Clerk of the ________________________ of
_________________, Nebraska, hereby certify that on the ________ day of ________________, 20_____, at
_______________ o’clock, _____M., I served the within notice on said __________________________ by
delivering a true and correct copy thereof to ___________________________________ personally (or by
posting a typewritten copy thereof on said premises).
                                       __________________________
                                             Municipal Clerk
   CERTIFICATE
 
      I, ______________________________Municipal Clerk of the ________________________ of
___________________, Nebraska, hereby certify that the foregoing is a true, accurate and correct copy of
a notice ____________________ now in my hands for service with all endorsements thereon.
 
      Dated _____________________, 20_________
 
                                       __________________________
                                          Municipal Clerk
 
 
Application Form
   APPLICATION FOR ______________ LICENSE
                                    ___________________________, Nebraska
                                    ____________________________, 20____
 
      I, _________________________ hereby make application to the ______________and ____________________ of the
______________________of ___________, Nebraska, for license to                                                      in said for
period ending _________________________, 20 _______. I certify that I am ____________________ and qualified to engage in
_________________________. I agree to conform strictly to the ordinances of this _____________________ relative to said
_____________, and obey all orders, requirements and regulations of its lawfully constituted authorities.
 
      I include with this application all required documents.
 
      I accompany this application with ________ Dollars ($___________) in payment of the occupation tax in the sum of
________________ Dollars ($______), and bond for approval of the __________ and ________________________ of said
__________________and other charges required by ordinance for the issuance of said license.
 
                                                _________________________
                                                Applicant
 
 
License Form
   ______________LICENSE
 
   License Fee
   $____________                    FOR THE CALENDAR YEAR No.____
                                                          20________
 
      KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
 
      THAT ______________________ having paid $___________, the fee provided by law to _______________________ pursuant to
application filed in the office of undersigned,
 
      NOW THEREFORE, said ________________________________________ Nebraska to _____________________ from the date last
hereinafter written to December 31, 20 ______: Said license is issued on condition that licensee and his or her employees
shall at all times __________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________ .
      This license is neither negotiable nor transferable and shall be of no force and effect outside the corporate limits of
the municipality and if revoked and forfeited renders licensee ineligible to receive a new license for a period of one year
from the date of such revocation and forfeiture.
 
   Dated at _______________________, Nebraska, this day of ________________, 20______.
 
                                          ______________________
                                             Municipal Clerk
 
 
   (SEAL)
 
ARTICLE 9: INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
Section
   
1-901   Definitions
   
1-902   Petitions, ballots
   
1-903   Petitions, form
   
1-904   Signature sheets
   
1-905   Petitions, affidavit
   
1-906   Petitions, notification
   
1-907   Frequency of occurrence
   
1-908   Direct vote
   
1-909   Elections
   
1-910   Ballots
   
1-911   Initiative
   
1-912   Referendum limitations
   
1-913   Referendum, passage
   
1-914   Violations, penalties
   
1-915   Applicability
§ 1-901 DEFINITIONS.
   The powers of initiative and referendum are reserved to the qualified
electors of the municipality by state law. This article shall govern the use of
initiative to enact and the use of referendum to amend or repeal measures
affecting the governance of the municipality. For the purpose of this article,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
   CIRCULATOR. Any person who solicits signatures for an initiative or
referendum petition.
   CLERK. The Municipal Clerk or the municipal official in charge of elections.
   GOVERNING BODY. The legislative authority of the municipality.
   MEASURE. An ordinance, charter provision or resolution which is within the
legislative authority of the governing body to enact, and which is not excluded
from the operation of referendum by the exceptions in §
1-912.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Deshler, Nebraska.
   PETITION. A document authorized for circulation pursuant to §
1-902 or any copy of such document.
   PROSPECTIVE PETITION. A sample document containing the information necessary
for a completed petition, including a sample signature sheet, which has not yet
been authorized for circulation.
   QUALIFIED ELECTORS. All persons registered to vote, at the time the
prospective petition is filed, in the jurisdiction governed or to be governed
by any measure sought to be enacted by initiative or altered or repealed by
referendum.
   SIGNATURE SHEET. A sheet of paper which is part of a petition and which is
signed by persons wishing to support the petition effort.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2501 through 18-2511
§ 1-902 PETITIONS, BALLOTS.
   (A)   (1)   Before circulating an initiative or referendum petition, the
petitioner shall file with the Clerk a prospective petition. The Clerk shall
date the prospective petition immediately upon its receipt. The Clerk shall
verify that the prospective petition is in proper form and shall provide a
ballot title for the initiative or referendum proposal as described below.
      (2)   If the prospective petition is in proper form, the Clerk shall
authorize the circulation of the petition and such authorization shall be given
within three working days from the date the prospective petition was filed. If
the form of the prospective petition is incorrect in any way, the Clerk shall,
within three working days from the date the prospective petition was filed,
inform the petitioner of necessary changes and request that those changes be
made.
      (3)   When the requested changes have been made and the revised
prospective petition has been submitted to the Clerk in proper form, the Clerk
shall authorize the circulation of the petition and such authorization shall be
given within two working days from the receipt of the properly revised
petition.
   (B)   The ballot title of any measure to be initiated or referred shall
consist of:
      (1)   A briefly-worded caption by which the measure is commonly known or
which accurately summarizes the measure;
      (2)   A briefly-worded question which plainly states the purpose of the
measure and is phrased so that an affirmative response to the question
corresponds to an affirmative vote on the measure; and
      (3)   A concise and impartial statement of not more than 75 words of the
chief purpose of the measure.
   (C)   The ballots used when voting on an initiative or referendum proposal
shall contain the entire ballot title. Proposals for initiative and referendum
shall be submitted on separate ballots, and the ballots shall be printed in
lower case ten point type, except that the caption shall be in black face. All
initiative and referendum measures shall be submitted in a nonpartisan manner
without indicating or suggesting on the ballot that they have or have not been
approved or endorsed by any political party or organization.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2512 and 18-2513
§ 1-903 PETITIONS, FORM.
   (A)   The Secretary of State shall design the form to be used for initiative
and referendum petitions, including signature sheets. These forms shall be made
available to the public by the Clerk, and they shall serve as a guide for
individuals preparing prospective petitions. Substantial compliance with
initiative and referendum forms is required before authorization to circulate
such petition may be granted by the Clerk. Those preparing prospective
petitions shall be responsible for making copies of the petition for
circulation, once authorization for circulation has been granted, and each
petition presented for signature must be identical to the petition authorized
for circulation by the Clerk.
   (B)   Every petition shall contain the name and residential address of not
more than three persons as chief petitioners or sponsors of the measure. The
chief petitioners or sponsors shall be qualified electors of the municipality
potentially affected by the initiative or referendum proposal. Every petition
shall contain the caption and ballot title required in § 1-902, and only
qualified electors shall circulate petitions.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2514 and 18-2515
§ 1-904 SIGNATURE SHEETS.
   (A)   Every signature sheet shall:
      (1)   Contain the caption required in § 1-902(A);
      (2)   Be part of a complete and authorized petition when presented to
potential signatories;
      (3)   Provide space for signatories to write their names, residential
addresses and the date of signing; and
      (4)   Contain a statement that anyone falsifying information on a
signature sheet shall be subject to penalties provided by law.
   (B)   No more than 25 signatures on each signature sheet shall be counted.
In order to be valid, a signature shall be that of an individual registered to
vote, at the time of signing, in the jurisdiction governed or to be governed by
the measure addressed in the petition. A signature shall include the
signatory’s full name, his or her residential address and the date of signing.
No signatory shall use ditto marks as a means of affixing his or her address or
date on any petition. A wife shall not use her husband’s Christian or given
name when she signs a petition and she shall sign her own Christian or given
name along with her surname.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2516
§ 1-905 PETITIONS, AFFIDAVIT.
   (A)   Included in the contents of every petition shall be an affidavit, to
be signed by the circulator in the presence of a notary, which states that the
circulator is a qualified elector, that each person who signed the petition did
so in the presence of the circulator on the date indicated and that the
circulator believes that each signatory was registered to vote in the affected
jurisdiction at the time he or she signed the petition and that the circulator
believes that each signatory has stated his or her name and address correctly.
   (B)   When a special election is being requested, such fact shall be stated
in the petition.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2517
§ 1-906 PETITIONS, NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Signed petitions shall be filed with the Clerk for signature
verification. Upon the filing of a petition, and passage of a resolution by the
governing body, the municipality and the County Clerk or Election Commissioner
of the county in which such municipality is located may by mutual agreement
provide that the County Clerk or Election Commissioner shall ascertain whether
the petition is signed by the requisite number of voters. The municipality
shall reimburse the county for any costs incurred by the County Clerk or
Election Commissioner. When the verifying official has determined that 100% of
the necessary signatures required by this article have been obtained, he or she
shall notify the governing body of that fact and shall immediately forward to
the governing body a copy of the petition.
   (B)   In order for an initiative or referendum proposal to be submitted to
the governing body and the voters, the necessary signatures shall be on file
with the Clerk within six months from the date the prospective petition was
authorized for circulation. If the necessary signatures are not obtained by
such date, the petition shall be void.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2518
§ 1-907 FREQUENCY OF OCCURRENCE.
   The same measure, either in form or in essential substance, may not be
submitted to the people by initiative petition, either affirmatively or
negatively, more often than once every two years. No attempt to repeal or alter
an existing measure or portion of such measure by referendum petition may be
made within two years from the last attempt to do the same. Such prohibition
shall apply only when the subsequent attempt to repeal or alter is designed to
accomplish the same or essentially the same purpose as the previous attempt.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2519
§ 1-908 DIRECT VOTE.
   The Executive Officer and governing body of the municipality may at any
time, by resolution, provide for the submission to a direct vote of the
electors of any measure pending before it, enacted by it or enacted by the
electors under this article and may provide in such resolution that such shall
be submitted at a special election or the next regularly scheduled primary or
general election. Immediately upon the passage of any such resolution for
submission, the Clerk shall cause such measure to be submitted to a direct vote
of the electors at the time specified in such resolution and in the manner
provided in this article for submission of measures upon proposals and
petitions filed by voters. Such matter shall become law if approved by a
majority of the votes cast.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2520
§ 1-909 ELECTIONS.
   The Clerk shall call elections under this article either at a special
election or regularly scheduled primary or general election. He or she shall
cause notice of every such election to be printed in one or more newspapers of
general circulation in such municipality and also posted in the office of the
Clerk and three or more conspicuous places in such municipality at least 30
days prior to such election. The Clerk shall cause copies of measures initiated
or referred to be printed in pamphlet form and furnish the same to the electors
of such municipality upon their application or order. Such notice provided in
this section shall designate where such copies may be obtained.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2521
§ 1-910 BALLOTS.
   All ballots for use in special elections under this article shall be
prepared and furnished by the Clerk, unless the governing body contracts with
the county for such service and shall be in form the same as provided by law
for election of the Executive Officer and governing body of such municipality.
When ordinances under such sections are submitted to the electors at a
regularly scheduled primary or general election, they shall be placed upon the
official ballots as provided in this article.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2522
§ 1-911 INITIATIVE.
   (A)   The power of initiative allows citizens the right to enact measures
affecting the governance of the municipality. An initiative proposal shall not
have as its primary or sole purpose the repeal or modification of existing law
except if such repeal or modification is ancillary to and necessary for the
adoption and effective operation of the initiative measure.
   (B)   An initiative shall not be effective if the direct or indirect effect
of the passage of such initiative measure shall be to repeal or alter an
existing law, or portion thereof, which is not subject to referendum or subject
only to limited referendum pursuant to §
1-912.
   (C)   Whenever an initiative petition bearing signatures equal in number to
at least 15% of the qualified electors of a municipal subdivision has been
filed with the Clerk and verified, it shall be the duty of the governing body
to consider enactment of the measure contained in the petition. If the
governing body fails to enact the measure without amendment, within 30 days
from the date it received notification, the Clerk shall cause the measure to be
submitted to a vote of the people at the next regularly scheduled primary or
general election held within the municipality.
   (D)   Whenever an initiative petition bearing signatures equal in number to
at least 20% of the qualified electors which requests that a special election
be called to submit the initiative measure to a vote of the people, has been
filed with the Clerk and verified, it shall be the duty of the governing body
to consider enactment of the measure contained in the petition. If the
governing body fails to enact the measure, without amendment, within 30 days
from the date it received notification, the Clerk shall cause the measure to be
submitted to a vote of the people at a special election called for such
purpose. The date of such election shall not be less than 30 nor more than 60
days from the date the governing body received notification pursuant to §
1-906.
   (E)   If a majority of voters voting on the initiative measure shall vote in
favor of such measure, it shall immediately become a valid and binding measure
of the municipality. A measure adopted by such method shall not be amended or
repealed except by two-thirds majority of the members of the governing body. No
such attempt to amend or repeal shall be made within one year from the adoption
of the measure by the electors.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2523 through 18-2526
§ 1-912 REFERENDUM LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   The power of referendum allows citizens the right to repeal or amend
existing measures, or portions thereof, affecting the governance of the
municipality.
   (B)   The following measures shall not be subject to referendum or limited
referendum:
      (1)   Measures necessary to carry out contractual obligations, including,
but not limited to, those relating to the issuance of or provided for in bonds,
notes, warrants or other evidences of indebtedness, for projects previously
approved by a measure which was, or is, subject to referendum or limited
referendum or previously approved by a measure adopted prior to July 17, 1982;
      (2)   Measures relating to any industrial development projects,
subsequent to measures giving initial approval to such projects;
      (3)   Measures adopting proposed budget statements following compliance
with procedures set forth in the State Budget Act, being Neb. RS 13-501 et
seq.;
      (4)   Measures relating to the immediate preservation of the public
peace, health or safety which have been designated as urgent measures by
unanimous vote of those present and voting of the governing body and approved
by its Executive Officer;
      (5)   Measures relating to projects for which notice has been given as
provided for in subsection (E) below for which a sufficient referendum petition
was not filed within the time limit stated in such notice or which received
voter approval after the filing of such petition;
      (6)   Resolutions directing the Municipal Clerk to cause measures to be
submitted to a vote of the people at a special election as provided in Neb. RS
18-2524 and 18-2529;
      (7)   Resolutions ordering an earlier effective date for measures enacted
by initiative as provided in Neb. RS 18-2526;
      (8)   Measures relating to any facility or system adopted or enacted
pursuant to the Integrated Solid Waste Management Act, being Neb. RS 13-2001 et
seq. by the municipality and which are necessary to carry out contractual
obligations provided for in previously issued bonds, notes, warrants or other
evidence of indebtedness;
      (9)   Measures that amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal a zoning
regulation, restriction or boundary and are subject to protest as provided in
Neb. RS 19-905;
      (10)   Measures relating to personnel issues, including, but not limited
to, establishment, modification or elimination of any personnel position,
policy, salary or benefit and any hiring, promotion, demotion or termination of
personnel; and
      (11)   Measures relating to matters subject to the provisions of the
Municipal Natural Gas System Condemnation Act, being Neb. RS 19-4624 et seq.
   (C)   The following measures shall be subject to limited referendum:
      (1)   Measures in furtherance of a policy of the municipality or relating
to projects previously approved by a measure which was subject to referendum or
which was enacted by initiative or has been approved by the voters at an
election, except that such measures shall not be subject to referendum or
limited referendum for a period of one year after any such policy or project
was approved at a referendum election, enacted by initiative or approved by the
voters at an election;
      (2)   Measures relating to the acquisition, construction, installation,
improvement or enlargement, including the financing or refinancing of the costs
of public ways, public property, utility systems and other capital projects and
measures giving initial approval for industrial development projects;
      (3)   Measures setting utility system rates and charges, except for
measures necessary to carry out contractual obligations provided for in
previously issued bonds, notes, warrants or other evidences of indebtedness,
and pay rates and salaries for municipal employees other than the members of
the governing body and the Executive Officer; and
      (4)   Measures relating to any facility or system adopted or enacted
pursuant to the Integrated Solid Waste Management Act, being Neb. RS 13-2001 et
seq. by the municipality except for measures necessary to carry out contractual
obligations provided for in previously issued bonds, notes, warrants or other
evidence of indebtedness.
   (D)   Measures subject to limited referendum shall ordinarily take effect 30
days after their passage by the governing body, including an override of any
veto, if necessary. Referendum petitions directed at measures subject to
limited referendum shall be filed for signature verification pursuant to Neb.
RS 18-2518 within 30 days after such measure’s passage by the governing body,
including an override of any veto, if necessary, or after notice is first
published pursuant to subsection (E)(1)(c) below. If the necessary number of
signatures as provided in Neb. RS 18-2529 or 18-2530 has been obtained within
the time limitation, the effectiveness of the measure shall be suspended unless
approved by the voters.
   (E)   (1)   For any measure relating to the acquisition, construction,
installation, improvement or enlargement of public ways, public property,
utility systems or other capital projects or any measure relating to any
facility or system adopted or enacted pursuant to the Integrated Solid Waste
Management Act, being Neb. RS 13-2001 et seq., the municipality may exempt all
subsequent measures relating to the same project from the referendum and
limited referendum procedures provided for in this article by the following
procedure:
         (a)   By holding a public hearing on the project, the time and place
of such hearing being published at least once not less than five days prior to
the date set for hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the
municipality;
         (b)   By passage of a measure approving the project, including an
override of a veto, if necessary, at a meeting held on any date subsequent to
the date of hearing; and
         (c)   After passage of such measure, including an override of a veto,
if necessary, by giving notice as follows.
            1.   For those projects for which applicable statutes require an
ordinance or resolution of necessity, creating a district or otherwise
establishing the project, notice shall be given for such project by including
either as part of such ordinance or resolution or as part of any publicized
notice concerning such ordinance or resolution a statement that the project as
described in the ordinance or resolution is subject to limited referendum for a
period of 30 days after the first publication of such notice and that, after
such 30-day period, the project and measures related to it will not be subject
to any further right of referendum.
            2.   For projects for which applicable statutes do not require an
ordinance or resolution of necessity, notice shall be given by publication of a
notice concerning such projects stating in general terms the nature of the
project and the engineer’s estimate of costs of such project and stating that
the project described in the notice is subject to limited referendum for a
period of 30 days after the first publication of such notice and that, after
such 30-day period, the project and measures related to it will not be subject
to any further right of referendum. The notice required by this subsection (E)
shall be published in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the
municipality and shall be published not later than 15 days after passage by the
governing body, including an override of a veto, if necessary, of a measure
approving the project.
      (2)   The right of the municipality to hold such a hearing prior to the
passage of the measure by the governing body and give such notice after passage
of such measure by the governing body to obtain exemption for any particular
project in a manner described in this subsection (E) is optional, and the
municipality shall not be required to hold such a hearing or give such notice
for any particular project.
   (F)   Nothing in subsections (C) and (E) above shall be construed as
subjecting to limited referendum any measure related to matters subject to the
provisions of the Municipal Natural Gas System Condemnation Act, being Neb. RS
19-4624 et seq.
   (G)   All measures, except as provided in subsections (B), (C) and (E)
above, shall be subject to the referendum procedure at any time after such
measure has been passed by the governing body, including an override of a veto,
if necessary, or enacted by the voters by initiative.
(Ord. 453, passed 3-2-1993; Ord. 649, passed 6-5-2001; Ord. 692, passed 5-6-
2003)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2527 and 18-2528
§ 1-913 REFERENDUM, PASSAGE.
   (A)   Whenever a referendum petition bearing signatures equal in number to
at least 15% of the qualified electors of the municipality has been filed with
the Clerk and verified, it shall be the duty of the governing body to
reconsider the measure or portion of such measure which is the object of the
referendum. If the governing body fails to repeal or amend the measure or
portion thereof in the manner proposed by the referendum, the Clerk shall cause
the measure to be submitted to a vote of the people at the next regularly
scheduled primary or general election held within the municipality, within 30
days from the date the governing body receives notification.
   (B)   Whenever a referendum petition bearing signatures equal in number to
at least 20% of the qualified voters of the municipality which requests that a
special election be called to submit the referendum measure to a vote of the
people has been filed with the Clerk and verified, it shall be the duty of the
governing body to reconsider the measure or portion of such measure which is
the object of the referendum. If the governing body fails to repeal or amend
the measure or portion thereof, in the manner proposed by the referendum, the
Clerk shall cause the measure to be submitted to a vote of the people at a
special election called for such purpose within 30 days from the date the
governing body received notification. The date of such special election shall
not be less than 30 nor more than 60 days from the date the governing body
received notification.
   (C)   If a majority of the electors voting on the referendum measure shall
vote in favor of such measure, the law subject to the referendum shall be
repealed or amended. A measure repealed or amended by referendum shall not be
reenacted or returned to its original form except by a two-thirds’ majority of
the members of the governing body. No such attempt to reenact or return the
measure to its original form shall be made within one year of the repeal or
amendment of the measure by the electors. If the referendum measure does not
receive a majority vote, the ordinance shall immediately become effective or
remain in effect.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2529 through 18-2531
§ 1-914 VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES.
   (A)   Whoever knowingly or willfully makes a false affidavit or takes a
false oath regarding the qualifications of any person to sign petitions under
Neb. RS 18-2501 through 18-2531 shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor with a
limit of $300 on the fine.
   (B)   Whoever falsely makes or willfully destroys a petition or any part
thereof, or signs a false name thereto, or signs or files any petition knowing
the same or any part thereof to be falsely made, or suppresses any petition, or
any part thereof, which has been duly filed, pursuant to Neb. RS 18-2501
through 18-2531 shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor with a limit of $500
on the fine.
   (C)   Whoever signs any petition under Neb. RS 18-2501 through 18-2531
knowing that he or she is not a registered voter in the place where such
petition is made, aids or abets any other person in doing any of the acts
mentioned in this section, bribes or gives or pays any money or thing of value
to any person directly or indirectly to induce him or her to sign such
petition, or engages in any deceptive practice intended to induce any person to
sign a petition, shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor with a limit of $300
on the fine.
   (D)   Any Clerk who willfully refuses to comply with the provisions of Neb.
RS 18-2501 through 18-2531, or who willfully causes unreasonable delay in the
execution of his or her duties under such sections shall be guilty of a Class
IV felony, but imprisonment shall not be included as part of the punishment,
and the fine shall not exceed $5,000.
(Ord. 342, passed 11-1-1983)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2532 through 18-2535
§ 1-915 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The provisions of the statutes of the state relating to election
officers, voting places, election apparatus and blanks, preparation and form of
ballots, information to voters, delivery of ballots, calling of elections,
conduct of elections, manner of voting, counting of votes, records and
certificates of election and recounts of votes, so far as applicable, shall
apply to voting on ordinances by the electors pursuant to this article.
   (B)   Nothing in this article shall apply to procedures for initiatives or
referendums provided in Neb. RS 18-412 and 18-412.02 relating to municipal
light and power plants, Neb. RS 70-504 and 70-650.01, relating to public power
districts, and Neb. RS 80-203 through 80-205 relating to soldiers and sailors
monuments.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2536 and 18-2537
ARTICLE 10: MEETINGS
Section
   
1-1001   Closed sessions
   
1-1002   Public participation
   
1-1003   Organizational
   
1-1004   Open to public; notice; agenda
   
1-1005   “Public body” defined
   
1-1006   Council meetings; when; quorum; votes
   
1-1007   Videoconferencing, when allowed
   
1-1008   Telephone conference calls; when allowed
§ 1-1001 CLOSED SESSIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Any public body may hold a closed session by the affirmative
vote of a majority of its voting members if a closed session is clearly
necessary for the protection of the public interest or for the prevention of
needless injury to the reputation of an individual and if such individual has
not requested a public meeting.
      (2)   Closed sessions may be held for, but shall not be limited to, such
reasons as:
         (a)   Strategy sessions with respect to collective bargaining, real
estate purchases, pending litigation or litigation which is imminent as
evidenced by communication of a claim or threat of litigation to or by the
public body;
         (b)   Discussion regarding deployment of security personnel or
devices;
         (c)   Investigative proceedings regarding allegations of criminal
misconduct; or
         (d)   Evaluation of the job performance of a person when necessary to
prevent needless injury to the reputation of a person and if such person has
not requested a public meeting.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall permit a closed meeting for
discussion of the appointment or election of a new member to any public body.
   (B)   The vote to hold a closed session shall be taken in open session. The
vote of each member on the question of holding a closed session, the reason for
the closed session and the time when the closed session commenced and concluded
shall be recorded in the minutes. The public body holding such a closed session
shall restrict its consideration to matters during the closed portions to only
those purposes set forth in the minutes as the reason for the closed session.
The meeting shall be reconvened in open session before any formal action may be
taken. For the purpose of this section, FORMAL ACTION shall mean a collective
decision or a collective commitment or promise to make a decision on any
question, motion, proposal, resolution, order or ordinance or formation of a
position or policy but shall not include negotiating guidance given by members
of the public body to legal counsel or other negotiators in closed sessions
authorized under subsection (A)(2)(a) above.
   (C)   Any member of the public body shall have the right to challenge the
continuation of a closed session if the member determines that the session has
exceeded the reason stated in the original motion to hold a closed session or
if the member contends that the closed session is neither clearly necessary for
the protection of the public interest or the prevention of needless injury to
the reputation of an individual. Such challenge shall be overruled only by a
majority vote of the members of the public body. Such challenge and its
disposition shall be recorded in the minutes.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that any meeting
be closed to the public. No person or public body shall fail to invite a
portion of its members to a meeting, and no public body shall designate itself
a subcommittee of the whole body for the purpose of circumventing the
provisions of this article. No closed session, informal meeting, chance
meeting, social gathering or electronic communication shall be used for the
purpose of circumventing the provisions of this article.
   (E)   The provisions of this article shall not apply to chance meetings, or
to attendance at or travel to conventions or workshops of members of a public
body at which there is no meeting of the body then intentionally convened and
there is no vote or other action taken regarding any matter over which the
public body has supervision, control, jurisdiction or advisory power.
(Ord. 357, passed 10-1-1985; Ord. 452, passed 3-2-1993; Ord. 494, passed 2-7-
1995)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 84-1410
§ 1-1002 PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this article, the public shall have the
right to attend and the right to speak at meetings of public bodies and all or
any part of a meeting of a public body except for closed meetings called to
pursuant to §
1-1001 may be videotaped, televised, photographed, broadcast or recorded by any
person in attendance by means of a tape recorder, camera, video equipment or
any other means of pictorial or sonic reproduction or in writing.
   (B)   It shall not be a violation of this section for any public body to
make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations regarding the conduct of
persons attending, speaking at, videotaping, televising, photographing,
broadcasting or recording its meetings. A body may not be required to allow
citizens to speak at each meeting, but it may not forbid public participation
at all meetings. No public body shall require members of the public to identify
themselves as a condition for admission to the meeting. The body may require
any member of the public desiring to address the body to identify himself or
herself. No public body shall, for the purpose of circumventing the provisions
of this article, hold a meeting in a place known by the body to be too small to
accommodate the anticipated audience. No public body shall be deemed in
violation of this section if it holds its meeting in its traditional meeting
place which is located in this state. An agency which contracts with
municipalities outside the state may hold meetings of any committee outside the
state if such meetings are held only in such contracting municipalities. Final
action on any agenda item shall only be taken by the agency at a meeting in the
state, which meeting shall comply with Neb. RS 84-1408 through 84-1414. The
public body shall, upon request, make a reasonable effort to accommodate the
public’s right to hear the discussion and testimony presented at the meeting.
Public bodies shall make available at the meeting, for examination and copying
by members of the public, at least one copy of all reproducible written
material to be discussed at an open meeting.
(Ord. 357, passed 10-1-1985; Ord. 376, passed 11-3-1987) Penalty, see §
1-1201
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2438 and 84-1412
§ 1-1003 ORGANIZATIONAL.
   The newly elected Council shall convene at the regular place of meeting in
the city on the first Tuesday in January of each year in which a municipal
election is held immediately after the prior Council adjourns and proceed to
organize themselves for the ensuing year. The Mayor elected for the new
municipal year shall call the meeting to order. The Council shall then proceed
to examine the credentials of its members and other elective officers of the
city to see that each has been duly and properly elected and to see that such
oaths and bonds have been given as are required. After ascertaining that all
members are duly qualified, the Council shall then elect one of its own body
who shall be styled as President of the Council. The Mayor shall then nominate
his or her candidates for appointive offices. He or she shall then proceed with
the regular order of business. It is hereby made the duty of each and every
member of the Council, or his or her successor in office, and of each officer
elected to any office, to qualify prior to the first regular meeting in
December following his or her election. All appointive officers shall qualify
within two weeks following their appointments. Qualification for each officer
who is not required to give bond shall consist in his or her subscribing and
taking an oath to support the Constitution of the United States, the
Constitution of the state and the laws of the municipality, and to perform
faithfully and impartially the duties of his or her office, said oath to be
filed in the office of the Municipal Clerk. Each officer who is required to
give a bond shall file the required bond in the office of the Municipal Clerk
with sufficient sureties, conditioned on the faithful discharge of the duties
of his or her office, with the oath endorsed thereon.
(Ord. 251, passed 5-15-1979)
§ 1-1004 OPEN TO PUBLIC; NOTICE; AGENDA.
   (A)   The formation of public policy is public business and may not be
conducted in secret. Every meeting of a public body shall be open to the public
in order that citizens may exercise their democratic privilege of attending and
speaking at meetings of public bodies, except as otherwise provided by the
Constitution of the state, federal statutes and the Open Meetings Act, being
Neb. RS 84-1407.
(Neb. RS 84-1408)
   (B)   (1)   Each public body shall give reasonable advance publicized notice
of the time and place of each meeting as provided in subsection (B)(2) below.
The notice shall be transmitted to all members of the public body and to the
public.
      (2)   The notice shall be published by:
         (a)   Publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the
public body’s jurisdiction and, if available, on such newspaper’s web site; or
         (b)   Posting written notice in three conspicuous public places in the
city. The notice shall be posted in the same three places for each meeting.
      (3)   In addition to a method of notice required by subsection (B)(2)
above, the notice shall also be provided by any other appropriate method
designated by the public body.
      (4)   Each public body shall record the methods and dates of the notice
in its minutes.
      (5)   The notice shall contain an agenda of subjects known at the time of
the publicized notice or a statement that the agenda, which shall be kept
continually current, is readily available for public inspection at the office
of the public body during normal business hours. Agenda items shall be
sufficiently descriptive to give the public reasonable notice of the matters to
be considered at the meeting. Except for items of an emergency nature, the
agenda shall not be altered later than 24 hours before the scheduled
commencement of the meeting or 48 hours before the scheduled commencement of a
meeting of the City Council scheduled outside the corporate limits of the city.
The public body shall have the right to modify the agenda to include items of
an emergency nature only at such public meeting.
(Neb. RS 84-1411)
Statutory reference:
   Videoconferencing when emergency is declared by the Governor under the
Emergency Management
    Act, see Neb. RS 84-1411(7)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 951, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been
    replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 1-1005 “PUBLIC BODY” DEFINED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PUBLIC BODY.
         (a)   The governing body of the municipality,
         (b)   All independent boards, commissions, bureaus, committees,
councils, subunits or any other bodies, now or hereafter created by
Constitution, statute, ordinance or otherwise pursuant to law, and
         (c)   Advisory committees of the bodies listed above.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to subcommittees of such bodies unless a
quorum of the public body attends a subcommittee meeting or unless such
subcommittees are holding hearings, making policy or taking formal action on
behalf of their parent body.
(Ord. 451, passed 3-2-1993)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 84-1409(1)
§ 1-1006 COUNCIL MEETINGS; WHEN; QUORUM; VOTES.
   (A)   Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held at such times as
the Council may provide by ordinance. A majority of all the members elected to
the Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business, but
a fewer number may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of
absent members. When the City Council consists of four members as established
by ordinance or home rule charter, the Mayor shall be deemed a member of the
City Council for purposes of establishing a quorum when the Mayor’s presence is
necessary to establish the quorum. Unless a greater vote is required by law, an
affirmative vote of at least one-half of the elected members shall be required
for the transaction of any business.
(Neb. RS 17-105)
   (B)   (1)   The Mayor or any three Council members shall have power to call
special meetings of the City Council, the object of which shall be submitted to
the Council in writing; and the call and object, as well as the disposition
thereof, shall be entered upon the journal by the City Clerk.
(Neb. RS 17-106)
      (2)   On filing the call for a special meeting, the City Clerk shall
notify the Mayor and Council members of the special meeting, stating the time
and purpose.
   (C)   Unless otherwise provided by the Council, on the request of any two
members, whether a quorum is present or not, all absent members shall be sent
for and compelled to attend.
   (D)   At the hour appointed for a meeting, the City Clerk shall proceed to
call the roll of members and announce whether a quorum is present. If a quorum
is present, the Council shall be called to order by the Mayor, if present, or
if absent, by the President of the Council.
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 942, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 1-1007 VIDEOCONFERENCING, WHEN ALLOWED.
   (A)   A meeting of an organization created under the Interlocal Cooperation
Act, being Neb. RS 13-801 et seq., the Joint Public Agency Act, being Neb. RS
13-2501 et seq. or the Municipal Cooperative Financing Act, being Neb. RS 18-
2401 et seq. or of the governing body of a risk management pool or its advisory
committees organized in accordance with the Intergovernmental Risk Management
Act, being Neb. RS 44-4301 et seq. may be held by means of videoconferencing
if:
      (1)   Reasonable advance publicized notice is given;
      (2)   Reasonable arrangements are made to accommodate the public’s right
to attend, hear and speak at the meeting, including seating, recordation by
audio or visual recording devices and a reasonable opportunity for input such
as public comment or questions to at least the same extent as would be provided
if videoconferencing were not used;
      (3)   At least one copy of all documents being considered is available to
the public at each site of the videoconference;
      (4)   At least one member of the governing body or advisory committee is
present at each site of the videoconference; and
      (5)   No more than one-half of the governing body’s or advisory
committee’s meetings in a calendar year are held by videoconference.
   (B)   Videoconferencing shall not be used to circumvent any of the public
government purposes established in Neb. RS 84-1408 through 84-1414.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      VIDEOCONFERENCING. Conducting a meeting involving participants at two or
more locations through the use of audio-video equipment which allows
participants at each location to hear and see each meeting participant at each
other location, including public input. Interaction between meeting
participants shall be possible at all meeting locations.
(Ord. 542, passed 6-3-1997; Ord. 640, passed 5-10-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 84-1409 and 84-1411
§ 1-1008 TELEPHONE CONFERENCE CALLS; WHEN ALLOWED.
   (A)   A meeting of the governing body of a joint entity formed under the
Interlocal Cooperation Act, being Neb. RS 13-801 et seq. or of the governing
body of a risk management pool or its advisory committees organized in
accordance with the Intergovernmental Risk Management Act, being Neb. RS 44-
4301 et seq. may be held by telephone conference call if:
      (1)   The territory represented by the member public agencies of the
entity or pool covers more than one county;
      (2)   Reasonable advance publicized notice is given which identifies each
telephone conference location at which a member of the entity’s or pool’s
governing body will be present;
      (3)   All telephone conference meeting sites identified in the notice are
located within public buildings used by members of the entity or pool or at a
place which will accommodate the anticipated audience;
      (4)   Reasonable arrangements are made to accommodate the public’s right
to attend, hear and speak at the meeting, including seating, recordation by
audio recording devices and a reasonable opportunity for input such as public
comment or questions to at least the same extent as would be provided if a
telephone conference call was not used;
      (5)   At least one copy of all documents being considered is available to
the public at each site of the telephone conference call;
      (6)   At least one member of the governing body of the entity or pool is
present at each site of the telephone conference call identified in the public
notice;
      (7)   The telephone conference call lasts no more than one hour; and
      (8)   No more than one-half of the entity’s or pool’s meetings in a
calendar year are held by telephone conference call.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the participation of
consultants, members of the press and other nonmembers of the governing body at
sites not identified in the public notice. Telephone conference calls shall not
be used to circumvent any of the public government purposes established in Neb.
RS 84-1408 through 84-1414.
(Ord. 639, passed 5-10-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 84-1411(3) 
ARTICLE 11: INTERGOVERNMENTAL RISK MANAGEMENT
Section
   
1-1101   Intergovernmental risk management; authority
§ 1-1101 INTERGOVERNMENTAL RISK MANAGEMENT; AUTHORITY.
   The governing body and any one or more public agencies, as defined in Neb.
RS 44-4303, may make and execute an agreement providing for joint and
cooperative action in accordance with Neb. RS 44-4301 through 44-4339, to form,
become members of and operate a risk management pool for the purpose of
providing to members risk management services and insurance coverages in the
form of group self-insurance or standard insurance, including any combination
of group self-insurance and standard insurance, to protect members against
losses arising from any of the following:
   (A)   General liability;
   (B)   Damage, destruction or loss of real or personal property, including,
but not limited to, loss of use or occupancy and loss of income or extra
expense resulting from loss of use or occupancy;
   (C)   Errors and omissions liability; and
   (D)   Workers’ compensation liability.
(Ord. 378, passed 11-3-1987)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 44-4301 through 44-4339
ARTICLE 12: PENAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
1-1201   Violations; penalty
§ 1-1201 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, or any person’s agent or servant, who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided herein,
shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined in any sum not exceeding $500. A new violation shall be deemed to have
been committed every 24 hours of failure to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the
municipality may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin, abate and remove the
same in the manner provided by law.
      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists,
the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.
(Ord. 642, passed 5-10-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-505, 18-1720 and 18-1722
CHAPTER 2: COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
   Article
      
1.   COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
      
2.   PENAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1: COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
Section
   
2-101   Library Board; general powers and duties
   
2-102   Board of Health
   
2-103   Board of Park Commissioners
   
2-104   Cemetery Board
   
2-105   Nursing Home Board
   
2-106   Housing Authority Board
   
2-106.01   Housing Authority Board; continued existence as housing agency
   
2-107   Joint Housing Authority
   
2-108   Planning Commission
   
2-109   Recreation Board
   
2-110   Board of Adjustment
   
2-111   Economic Development Program
§ 2-101 LIBRARY BOARD; GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Library Board shall consist of seven members which shall be
appointed by the governing body. The nominated members must receive a majority
vote of the governing body. All members of the Library Board shall be residents
of the municipality. The members of the Library Board shall serve a four-year
term of office and shall serve without compensation. At the discretion of the
governing body, Board members may be required to get a bond in a sum set by
resolution of said governing body and conditioned upon the faithful performance
of their duties. At the time of the Board’s first meeting in January of each
year, the Board shall organize by selecting from their number a Chairperson and
secretary. It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep full and correct
minutes and records of all meetings and to file the same with the Municipal
Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection at any reasonable
time. A majority of the Library Board members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business. The Board shall meet at such time as the governing
body may designate. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the
Chairperson or any four members of the Board. All actions of the Board shall be
subject to the review and supervision of the governing body. No member of the
governing body shall serve as a member of the Library Board while serving a
term of office as a member of the governing body.
   (B)   The Library Board shall have the power to make and adopt such bylaws,
rules and regulations for its own guidance and for the government of the
Library and reading room as it may deem expedient, not inconsistent with Neb.
RS 51-201 through 51-219.
   (C)   The Library Board shall have exclusive control of expenditures, of all
money collected or donated to the credit of the Library Fund, of the renting of
any Library building, and the supervision, care and custody of the grounds,
rooms or buildings constructed, leased or set apart for that purpose, all in
accordance with state law, subject to §
1-101.
   (D)   The Library Board shall have the power to recommend the appointment of
a suitable librarian and assistant and recommend compensation for same to the
governing body. The Library Board shall have the power to establish rules and
regulations for the government of the Library as may be deemed necessary for
its preservation and to maintain its usefulness and efficiency. It shall have
the power to fix and impose, by general rules, penalties and forfeitures for
trespasses upon or injury to the Library grounds, rooms, books or other
property, for failure to return any book or for violation of any bylaw, rule or
regulation. The Library Board shall have and exercise such power as may be
necessary to carry out the spirit and intent of Neb. RS 51-201 through 51-219
in establishing and maintaining the library and reading room.
(Ord. 893, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 2-102 BOARD OF HEALTH.
   (A)   (1)   The governing body shall appoint a Board of Health which shall
consist of four members. The members of the Board shall include the Mayor (who
shall serve as Chairperson), the President of the City Council and two other
members. One member shall be a physician or health care provider, if one can be
found who is willing to serve. Such physician or health care provider, if
appointed, shall be the Board’s medical advisor. If the Mayor has appointed a
Chief of Police, the Chief of Police shall serve on the Board as secretary and
quarantine officer.
      (2)   The members of the Board shall serve, without compensation, a one-
year term of office, unless reappointed, and shall reorganize at the first
meeting in December of each year. No member of the Board of Health shall hold
more than one Board of Health position.
   (B)   The secretary shall keep full and correct minutes and records of all
meetings and file the same with the Municipal Clerk where they shall be
available for public inspection during office hours. The Board of Health shall
be funded by the governing body from time to time out of the General Fund. A
majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of doing
business. The Board shall meet at such times as the governing body may
designate. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the Chairperson or any
two members of the Board.
   (C)   (1)   The Board shall enact rules and regulations, which shall have
the full force and effect of law, to safeguard the health of the people of the
municipality. The Board shall enforce the rules and regulations and provide
fines and punishments for any violations thereof. It may regulate, suppress and
prevent the occurrence of nuisances and enforce all laws of the state and
ordinances of the municipality relating to nuisances and to matters of
sanitation which affect the health and safety of the people. The Board shall
regularly inspect such premises and businesses as the governing body may
direct.
      (2)   All members of the Board shall be responsible for making such
reports and performing such other duties as the governing body may from time to
time designate.
(Ord. 264, passed 5-15-1979; Ord. 308, passed 6-1-1982; Ord. 553, passed 6-3-
1997)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-121
§ 2-103 BOARD OF PARK COMMISSIONERS.
   (Repealed by Ord. 901, passed 1-9-2018)
§ 2-104 CEMETERY BOARD.
   (A)   The governing body shall appoint the Cemetery Board which shall
consist of three members who are residents of the municipality and who shall
serve without compensation for a term of three years. All necessary
appointments to the Cemetery Board shall be made by the governing body at its
first regular meeting in the month of January of each year. Two members shall
be appointed each year and may be required, in the discretion of the governing
body, to give a bond in a sum set by resolution of the governing body, and
conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties. At the first meeting
in January of each year, the Board shall organize by selecting from its
membership a Chairperson and secretary. The secretary shall keep the full and
correct minutes and records of all meetings and file the same with the
Municipal Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. A majority of the Board members shall constitute a quorum for
the purpose of doing business. The Board shall meet at such times as the
governing body may designate. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the
Chairperson or any two of the Board members. The Board shall have the general
care, management and supervision of the Municipal Cemetery with the power and
authority to limit and regulate the number of cemetery lots that may be owned
by the same person; to prescribe rules for enclosing, adorning and erecting
monuments and tombstones on cemetery lots; and to prohibit any diverse or
improper use thereof; provided, that no religious tests shall be made as to the
ownership of lots, the burial therein and the ornamentation of graves.
   (B)   The Board shall pass rules and regulations for the proper use of the
Cemetery and prescribe penalties and fines for violations thereof. The Board
shall use all revenue received from the sale of lots, gifts or by devise for
the care, management and administration of the Cemetery. All actions of the
Board shall be subject to the review and supervision of the governing body, and
it shall be responsible for making such reports and performing such additional
duties as the governing body may designate. No member of the governing body
shall serve as a member of the Board while serving a term of office as a member
of the governing body. No member of the Cemetery Board shall hold more than one
Cemetery Board office.
(Ord. 304, passed 6-1-1982; Ord. 462, passed 4-5-1994)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 12-401 through 12-403
§ 2-105 NURSING HOME BOARD.
   The governing body shall appoint the Nursing Home Board. The Board shall
consist of five members. The members of the Board shall serve a one-year term
of office unless reappointed. Said appointments shall be made by the governing
body at the first regularly scheduled meeting in the month of January of each
year. The Board shall serve without compensation and may be required, in the
discretion of the governing body, to give a bond in a sum set by resolution of
the governing body, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of their
duties. At the time of the Board’s first meeting in January of each year, the
Board shall organize by selecting from its membership a Chairperson, secretary
and financial officer. It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep the full
and correct minutes and records of all meetings, and to file the same with the
Municipal Clerk, where they shall be available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. The financial officer shall act as a liaison between the
Nursing Home Board and the governing body with respect to issues involving
nursing home funds and investments. The responsibilities of the financial
officer shall be to provide information to the governing body, however, the
ultimate responsibility for making decisions on all financial issues shall
continue to be that of the Mayor and City Council. A majority of the Board
members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The Board
shall meet at such times as the governing body may designate. Special meetings
may be held upon the call of the Chairperson or any three members of the Board.
It shall be the duty of the Board to have general charge of the Municipal
Nursing Home and shall establish appropriate rules and regulations for the
management, operation and use of the same. All actions of the Board shall be
subject to the review and supervision of the governing body. The Board shall be
responsible for making such reports and performing such additional duties as
the governing body may, from time to time, designate. No member of the
governing body shall serve as a member of the Nursing Home Board while serving
a term of office as a member of the governing body. No member of the Nursing
Home Board shall serve in the capacity of both the Chairperson and secretary of
the Board.
(Ord. 303, passed 6-1-1982; Ord. 750, passed 6-6-2006; Ord. 756, passed 9-5-
2006; Ord. 769, passed 8-7-2007)
§ 2-106 HOUSING AUTHORITY BOARD.
   (A)   The governing body shall appoint five persons who shall constitute the
Housing Authority Board, and such persons shall be called the Commissioners.
One Commissioner shall be appointed each year. Each Commissioner shall serve a
five-year term of office or until his or her successor is duly appointed;
provided, that all vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms. The
governing body may appoint one of its members to serve as one of the five
members of such Housing Authority Board for such term as the governing body may
determine. No person shall serve as a Commissioner unless he or she resides
within the area of operation of that Housing Authority Board. A certificate of
the appointment or reappointment of any Commissioner shall be filed with the
Municipal Clerk, and such certificate shall be conclusive evidence of the
proper appointment of such Commissioner. A Commissioner shall receive no
compensation for his or her services, but he or she shall be entitled to the
necessary expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in discharge of his or
her duties. A majority of Commissioners shall constitute a quorum of the
Housing Authority Board for the purpose of conducting its business, exercising
its powers and for all other purposes. Action may be taken by the Housing
Authority Board upon the vote of the majority of the Commissioners present
unless in any case the bylaws of the Housing Authority Board shall require a
larger number. The Commissioners shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson
from among the Commissioners and shall have the power to employ an executive
director who shall serve as ex officio secretary of the Housing Authority
Board. The Housing Authority Board may also employ legal counsel, or it may
call upon the chief law officer of the municipality, for such services as it
may require. It may employ technical experts and such other officers, agents
and employees as it may require and shall determine their qualifications,
duties, compensations and terms of office. The Housing Authority Board may
delegate such other powers and duties to its agents or employees as it may deem
proper. During his or her tenure and for one year thereafter, no commissioner,
officer or employee of the Municipal Housing Authority Board shall voluntarily
acquire any interest, direct or indirect, in any project or in any property
included or planned to be included in any project, or in any contract or
proposed contract relating to any housing project. If any such commissioner,
officer or employee involuntarily acquires any such interest, or voluntarily or
involuntarily acquired any such interest prior to appointment or employment as
commissioner, officer or employee, he or she shall immediately disclose his or
her interest in writing to the Housing Authority Board, and such disclosure
shall be entered upon the minutes of the Housing Authority Board, and he or she
shall not participate in any action by the Housing Authority Board relating to
the property or contract in which he or she has any such interest; provided,
that nothing herein shall apply to the acquisition of any interest in notes or
bonds of the Housing Authority Board issued in connection with any housing
project, or to the execution of agreements by banking institutions for deposit
or handling of funds in connection with a project or to act as trustee under
any trust indenture, or to utility services, the rates for which are fixed or
controlled by a governmental agency. The Mayor may remove a Commissioner for
neglect of duty or misconduct in office in the manner prescribed hereinafter.
The Mayor shall send a notice of removal to such Commissioner which notice
shall contain a statement containing the charges against him or her. Unless
within ten days from the receipt of such notice, such Commissioner files with
the Clerk a request for a hearing before the governing body, the Commissioner
shall be deemed as removed from office. If a request for a hearing is filed
with the Clerk, the governing body of the municipality shall hold a hearing at
which the Commissioner shall have the right to appear in person or by counsel
and the governing body shall determine whether the removal shall be disapproved
or upheld. If the removal is disapproved, the Commissioner shall continue to
hold his or her position.
   (B)   The Housing Authority Board shall keep an accurate account of all its
activities and of all its receipts and disbursements and shall make a report to
the governing body on all such information.
(Ord. 306, passed 6-1-1982; Ord. 323, passed 9-7-1982)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 71-1572 et seq.
§ 2-106.01 HOUSING AUTHORITY BOARD; CONTINUED EXISTENCE AS HOUSING AGENCY.
   (A)   The local Housing Authority Board established under prior state law
and in existence on January 1, 2000, shall have continued existence as a
housing agency under the State Housing Agency Act, being Neb. RS 71-1572 et
seq.
   (B)   The local housing agency shall conduct its operations consistent with
the State Housing Agency Act, being Neb. RS 71-1572 et seq. All property,
rights in land, buildings, records and equipment and any funds, money, revenue,
receipts or assets of the Housing Authority Board belong to the agency as
successor. All obligations, debts, commitments and liabilities of the Housing
Authority Board are obligations, debts, commitments and liabilities of the
successor agency.
   (C)   Any resolution by the Housing Authority Board and any action taken by
the Housing Authority Board prior to January 1, 2000, with regard to any
project or program which is to completed within or to be conducted for a 12-
month period following January 1, 2000, and which resolution or action is
lawful under state law as it existed prior to January 1, 2000, is a lawful
resolution or action of the successor agency and binding upon the successor
agency and enforceable by or against the agency, notwithstanding that such
resolution or action is inconsistent with, not authorized by, or prohibited
under the provisions of the State Housing Agency Act, being Neb. RS 71-1572 et
seq.
   (D)   All commissioners of the local housing agency and all officers, legal
counsel, technical experts, directors and other appointees or employees of the
agency holding office or employment by virtue of any such prior law on January
1, 2000, shall be deemed to have been appointed or employed under the State
Housing Agency Act, being Neb. RS 71-1572 et seq.
(Ord. 638, passed 5-10-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 71-1576
§ 2-107 JOINT HOUSING AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Any two or more cities, villages or counties, or any combination
thereof, may, by resolution of their separate governing bodies, determine that
there is a need for a Joint Housing Authority to provide decent, safe and
sanitary housing for persons of low income living in a multi-jurisdictional
area, and that this need would be more efficiently served by the establishment
of such Joint Housing Authority. Such Joint Housing Authority shall have
perpetual existence; except that any city, village or county, as the case may
be, may withdraw from participation in the Joint Housing Authority by
resolution of its governing body only under the conditions set out in state
law. The area of operation of such Joint Housing Authority would be an area
equivalent to the total areas of operation which the housing authorities, if
created separately by the cities, villages or counties establishing the Joint
Authority would have. The creation of subsequent housing authorities shall not
affect the area of operation or territorial jurisdiction of any existing
Housing Authority. Whenever a Joint Housing Authority is created, it shall bear
such name as the political subdivision or subdivisions creating it shall
choose, and such name shall include the words Joint Housing Authority.
   (B)   (1)   When it is determined by resolution of the governing bodies of
two or more cities, villages or counties, or any combination thereof, that it
is expedient to create a Joint Housing Authority and to participate therein,
the governing bodies shall appoint persons who shall be residents of the area
of operations of the Authority and who shall constitute the Joint Housing
Authority, and such persons shall be called Commissioners.
      (2)   The Commissioners shall be appointed as follows:
         (a)   When two political subdivisions constitute the participating
members in such Joint Authority, each shall appoint two persons to act as
Commissioners, and such Commissioners shall elect a fifth person to act as a
Commissioner;
         (b)   When three political subdivisions constitute the participating
members in such Joint Authority, each shall appoint one person to act as a
Commissioner and such Commissioners shall elect a fourth and fifth person to
act as Commissioners;
         (c)   When four political subdivisions constitute the participating
members in such Joint Authority, each shall appoint one person to act as
Commissioner and such Commissioners shall elect a fifth person to act as a
Commissioner; and
         (d)   When five or more political subdivisions constitute the
participating members in the Joint Authority, each shall appoint one person to
act as Commissioner.
   (C)   Each Commissioner shall serve a term of five years from the date of
his or her appointment. All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by
the entity originally appointing such Commissioner. Tenancy in a project
established by a Joint Housing Authority shall not preclude the appointment of
any person to serve as a Commissioner of such Joint Housing Authority. After a
Joint Housing Authority has been created, additional political subdivisions may
elect to participate as members of such Joint Housing Authority after
compliance with Neb. RS 71-1598, if the majority of existing Commissioners in
such Joint Housing Authority and all participating political subdivisions by
their respective governing bodies consent to such additional member. A Joint
Housing Authority having 12 or more Commissioners may by resolution establish
an executive committee of at least five but not more than seven Commissioners.
The committee shall have such powers over the management and operation of such
Joint Housing Authority as the Commissioners of such Joint Housing Authority
shall specify and shall declare in the resolution. No person shall serve as a
Commissioner unless he or she resides within the area of operation of the Joint
Housing Authority involved.
(Ord. 322, passed 9-7-1982)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 71-1572
§ 2-108 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   (1)   If the City Council adopts zoning or other regulations pursuant
to Neb. RS 19-901 et seq., the Planning Commission shall consist of five, seven
or nine regular members, as specified by the City Council by ordinance, who
shall represent, insofar as is possible, the different professions or
occupations in the city and shall be appointed by the Mayor by and with the
approval of a majority vote of the members elected to the City Council. Two of
the regular members may be residents of the area over which the city is
authorized to exercise extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulation. When
there are 500 residents in the area over which the city exercises
extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulation, one regular member of the
Commission shall be a resident from such area. If it is determined by the City
Council that 500 residents reside in the area subject to extraterritorial
zoning or subdivision regulation, and no such resident is a regular member of
the Commission, the first available vacancy on the Commission shall be filled
by the appointment of such an individual. A number of Commissioners equal to a
majority of the number of regular members appointed to the Commission shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business. All regular members of
the Commission shall serve without compensation. The term of each regular
member shall be three years, except that one-third or fewer of the regular
members of the first Commission to be so appointed shall serve for terms of one
year, one-third or fewer for terms of two years, and the remaining members for
terms of three years. All regular members shall hold office until their
successors are appointed. Any member may, after a public hearing before the
Council, be removed by the Mayor with the consent of a majority vote of the
members elected to the Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance
in office or other good and sufficient cause. Vacancies occurring otherwise
than through the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired portion
of the term by the Mayor.
      (2)   The Mayor may, with the approval of a majority vote of the elected
members of the Council, appoint one alternate member to the Planning
Commission. The alternate member shall serve without compensation. The term of
the alternate member shall be three years, and he or she shall hold office
until his or her successor is appointed and approved. The alternate member may
be removed from office in the same manner as a regular member. If the alternate
member position becomes vacant other than through the expiration of the term,
the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term by the Mayor
with the approval of a majority vote of the elected members of the Council. The
alternate member may attend any meeting and may serve as a voting and
participating member of the Commission at any time when less than the full
number of regular Commission members is present and capable of voting.
      (3)   A regular or alternate member of the Planning Commission may hold
any other municipal office except:
         (a)   Mayor;
         (b)   A member of the City Council;
         (c)   A member of any community redevelopment authority or limited
community redevelopment authority created under Neb. RS 18-2102.01; or
         (d)   A member of any citizen advisory review committee created under
Neb. RS 18-2715.
(Neb. RS 19-926)
   (B)   The Commission shall elect its Chairperson from its members and create
and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of the
Chairperson shall be one year, and he or she shall be eligible for reelection.
The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each calendar
quarter, except as provided in this section. The City Council may require the
Commission to meet more frequently and the Chairperson of the Commission may
call for a meeting when necessary to deal with business pending before the
Commission. If no business is pending before the Commission, the Chairperson
may cancel a quarterly meeting, but no more than three quarterly meetings may
be cancelled per calendar year. The Commission shall adopt rules and
regulations for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its
resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which shall be a public
record.
(Neb. RS 19-927)
   (C)   No member of the Commission shall serve in the capacity of both the
Chairperson and secretary of the Commission. The secretary shall keep the full
and correct minutes and records of all meetings and file them with the City
Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection during office hours.
   (D)   The City Council may provide the funds, equipment and accommodations
necessary for the work of the Commission, but the expenditures of the
Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for
that purpose by the Council; and no expenditures nor agreements for
expenditures shall be valid in excess of such amounts.
(Neb. RS 19-928)
   (E)   (1)   (a)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 19-930 through 19-933, the
Planning Commission shall:
            1.   Make and adopt plans for the physical development of the city,
including any areas outside its boundaries which in the Commission’s judgment
bear relation to the planning of such city and including a comprehensive
development plan as defined by Neb. RS 19-903;
            2.   Prepare and adopt such implemental means as a capital
improvement program, subdivision regulations, building codes and a zoning
ordinance in cooperation with other interested city departments; and
            3.   Consult with and advise public officials and agencies, public
utilities, civic organizations, educational institutions and citizens with
relation to the promulgation and implementation of the comprehensive
development plan and its implemental programs. The Commission may delegate
authority to any such group to conduct studies and make surveys for the
Commission, make preliminary reports on its findings and hold public hearings
before submitting its final reports.
         (b)   The City Council shall not take final action on matters relating
to the comprehensive development plan, capital improvements, building codes,
subdivision development, the annexation of territory or zoning until it has
received the recommendation of the Planning Commission, provided that the
Planning Commission shall make its recommendation so that it is received by the
City Council within 60 days after the Commission begins consideration of a
matter or within such other number of days as the City Council has set by
ordinance.
         (c)   A recommendation from the Planning Commission shall not be
required for subdivision of existing lots and blocks whenever all required
public improvements have been installed, no new dedication of public rights-of-
way or easements is involved, and such subdivision complies with the ordinance
requirements concerning minimum areas and dimensions of such lots and blocks,
if the City Council has designated, by ordinance, an agent pursuant to Neb. RS
19-916.
      (2)   (a)   The Commission may, with the consent of the City Council, in
its own name, make and enter into contracts with public or private bodies,
receive contributions, bequests, gifts or grant funds from public or private
sources, expend the funds appropriated to it by the city, employ agents and
employees and acquire, hold and dispose of property.
         (b)   The Commission may on its own authority make arrangements
consistent with its program, conduct or sponsor special studies or planning
work for any public body or appropriate agency, receive grants, remuneration or
reimbursement for such studies or work and, at its public hearings, summon
witnesses, administer oaths and compel the giving of testimony.
      (3)   (a)   The Commission may grant conditional uses or special
exceptions to property owners for the use of their property if the City Council
has, through a zoning ordinance or special ordinance, generally authorized the
Commission to exercise such powers and has approved the standards and
procedures adopted by the Commission for equitably and judiciously granting
such conditional uses or special exceptions. The granting of a conditional use
permit or special exception shall only allow property owners to put their
property to a special use if it is among those uses specifically identified in
the zoning ordinance as classifications of uses which may require special
conditions or requirements to be met by the owners before a use permit or
building permit is authorized.
         (b)   The power to grant conditional uses or special exceptions shall
be the exclusive authority of the Commission, except that the City Council may
choose to retain for itself the power to grant conditional uses or special
exceptions for those classifications of uses specified in the zoning ordinance.
The Council may exercise such power if it has formally adopted standards and
procedures for granting such conditional uses or special exceptions in a manner
that is equitable and will promote the public interest.
         (c)   An appeal of a decision by the Commission or Council regarding a
conditional use or special exception shall be made to the District Court.
(Neb. RS 19-929)
Statutory reference:
   Other provisions on planning commissions, see Neb. RS 19-925 through 19-933
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 959, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 2-109 RECREATION BOARD.
   The Mayor and City Council shall appoint the Recreation Board. Said
appointments shall be made by the governing body at the first regularly
scheduled meeting in the month of January of each year. The Board shall consist
of seven members. The members shall serve a one-year term of office unless
reappointed. The Board shall serve without compensation and may be required, at
the discretion of the Mayor and City Council, to give a bond in a sum set by
resolution of the governing body and conditioned upon the faithful performance
of their duties. At the time of the Board’s first meeting in January of each
year, the Board shall organize by selecting from their number a Chairperson,
secretary and Treasurer. It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep the full
and correct minutes and records of all meetings and to file the same with the
Municipal Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. A majority of the Board members shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business. The Board shall meet at such times as the Mayor
and City Council may designate. Special meetings may be held upon the call of
the Chairperson, or any two of the Board members. It shall be the duty of the
Board to take the immediate charge of all municipal recreational facilities and
to supervise all recreational activities organized and conducted at such
recreational facilities. The Board shall establish appropriate rules and
regulations for the management, use and operation of the same. All actions of
the Board shall be subject to the review and control of the Mayor and City
Council. The Board shall be responsible for making such reports and performing
such other duties as the governing body, from time to time, may designate.
Neither the Mayor nor any member of the City Council, shall serve as a member
of the Recreation Board while serving a term of office as a member of the
governing body. No member of the Recreation Board shall serve in the capacity
of both Chairperson and secretary of the Board.
(Ord. 384, passed 4-5-1988; Ord. 463, passed 4-5-1994; Ord. 713, passed 2-3-
2004; Ord. 765, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 2-110 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint, with the consent of the City Council, a Board
of Adjustment, which shall consist of five regular members plus one additional
member designated as an alternate who shall attend and serve only when one of
the regular members is unable to attend for any reason. Each member shall be
appointed for a term of three years and shall be removable for cause by the
Mayor upon written charges and after public hearings. Vacancies shall be filled
for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. One member only
of the Board of Adjustment shall be appointed from the membership of the
Planning Commission, and the loss of membership on the Planning Commission by
such member shall also result in his or her immediate loss of membership on the
Board of Adjustment and the appointment of another Planning Commissioner to the
Board of Adjustment. If the Board does not include a member who resides in the
extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of the city, the first vacancy occurring
on the Board of Adjustment after the effective date of this section shall be
filled by the appointment of a person who resides in the extraterritorial
zoning jurisdiction of the city at such time as more than 200 persons reside
within such area. Thereafter, at all times, at least one member of the Board of
Adjustment shall reside outside the corporate boundaries of the city but within
its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction. Neither the Mayor nor any member of
the City Council shall serve as a member of the Board of Adjustment.
   (B)   The members of the Board shall serve without compensation and may be
required, in the discretion of the City Council, to give a bond in a sum set by
resolution of the City Council and conditioned upon the faithful performance of
their duties. The Board shall organize at its first meeting each year after the
City Council meeting when appointments are regularly made and shall elect from
its membership a Chairperson and secretary. No member of the Board of
Adjustment shall serve in the capacity of both Chairperson and secretary of the
Board.
   (C)   The Board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this
section and Neb. RS 19-901 through 19-914. Meetings of the Board shall be held
at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may
determine. Special meetings may be also held upon the call of any three members
of the Board. A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose
of doing business. The Chairperson, or in his or her absence the Acting
Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All
meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. It shall be the duty of the
secretary to keep complete and accurate minutes of the Board’s proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to
vote, indicating such fact, and to keep records of the Board’s examinations and
other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office
of the Board and shall be public record. The Board shall be responsible for
making such reports and performing such other duties as the Mayor and City
Council may designate.
   (D)   Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any
officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any decision of
the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable
time, as provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the officer from
whom the appeal is taken and with the Board a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith
transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance
of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken
certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with
him or her, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in
his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may
be granted by the Board or by a court of record on application on notice to the
officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. The Board shall
fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice
thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same
within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or
by agent or by attorney.
   (E)   The Board shall have only the following powers:
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative
official or agency based on or made in the enforcement of any zoning regulation
or any regulation relating to the location or soundness of structures, except
that the authority to hear and decide appeals shall not apply to decisions made
by the City Council or Planning Commission regarding a conditional use or
special exception;
      (2)   To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of any zoning
regulation, requests for interpretation of any map; and
      (3)   When by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a
specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of the zoning
regulations, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other
extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property,
the strict application of any zoning regulation would result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardships upon
the owner of such property, to authorize, upon an appeal relating to the
property, a variance from such strict application so as to relieve such
difficulties or hardship, if such relief may be granted without substantial
detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and
purpose of any ordinance or resolution.
   (F)   (1)   No such variance shall be authorized by the Board unless it
finds that:
         (a)   The strict application of the zoning regulation would produce
undue hardship;
         (b)   Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the
same zoning district and the same vicinity;
         (c)   The authorization of such variance will not be of substantial
detriment to adjacent property and the character of the district will not be
changed by the granting of the variance; and
         (d)   The granting of such variance is based upon reason of
demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for
purposes of convenience, profit or caprice.
      (2)   No variance shall be authorized unless the Board finds that the
condition or situation of the property concerned or the intended use of the
property is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably
practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an
amendment to the zoning regulations.
   (G)   In exercising the powers granted in this section, the Board may, in
conformity with Neb. RS 19-901 through 19-915, reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed
from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought
to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom
the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any
such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any
matter upon which it is required to pass under any such regulation or to effect
any variation in such regulation.
   (H)   Appeals from a decision by the Board may be taken as provided in Neb.
RS 19-912.
(Ord. 731, passed 12-7-2004)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-908 through 19-910
§ 2-111 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM.
   (A)   Administration. The city has adopted an Economic Development Program.
To administer the program, there are established and identified the following
components and responsibilities.
      (1)   Program Administrator. The Program Administrator shall be appointed
by the Mayor and approved by the City Council. The Program Administrator shall
be responsible for the day-to-day activities of administering the program. The
Program Administrator shall be the primary point of contact for applicants on
the program, the application process and additional financial documents needed
for the application process. The Program Administrator shall coordinate with
applicants, Citizen Advisory Review Committee, Application Review Committee and
City Council to ensure timely review of completed applications.
      (2)   Citizen Advisory Review Committee. The Citizen Advisory Review
Committee shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor and approved by
the City Council. No member may be an elected or appointed official, employee
of the city or any person who participates in the decision-making process
regarding expenditures of program funds. At least one member on the Committee
must have expertise or experience in the field of business, finance or
accounting. The Program Administrator will serve as ex officio member. The
Citizen Advisory Review Committee shall meet regularly as required to review
the program and shall report to the City Council at least once in every six-
month period on its findings and suggestions at a public hearing called for
that purpose.
      (3)   Application Review Committee. The Application Review Committee
shall consist of three to seven members appointed by the Mayor and approved by
the City Council. Members shall have some level of economic development,
lending, business and/or accounting expertise. No member may be an elected or
appointed official, employee of the city, nor anyone who is an applicant,
employee agent, shareholder or officer of an applicant for program funds.
Members are not required to live within the city limits. The Application Review
Committee shall review and analyze program applications, including confidential
financial information, to make an educated evaluation of the viability of the
project and recommendation to the City Council. The Committee shall meet
regularly to ensure applications are processed, reviewed and brought before the
City Council in a timely manner.
      (4)   City Council. The City Council shall exercise final authority on
expenditure of funds in support of the economic development program. The City
Council shall provide ultimate responsibility and oversight for the program.
   (B)   Confidentiality. The Program Administrator and members of the
Application Review Committee, Citizen Advisory Review Committee, City Council
and city staff may receive information about businesses that is confidential
and, if released, could harm businesses or give an unfair advantage to
competitors. Information received and reviewed through the Economic Development
Program is therefore considered confidential. State law authorizes the city to
maintain the confidentiality of business information which comes into its
possession for use in the Economic Development Program. Unauthorized disclosure
of any confidential business information shall be a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 965, passed 6-7-2022) Penalty, see §
2-201
ARTICLE 2: PENAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
2-201   Violations; penalty
§ 2-201 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, or any person’s agent or servant, who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided herein,
shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined in any sum not exceeding $500. A new violation shall be deemed to have
been committed every 24 hours of failure to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the
municipality may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin, abate and remove the
same in the manner provided by law.
      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists,
the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.
(Ord. 642, passed 5-10-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-505, 18-1720 and 18-1722
CHAPTER 3: DEPARTMENTS
   Article
      
1.   WATER DEPARTMENT
      
2.   SEWER DEPARTMENT
      
3.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
      
4.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
5.   PARKS
      
6.   SWIMMING POOL
      
7.   LIBRARY
      
8.   CEMETERY
      
9.   DUMPING GROUNDS
      
10.   ELECTRICAL SYSTEM
      
11.   UTILITIES GENERALLY
      
12.   NATURAL GAS RATE FILING FEE
      
13.   PENAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1: WATER DEPARTMENT
Section
   
3-101   Operation and funding
   
3-102   Definitions
   
3-103   Water contract
   
3-104   Installation procedure
   
3-105   Installation expense; tap fee
   
3-106   Repairs and maintenance
   
3-107   Fees and collections
   
3-108   Minimum rates
   
3-109   Water bills
   
3-110   Lien
   
3-111   Restricted use
   
3-112   Fire hydrants
   
3-113   Pollution
   
3-114   Mandatory hook-up
   
3-115   Inspection
   
3-116   Destruction of property
   
3-117   Complaints
   
3-118   Backflow/backsiphonage prevention; general policy
   
3-119   Backflow/backsiphonage prevention; definitions
   
3-120   Backflow/backsiphonage prevention; cross-connections prohibited
   
3-121   Backflow/backsiphonage prevention; survey and investigations
   
3-122   Backflow/backsiphonage prevention; type of protection required
   
3-123   Backflow/backsiphonage prevention; where protection is required
   
3-124   Backflow/backsiphonage prevention; backflow prevention devices
   
3-125   Backflow/backsiphonage prevention; installation and maintenance
   
3-126   Adoption of drought emergency contingency plan
§ 3-101 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   The municipality owns and operates the Municipal Water Department through
the Utilities Superintendent. The governing body, for the purpose of defraying
the cost of the care, management and maintenance of the Municipal Water
Department may each year levy a tax, not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed
by state law, on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property
within the corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from said
tax shall be known as the Water Fund and shall remain in the custody of the
Municipal Treasurer. The Utilities Superintendent shall have the direct
management and control of the Municipal Water Department and shall faithfully
carry out the duties of his or her office. The Utilities Superintendent shall
have the authority to adopt rules and regulations for the sanitary and
efficient management of the Water Department subject to the supervision and
review of the governing body. The governing body shall set the rates to be
charged for services rendered by ordinance and shall file a copy of the rates
in the office of the Municipal Clerk for public inspection at any reasonable
time.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-531, 17-534 and 19-1305
§ 3-102 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MAIN. Any pipe other than a supply or service pipe that is used for the
purpose of carrying water to and dispersing the same in the municipality.
   SEPARATE PREMISES. More than one consumer procuring water from the same
service or supply pipe. The second premises may be a separate dwelling,
apartment, building or structure used for a separate business.
   SERVICE PIPE. Any pipe extending from the shut-off, stop box or curb cock at
or near the lot line to and beyond the property line of the consumer to the
location on the premises where the water is to be dispersed.
   SUPPLY PIPE. Any pipe tapped into a main and extending from there to a point
at or near the lot line of the consumer’s premises where the shut-off, stop box
or curb cock is located.
§ 3-103 WATER CONTRACT.
   The municipality, through its Water Department, shall furnish water to
persons within its corporate limits whose premises abut a street or alley in
which a commercial main now is or may hereafter be laid. No water service shall
be provided to individuals, businesses or any entity whatsoever without
installation of a water flow meter, selected by the municipality, to accurately
determine water usage. The municipality may furnish water to persons within its
corporate limits whose premises do not abut a street or alley in which a
municipal commercial main is now or may hereafter be laid and may also furnish
water to persons whose premises are situated outside the corporate limits of
the municipality, as and when, according to law, the governing body may see fit
to do so. The rules, regulations and water rates hereinafter named in this
article shall be considered a part of every application hereafter made for
water service and shall be considered a part of the contract between every
consumer now or hereafter served. Without further formality, the making of
application on the part of any applicant or the use or consumption of water
service by present consumers thereof and the furnishing of water service to
said consumer shall constitute a contract between the consumer and the
municipality to which said contract both parties are bound. If the consumer
shall violate any of the provisions of said contract or any reasonable rules
and regulations that the governing body may hereafter adopt, the Utilities
Superintendent, or his or her agent, may cut off or disconnect the water
service from the building or premises or place of such violation. No further
connection for water service to said building, premises or place shall again be
made save or except by order of the Utilities Superintendent or his or her
agent.
(Ord. 661, passed 3-5-2002)
§ 3-104 INSTALLATION PROCEDURE.
   In making excavations in streets, alleys or sidewalks for the purpose of
installing pipe or making repairs, the paving, stones and earth must be removed
and deposited in a manner that will occasion the least inconvenience to the
public and provide for adequate drainage. No person shall leave an excavation
made in the street, alley or sidewalk open at any time without a barricade, and
during the night, warning lights. After service pipes are laid, the streets,
alleys and sidewalks shall be restored to good condition. If the excavation in
any street, alley or sidewalk is left open or unfinished for a period of 24
hours or more, the Utilities Superintendent shall have the duty to finish or
correct the work, and all expenses so incurred shall be charged to the
consumer. All installations or repairs of pipes require two inspections by the
Utilities Superintendent. The first inspection shall be made when connections
or repairs are completed and before the pipes are covered. The second
inspection shall be made after the dirt work is completed and the service is
restored. It is the customer’s responsibility to notify the Superintendent at
the time the work is ready for each inspection. All installation shall be done
under the supervision and strictly in accordance with the rules, regulations
and specifications prescribed for such installation by the Utilities
Superintendent; provided, however, that in all cases service lines from the
main to the stop box must be of copper and, provided further, that said rules,
regulations and specifications have been reviewed and approved by the governing
body.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-537
§ 3-105 INSTALLATION EXPENSE; TAP FEE.
   The expense of providing water service from the main shall be paid by the
consumer. The consumer shall pay a tap fee in the amount of $250 to compensate
the municipality for the cost of tapping the main and the materials provided,
excluding the meter. It shall be unlawful for any person other than the Utility
Superintendent or his or her designated agent to tap the water main.
Additionally, the cost of the installation of the stop box shall be paid by the
consumer and the consumer shall be required to pay the expense of procuring the
services of a plumber and shall pay the expense of furnishing and installing
pipe, trenching and the necessary labor to bring water service from said water
main to the place of disbursement. Upon satisfactory installation of the stop
box, as determined by inspection of the Municipal Utility Superintendent, the
municipality shall be responsible for maintaining the water line from the main
to the stop box.
(Ord. 773, passed 2-5-2008) Penalty, see § 3-1301
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-542
§ 3-106 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   The municipality shall repair or replace, as the case may be, all supply
pipe between the commercial main and the stop box. The customer at his or her
own expense shall replace and keep in repair all service pipe from the stop box
to the place of disbursement. When leaks occur in service pipes, the Utilities
Superintendent shall shut off water service until the leak is repaired at the
expense of the customer to the satisfaction of the Utilities Superintendent.
All water meters shall be kept in repair by the municipality at the expense of
the municipality. When meters are worn out, they shall be replaced and reset by
the municipality at the expense of the municipality; provided, that if the
customer permits or allows a water meter to be damaged, injured or destroyed
through his or her own recklessness, carelessness or neglect so that the meter
must be repaired or replaced, the Utilities Superintendent shall bill and
collect from the customer the cost of such meter repair or replacement in the
same manner as water rent is collected. Permitting a water meter to be damaged
or destroyed by freezing shall always be considered negligence on the part of
the customer. All meters shall be tested at the customer’s request at the
expense of the customer any reasonable number of times; provided, that if the
test shows the water meter to be running 2% or more fast, the expense of such
test shall be borne by the municipality. The municipality reserves the right to
test any water service meter at any time, and, if said meter is found to be
beyond repair, the municipality shall always have the right to place a new
meter on the customer’s water service fixtures at municipal expense. Should a
consumer’s meter fail to register properly, the customer shall be charged for
water during the time the meter is out of repair on the basis of the monthly
consumption during the same month of the preceding year; provided, that if no
such basis for comparison exists, the customer shall be charged such amount as
may be reasonably fixed by the Utilities Superintendent. It shall be unlawful
for any person to tamper with any water meter, or by any means or device to
divert water from the service pipe so that the same shall not pass through said
meter, or, while passing through said meter, to cause the same to register
inaccurately.
Penalty, see §
3-1301
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-537
§ 3-107 FEES AND COLLECTIONS.
   The governing body has the power and authority to fix the rates as set forth
in §
3-108 to be paid by the water consumers for the use of water from the Water
Department. All such fees shall be on file for public inspection at the office
of the Municipal Clerk. The Utilities Superintendent shall bill the consumers
and collect all money received by the municipality on the account of the Water
Department. He or she shall faithfully account for and pay to the Municipal
Treasurer all revenue collected by him or her, taking his or her receipt
therefor in duplicate, filing one with the Municipal Clerk and keeping the
other on file in the Water Department’s official records.
(Ord. 911, passed 11-5-2019)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-540
§ 3-108 MINIMUM RATES.
   All water consumers shall be liable for the minimum rates set forth below
unless and until the consumer shall, by written order, direct the Utilities
Superintendent to shut off the water at the stop box, in which case he or she
shall not be liable thereafter for water rental until the water is turned on
again.
Meter Size Minimum Rate Per 1,000 Gallons
Meter Size Minimum Rate Per 1,000 Gallons
5/8"       $22.25       $2.60
3/4"       $26.50       $2.60
1"         $27.75       $2.60
1-1/2"     $32.75       $2.60
2"         $41.25       $2.60
3"         $59.50       $2.60
The cost for users outside of the corporate limits shall be 1-1/2 times the
above rates
 
(Ord. 903, passed 8-7-2018; Ord. 911, passed 11-5-2019)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-542
§ 3-109 WATER BILLS.
   Water bills shall be due and payable monthly at the office of the Municipal
Clerk. The Utilities Superintendent shall read or cause to be read water meters
monthly between the nineteenth day and the twenty-fifth day of the month. It
shall be the duty of the customers of the Water Department to present
themselves monthly at the office of the Municipal Clerk to pay their bills in
net cash. The Utilities Superintendent shall direct the Municipal Clerk to
charge and collect from each customer the amount of water consumed since the
last examination together with any other charges, properly itemized, due the
Water Department. Bills shall be due on the first day of each month and shall
be payable by the tenth of each month. There shall be a 10% penalty applied to
all accounts which are unpaid at the close of the business on the twentieth day
of the month following the billing period. Bills not paid by the twenty-fifth
day of each month shall be deemed to be delinquent. Upon being deemed to be
delinquent, as herein defined, the Municipal Clerk shall give a written notice
to the customer of such delinquency and shall demand payment immediately. In
the event that the bill is not paid within seven days after the sending of said
notice, it shall be discretionary with the Superintendent to cut off service at
any time; provided, that if the delinquent customer is a known welfare
recipient, it shall be the duty of the Municipal Clerk to notify the customer
and the County Welfare Department by certified mail of the proposed
termination. The Utilities Superintendent shall assess an additional fee set by
resolution of the governing body and on file at the office of the Municipal
Clerk, in the event that water is shut off for the nonpayment of any water
bill, to compensate the municipality for the additional hook-up necessary to
again provide water service to the delinquent customer. For provisions on water
meter deposits, see §
3-1105.
(Ord. 911, passed 11-5-2019)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-542 and 70-1605
§ 3-110 LIEN.
   In addition to all other remedies, if a customer shall for any reason remain
indebted to the municipality for water service furnished, such amount due,
together with any rents and charges in arrears, shall be considered a
delinquent water rent which is hereby declared to be a lien upon the real
estate for which the same was used. The Municipal Clerk shall notify in writing
or cause to be notified in writing, all owners of premises or their agents
whenever their tenants or lessees are 60 days or more delinquent in the payment
of water rent. It shall be the duty of the Utilities Superintendent, on June 1
of each year, to report to the governing body a list of all unpaid accounts due
for water, together with a description of the premises upon which the same was
used. The report shall be examined and, if approved by the governing body,
shall be certified by the Municipal Clerk to the County Clerk to be collected
as a special tax in the manner provided by law.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-538
§ 3-111 RESTRICTED USE.
   The governing body or the Utilities Superintendent may order a reduction in
the use of water or shut off the water on any premises in the event of a water
shortage due to fire or other good and sufficient cause. The municipality shall
not be liable for any damages caused by shutting off the supply of water of any
consumer while the system or any part thereof is undergoing repairs or when
there is a shortage of water due to circumstances over which the municipality
has no control.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-537
§ 3-112 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   All hydrants for the purpose of extinguishing fires are hereby declared to
be public hydrants, and it shall be unlawful for any person other than members
of the Municipal Fire Department under the orders of the Fire Chief, or the
Assistant Fire Chief, or members of the Water Department, to open or attempt to
open any of the hydrants and draw water from the same, or in any manner to
interfere with the hydrants.
Penalty, see §
3-1301
§ 3-113 POLLUTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute or attempt to pollute any
stream or source of water for the supply of the Municipal Water Department.
Penalty, see §
3-1301
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-536
§ 3-114 MANDATORY HOOK-UP.
   After the effective date of this ordinance, all persons constructing or
moving buildings within 300 feet of a water main shall be required, upon notice
by the governing body, to hook-up with the municipal water system.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-539
§ 3-115 INSPECTION.
   The Utilities Superintendent, or his or her duly authorized agents, shall
have free access, at any reasonable time, to all parts of each premises and
building to, or in which, water is delivered for the purpose of examining the
pipes, fixtures and other portions of the system to ascertain whether there is
any disrepair or unnecessary waste of water.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-537
§ 3-116 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break, injure
or deface any building, machinery, apparatus, fixture, attachment or
appurtenance of the Municipal Water Department. No person may deposit anything
in a stop box or commit any act tending to obstruct or impair the intended use
of any of the above mentioned property without the written permission of the
Utilities Superintendent.
Penalty, see §
3-1301
§ 3-117 COMPLAINTS.
   Any consumer feeling himself or herself aggrieved by reason of any
controversy with the Utilities Superintendent may appear before the governing
body and present his or her grievance. Any consumer who considers himself or
herself aggrieved by being required to pay the charge demanded for the use of
water, or for the resumption of water service after the same shall have been
shut off, shall pay such charge under protest, in which event the Municipal
Clerk shall write on the receipt given such customer the words “Paid Under
Protest.” Such consumer may then present his or her verified claim in the
manner provided for presenting claims to the governing body for a refund of the
amount so paid under protest. Such claims shall then be considered by the
governing body in the same manner as other claims against the municipality.
§ 3-118 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION; GENERAL POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of §§
3-118 through
3-125 is:
      (1)   To protect the public potable water supply of the city water system
from contamination or pollution by containing within the consumer’s internal
distribution system or private water system contaminants or pollutants which
could backflow through the service connection into the public potable water
supply system;
      (2)   To promote the elimination, containment, isolation or control of
existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the public or
consumer’s potable water systems and nonpotable water systems, plumbing
fixtures and industrial process systems; and
      (3)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-
connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the
contamination or pollution of all potable water systems.
   (B)   Application. Sections
3-118 through
3-125 shall apply to all premises served by the public potable water system of
the city.
   (C)   Policy. Sections
3-118 through
3-125 shall be reasonably interpreted. It is the city’s intent to recognize the
varying degrees of hazard and to apply the principle that the degree of
protection shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard.
   (D)   Responsibility. The Municipal Water Department shall be primarily
responsible for protection of the public potable water distribution system from
contamination or pollution due to backflow or contaminants or pollutants
through the water service connection. The cooperation of all consumers is
required to implement and maintain the program to control cross-connections.
The consumer is responsible for preventing contamination of the water system
within consumer’s own premises.
(Ord. 448, passed 10-6-1992)
§ 3-119 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION; DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
3-118 through
3-125, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR GAP SEPARATION. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water
to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the overflow level rim of the
receptacle.
   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY. Any water source or system, other than the public
water supply, that may be available in the building or premises.
   BACKFLOW. The flow, other than the intended direction of flow, of any
foreign liquids, gases or substances into the distribution system of a public
water supply.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Any device, method or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system; provided, that
backflow preventers have been tested and approved by a reputable testing
laboratory.
   CONSUMER. The owner or person in control of any premises supplied by or in
any manner connected to a public water system.
   CONTAINMENT. Protection of the public water supply by installing a cross-
connection control device or air gap separation on the main service line to a
facility, or as an installation within equipment handling potentially hazardous
materials.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water by sewage, process
fluids or other wastes to a degree which could create an actual hazard to the
public health through poisoning or through spread of disease by exposure.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical link between a potable water supply and any
other substance, fluid or source which makes possible contamination of the
potable water supply due to the reversal of flow of the water in the piping or
distribution system.
   HAZARD, DEGREE OF. An evaluation of the potential risk to public health and
the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system.
      (1)   HAZARD, HEALTH. Any condition, device or practice in the water
supply system and its operation which could create or may create a danger to
the health and well-being of the water consumer.
      (2)   HAZARD, PLUMBING. A plumbing type cross-connection in a consumer’s
potable water system that has not been properly protected by a vacuum breaker,
air gap separation or backflow prevention device.
      (3)   HAZARD, POLLUTIONAL. An actual or potential threat to the physical
properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the
consumer’s potable water system but which would constitute a nuisance or be
aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its
appurtenances but would not be dangerous to health.
      (4)   HAZARD, SYSTEM. An actual or potential threat of severe damage to
the physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer’s
potable water system, or of a pollution or contamination which would have a
protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.
   INDUSTRIAL PROCESS SYSTEM. Any system containing a fluid or solution which
may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form
or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollutional or
plumbing hazard if introduced into a potable water supply.
   ISOLATION. Protection of a facility service line by installing a cross-
connection control device or air gap separation on an individual fixture,
appurtenance or system.
   POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic or
biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a
hazard or impair the usefulness of the water to a degree which does not create
an actual hazard to the public health, but which does adversely and
unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use.
   PUBLIC POTABLE WATER SYSTEM. Any publicly or privately owned water system
supplying water to the general public which is satisfactory for drinking,
culinary and domestic purposes and meets the requirements of the State
Department of Health.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The terminal end of a service line from the public water
system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service, then the SERVICE
CONNECTION means the downstream end of the meter.
   WATER DEPARTMENT. The Municipal Water Department of the city.
(Ord. 448, passed 10-6-1992)
§ 3-120 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION; CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any
premises where actual or potential cross-connections to the public potable or
consumer’s water system may exist, unless such actual or potential cross-
connections are abated or controlled to the satisfaction of the Municipal Water
Department, and as required by laws and regulations of the State Department of
Health.
   (B)   No connection shall be installed or maintained whereby an auxiliary
water supply may enter a public potable or consumer’s water system, unless such
auxiliary water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply
shall have been approved by the Municipal Water Department and the State
Department of Health.
   (C)   No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any
premises in which the plumbing system, facilities and fixtures have not been
constructed and installed using acceptable plumbing practices considered by the
Municipal Water Department as necessary for the protection of health and
safety.
(Ord. 448, passed 10-6-1992) Penalty, see §
3-1301
§ 3-121 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION; SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   The consumer shall provide access to the premises at reasonable times to the
Municipal Water Department, or its authorized representative, for the
conduction of surveys and investigations of water use practices within the
consumer’s premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross-
connections to the consumer’s water system through which contaminants or
pollutants could backflow into the public potable water system. On request by
the Municipal Water Department, or its authorized representative, the consumer
shall furnish information on water use practices within his or her premises.
(Ord. 448, passed 10-6-1992)
§ 3-122 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION; TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED.
   The type of protection required by §§
3-118 through
3-125 shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists, as follows.
   (A)   An approved air gap separation shall be installed where the public
potable water system may be contaminated with substances that could cause a
severe health hazard.
   (B)   An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the public
potable water system may be contaminated with a substance that could cause a
health hazard.
   (C)   An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device or an approved double check valve assembly
shall be installed where the public potable water system may be polluted with
substances what could cause a pollutional hazard not dangerous to health.
(Ord. 448, passed 10-6-1992)
§ 3-123 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION; WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED.
   (A)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed in the
service connection line to a consumer’s water system or within any premises
where, in the judgment of the Municipal Water Department, actual or potential
hazards to the public potable water system exists. The type and degree of
protection required shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard.
   (B)   An approved air gap separation or reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention device shall be installed at the service connection or within any
premises where, in the judgment of the Municipal Water Department, the nature
and extent of activities on the premises, or the materials used in connection
with the activities, or materials stored on the premises, would present an
immediate and dangerous hazard to health should a cross-connection occur, even
though such cross-connection may not exist at the time the backflow prevention
device is required to be installed. This includes, but is not limited to, the
following situations:
      (1)   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless the quality of
the auxiliary supply is acceptable to the Municipal Water Department;
      (2)   Premises having internal cross-connections that are not correctable
or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to ascertain
whether or not cross-connections exist;
      (3)   Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross-
connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short
notice to assure the cross-connections do not exist;
      (4)   Premises that, although not covered by code, are subject to
frequent modification which would change their status or premises that have had
backflow code violations;
      (5)   Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to
permit entry into the public water supply or where a cross-connection could
reasonably be expected to occur. This shall include the handling of process
waters and cooling waters; and/or
      (6)   Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are handled
such that if backsiphonage or backpressure should occur, a serious health
hazard may result.
(Ord. 448, passed 10-6-1992)
§ 3-124 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION; BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (A)   Any backflow prevention device required by §§
3-118 through
3-125 shall be of a model or construction approved by the Municipal Water
Department.
      (1)   Air gap separation to be approved shall be at least double the
diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the flood level rim of
the vessel, but in no case less than one inch.
      (2)   A double check valve assembly or a reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention device shall be approved by the Municipal Water Department
and shall appear on the current “list of approved backflow prevention devices”
established by the Municipal Water Department.
   (B)   (1)   Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the Municipal
Water Department at the time of installation and properly maintained shall,
except for inspection and maintenance requirements, be excluded from the
requirements of §§
3-118 through
3-125 , so long as the Municipal Water Department is assured that they will
satisfactorily protect the water system.
      (2)   Whenever the existing device is moved from its present location, or
requires more than minimum maintenance, or when the Water Department finds that
their maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by
a backflow prevention device meeting the requirement of §§
3-118 through
3-125 .
(Ord. 448, passed 10-6-1992)
§ 3-125 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION; INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Backflow prevention devices required by §§
3-118 through
3-125 to be installed in an existing facility shall be installed at a location
and in a manner approved by the Municipal Water Department and shall be
installed at the expense of the water consumer.
   (B)   Backflow prevention devices required by §§
3-118 through
3-125 to be installed in a facility not existing at the time of this section
shall be installed at a location and in a manner and of the type approved by
the Municipal Water Department and shall be installed at the expense of the
water consumer.
   (C)   Backflow prevention devices installed on the service line to the
consumer’s water system shall be located on the consumer’s side of the water
meter, as close to the meter as is reasonably practical and prior to any other
connection.
   (D)   Backflow prevention devices shall be located so as to be readily
accessible for maintenance and testing, protected from freezing and where no
part of the device will be submerged or subject to flooding by any fluid.
   (E)   The water consumer shall be responsible for all costs of maintenance
for any backflow prevention device installed or in use at the facility of said
water consumer.
(Ord. 448, passed 10-6-1992)
§ 3-126 ADOPTION OF DROUGHT EMERGENCY CONTINGENCY PLAN.
   The city shall address any short-term water shortage problems through a
series of stages based on conditions of supply and demand with accompanying
triggers, goals and actions. Each stage is more stringent in water use than the
previous stage since there will be a greater deterioration in water supply
conditions. The Mayor is hereby authorized to implement the appropriate
conservation measures as set forth in this section, when any of the conditions
have been reached which would qualify for any of the specific stages. The Mayor
is given discretion to declare each particular stage, as deemed appropriate by
the Mayor by reviewing the severity of the trigger conditions and other
additional information, and is further authorized to implement conservation
measures within the guidelines provided for each particular stage.
   (A)   Stage one: water watch.
      (1)   This stage is triggered by any one of the following conditions:
         (a)   Groundwater levels have fallen five feet below normal seasonal
levels;
         (b)   System pressure falls below 35 pounds per square inch; or
         (c)   Demand for one day is in excess of 500,000 gallons per day.
      (2)   The goals of this stage are to heighten awareness of the public of
the water conditions and to maintain the integrity of the system.
      (3)   Management actions are as follows.
         (a)   Leaks will be repaired within 48 hours of detection.
         (b)   The city will monitor its use of water and will curtail
activities such as hydrant flushing and street cleaning.
      (4)   The public will be informed through the local media of the water
watch and be asked to voluntarily reduce outdoor water use and to efficiently
use water for indoor purposes, for example, washing full loads of clothing and/
or dishes, limiting the length and frequency of showers, checking for water
leaks and dripping of faucets, to prevent any unnecessary use of water.
   (B)   Stage two: water warning.
      (1)   This stage is triggered by any one of the following conditions:
         (a)   Groundwater levels have fallen ten feet below normal seasonal
levels;
         (b)   System pressure falls below 35 pounds per square inch;
         (c)   Plant operations are at 80% capacity for more than three
consecutive days; or
         (d)   Demand for one day is in excess of 500,000 gallons per day.
      (2)   The goals of this stage are to reduce peak demands by 20% and to
reduce overall weekly consumption by 10%.
      (3)   Management actions are as follows.
         (a)   Water supply will be monitored daily.
         (b)   Leaks will be repaired within 24 hours of detection.
         (c)   Pumpage at wells will be reduced to decrease draw down and to
maintain water levels over well screens.
         (d)   The city will curtail its water usage, including watering of
city grounds and washing of vehicles.
      (4)   In addition to the regulation actions under stage one, the
following regulatory authority may be exercised by the Mayor.
         (a)   An odd/even lawn watering system will be imposed on city
residents. Residents with odd-numbered houses will water on odd days, even-
numbered houses, on even days.
         (b)   Outdoor water use, including lawn watering and car washing will
be restricted to before 10:00 a.m. and after 9:00 p.m.
         (c)   Refilling of swimming pools will be limited to one day a week
after sunset.
         (d)   Excess water use charges for usage of water over the amount used
in the winter will be imposed at a rate twice the normal rate for water usage.
         (e)   Waste of water will be prohibited.
   (C)   Stage three: water emergency.
      (1)   This stage is triggered by any one of the following conditions:
         (a)   Groundwater levels have fallen 15 feet below normal seasonal
levels;
         (b)   System pressure falls below 35 pounds per square inch;
         (c)   Pumping lowers water levels to within five feet of the top of
the well screens;
         (d)   Plant operations are at 90% capacity for more than three
consecutive days; or
         (e)   Demand for one day is in excess of 500,000 gallons per day.
      (2)   The goals of this stage are to reduce peak demands by 50% and to
reduce overall consumption by 25%.
      (3)   Education actions are as follows.
         (a)   The city will make news releases to local media describing
current conditions and indicate the water supply outlook for the city.
         (b)   The city will hold public meeting(s) to discuss the emergency,
the status of the water supply and further actions which need to be taken.
      (4)   Management actions are as follows.
         (a)   The city water supplies will be monitored daily.
         (b)   Leaks will be repaired within 24 hours of detection.
         (c)   Standby wells will be activated for contingency operation.
         (d)   Pumpage at wells will be reduced to decrease draw down and to
maintain water levels over well screens.
         (e)   The city will seek additional emergency supplies from other
users, the state or federal government.
      (5)   In addition to the regulation actions available under stage two,
the following regulatory authority may be exercised by the Mayor:
         (a)   Outdoor water use will be banned, except for businesses which
require outdoor water use to operate.
         (b)   Waste of water will be prohibited.
      (6)   In the event that any water consumer fails to comply with the
regulatory action taken by the city, then the Mayor may direct the immediate
discontinuance of water service to the location which is not in compliance with
the restrictions imposed. Water service may be resumed upon the Mayor being
provided adequate evidence to show that compliance has been instituted and that
compliance will continue under the restrictions imposed.
(Ord. 751, passed 6-6-2006)
ARTICLE 2: SEWER DEPARTMENT
Section
   
3-201   Operation and funding
   
3-202   Definitions
   
3-203   Sewer contract
   
3-204   Mandatory connection
   
3-205   Repairs and maintenance
   
3-206   Classification
   
3-207   Sewer service; application; rate
   
3-208   Terms and conditions applying to all rates for sewer service charges
   
3-209   Lien
   
3-210   Complaints
   
3-211   Unlawful deposit of waste
   
3-212   Unlawful discharge of untreated sewage
   
3-213   Cesspools, privies and septic tanks prohibited
   
3-214   Building sewer installation; permit required
   
3-215   Building sewer installation; classification; permit application
   
3-216   Building sewer installation; expense; sewer tap fee
   
3-217   Building sewer installation; single premises
   
3-218   Building sewer installation; use of existing sewers
   
3-219   Building sewer installation; construction codes
   
3-220   Building sewer installation; unlawful connection
   
3-221   Building sewer installation; inspections
   
3-222   Building sewer installation; excavations
   
3-223   Hazardous and prohibited discharges; stormwater, surface water,
groundwater, cooling water and process water
   
3-224   Hazardous and prohibited discharges; flammable, toxic, corrosive and
obstructive substances; preliminary treatment
   
3-225   Hazardous and prohibited discharges; specific prohibitions as
determined by Superintendent
   
3-226   Hazardous and prohibited discharges; rejection, pretreatment, control
of discharge rate
   
3-227   Municipal Sewer Department; grease, oil and sand interceptors
   
3-228   Preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities; maintenance by
owner
   
3-229   Control manholes; installation and maintenance
   
3-230   Sampling; measurements; tests; analyses
   
3-231   Special exceptions permitted
   
3-232   Damage or destruction of equipment of sewage works
   
3-233   Inspections
   
3-234   Violation; notice and liability
§ 3-201 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   (A)   The municipality owns and operates the municipal sewer system through
the Utilities Superintendent.
   (B)   For the purpose of defraying the cost of the maintenance and repairing
of any sewer or water utilities in the municipality, the governing body may
each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law on
the taxable value of all taxable property in the municipality. The revenue from
the tax shall be known as the Water and Sewer Maintenance Fund and shall be
used exclusively for the purpose of maintenance and repairs of the water and
sewer system.
   (C)   The Utilities Superintendent shall have the direct management and
control of the Sewer Department, shall faithfully carry out the duties of the
office and shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations for the
sanitary and efficient management of the Department subject to the supervision
and review of the governing body.
(Ord. 593, passed 8-11-1998)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-149 and 17-925.01
§ 3-202 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes,
trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or groundwater.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
   pH. And include the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewer, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights and is controlled by public authority.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and
groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments together with such
ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing
of sewage.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
   STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters
and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted
cooling water.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Utilities Superintendent and/or the Sewer Commissioner
of the city, or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
filtering.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997)
§ 3-203 SEWER CONTRACT.
   (A)   The municipality through the Municipal Sewer Department shall furnish
sewer services to persons within its corporate limits whose premises abut a
street or alley in which a commercial main is now or may hereafter be laid. The
municipality may also furnish sewer service to persons whose premises are
situated outside the corporate limits of the municipality, as and when,
according to law, the governing body may see fit to do so. The rules,
regulations and sewer rental rates hereinafter named in this article shall be
considered a part of every application hereafter made for sewer service and
shall be considered a part of the contract between every customer now or
hereafter served. Without further formality, the making of the application on
the part of any applicant or the use of sewer service by present customers
thereof shall constitute a contract between the customer and the municipality
to which said contract both parties are bound.
   (B)   If the customer shall violate any of the provisions of said contract
or any reasonable rules and regulations that the governing body may hereafter
adopt, the Utilities Superintendent, or his or her agent, may cut off or
disconnect the sewer service from the building or premises of such violation.
No further connection for sewer service to said building or premises shall
again be made save or except by order of the Superintendent or his or her
agent.
Penalty, see §
3-234
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-901 and 17-902
§ 3-204 MANDATORY CONNECTION.
   (A)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting
on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in
the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is
hereby required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this article within 90 days after date of
official notice to do so; provided, that said public sewer is within 100 feet
(30.5 meters) of the property line.
   (B)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in subsection (A) above, a
direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this
article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal
facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997)
§ 3-205 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   The municipality shall repair or replace, as the case may be, all pipe
constituting major sewer mains. It shall be the responsibility of the customer
to repair or replace all other sewer pipe and appurtenances from the main to
and including the customer’s property. All replacements and repairs made by the
customer shall be done in the manner and with the materials approved by the
Utilities Superintendent; provided, that the same have been previously approved
by the governing body.
§ 3-206 CLASSIFICATION.
   The governing body may classify for the purpose of rental fees the customers
of the Municipal Sewer Department; provided, that such classifications are
reasonable and do not discriminate unlawfully against any consumer or group of
consumers.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-925.02
§ 3-207 SEWER SERVICE; APPLICATION; RATE.
   There is hereby established a rate for the use and service of the sewer
system of the City of Deshler, Nebraska. Said rate shall be uniform in amount
and applied to all users of said sewer system. The amount to be charged each
user shall be $22 per month plus $2 per 1,000 gallons of water usage, based on
the Winter Quarter (December, January and February).
(Ord. 622, passed 11-1-2005; Ord. 808, passed 10-4-2011; Ord. 976, passed 8-6-
2024)
§ 3-208 TERMS AND CONDITIONS APPLYING TO ALL RATES FOR SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.
   All bills are due and payable on the first day of the month and are
delinquent after the close of business on the twentieth day of the month.
(Ord. 622, passed 11-1-2005; Ord. 808, passed 10-4-2011; Ord. 976, passed 8-6-
2024)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-925.01
§ 3-209 LIEN.
   In addition to all other remedies, if a customer shall for any reason remain
indebted to the municipality for sewer service furnished, such amount due,
together with any rents and charges in arrears shall be considered a delinquent
sewer rent which is hereby declared to be a lien upon the real estate for which
the same was furnished. The Municipal Clerk shall notify in writing or cause to
be notified in writing, all owners of premises or their agents whenever their
tenants or lessees are 60 days or more delinquent in the payment of sewer rent.
It shall be the duty of the Utilities Superintendent on the first day of June
of each year to report to the governing body a list of all unpaid accounts due
for sewer service together with a description of the premises served. The
report shall be examined and, if approved by the governing body, shall be
certified by the Municipal Clerk to the County Clerk to be collected as a
special tax in the manner provided by law.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-925.01
§ 3-210 COMPLAINTS.
   Any consumer feeling himself or herself aggrieved by reason of any
controversy with the Utilities Superintendent may appear before the governing
body and present his or her grievance. Any consumer who considers himself or
herself aggrieved by being required to pay the charge demanded for the use of
the sewer, or for the resumption of sewer service after the same shall have
been shut off, shall pay such charge under protest, in which event the
Municipal Clerk shall write on the receipt given such customer the words “Paid
Under Protest.” Such consumer may then present his or her verified claim in the
manner provided for presenting claims to the governing body for a refund of the
amount so paid under protest. Such claims shall then be considered by the
governing body in the same manner as other claims against the municipality.
§ 3-211 UNLAWFUL DEPOSIT OF WASTE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997) Penalty, see §
3-234
§ 3-212 UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE OF UNTREATED SEWAGE.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or
in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any sewage or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this article.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997) Penalty, see §
3-234
§ 3-213 CESSPOOLS, PRIVIES AND SEPTIC TANKS PROHIBITED.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997) Penalty, see §
3-234
§ 3-214 BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997) Penalty, see §
3-234
§ 3-215 BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; CLASSIFICATION; PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   (1)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
         (a)   For residential and commercial service; and
         (b)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
      (2)   In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the city.
   (B)   The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
Superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of $25 for a residential or
commercial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time of
application.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997)
§ 3-216 BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; EXPENSE; SEWER TAP FEE.
   (A)   All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
   (B)   The owner shall pay a tap fee in the amount of $250 and shall further
indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997; Ord. 774, passed 1-8-2008)
§ 3-217 BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; SINGLE PREMISES.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997)
§ 3-218 BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; USE OF EXISTING SEWERS.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to meet all
requirements of this article.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997)
§ 3-219 BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; CONSTRUCTION CODES.
   (A)   (1)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a
building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city.
      (2)   In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
   (B)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (C)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice
No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
Superintendent before installation.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997)
§ 3-220 BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; UNLAWFUL CONNECTION.
   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, interior and exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997) Penalty, see §
3-234
§ 3-221 BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; INSPECTIONS.
   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the
Superintendent or his or her representative.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997)
§ 3-222 BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; EXCAVATIONS.
   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997)
§ 3-223 HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; STORMWATER, SURFACE WATER,
GROUNDWATER, COOLING WATER AND PROCESS WATER.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, including
interior and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water or
unpolluted industrial waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers,
or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water
or unpolluted process water may be discharged, on approval of the
Superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997)
§ 3-224 HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; FLAMMABLE, TOXIC, CORROSIVE AND
OBSTRUCTIVE SUBSTANCES; PRELIMINARY TREATMENT.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including, but not limited
to, cyanides in excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the
public sewer; and/or
   (C)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage facilities, such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997)
§ 3-225 HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS AS
DETERMINED BY SUPERINTENDENT.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers,
sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a
nuisance. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the
quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of
wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other contingent factors.
   (B)   The substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F (65°
C);
      (2)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° and 150° F (0 and 65°
C);
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Superintendent;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   Any water or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the Superintendent for such materials;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of state, federal or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (8)   Any waters of wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;
      (9)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fuller’s earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride or sodium
sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works; and
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
      (10)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters; or
      (11)   Any waters or wastes having:
         (a)   A five-day BOD greater than 300 parts per million by weight;
         (b)   Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of
suspended solids; or
         (c)   Having an average daily flow greater than 2% of the average
sewage flow of the city.
   (C)   Where necessary, in the opinion of the Superintendent, the owner shall
provide, at his or her expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary
to:
      (1)   Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million by
weight;
      (2)   Reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight; or
      (3)   Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes.
   (D)   Plans, specifications and other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval
of the Superintendent, and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997)
§ 3-226 HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; REJECTION, PRETREATMENT, CONTROL
OF DISCHARGE RATE.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in §
3-225, and which in the judgment of the Superintendent, may have a deleterious
effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life to constitute a public nuisance, the
Superintendent may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions
of §
3-231.
   (B)   If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997)
§ 3-227 MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   (A)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes,
sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units.
   (B)   All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Superintendent and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997)
§ 3-228 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT OR FLOW EQUALIZING FACILITIES; MAINTENANCE BY
OWNER.
   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997)
§ 3-229 CONTROL MANHOLES; INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and
shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent.
The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be
maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997)
§ 3-230 SAMPLING; MEASUREMENTS; TESTS; ANALYSES.
   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from
24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined from periodic
grab samples.)
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997)
§ 3-231 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS PERMITTED.
   No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997)
§ 3-232 DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION OF EQUIPMENT OF SEWAGE WORKS.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is part of the sewage works. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997) Penalty, see §
3-234
§ 3-233 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling
and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The
Superintendent or his or her representatives shall have no authority to inquire
into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic,
paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind
and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in subsection (A) above, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the
city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by
the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the
city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage
to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out
of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in
§
3-229.
   (C)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for
the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997)
§ 3-234 VIOLATION; NOTICE AND LIABILITY.
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this article except
§
3-232 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violation.
   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in subsection (A) above, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on
conviction thereof, shall be fined in the amount not exceeding $100 for each
violation. Each 24-hour period in which any such violation shall continue shall
be deemed a separate offense.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall
become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city
by reason of such violation.
(Ord. 539, passed 3-4-1997)
ARTICLE 3: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
3-301   Operation and funding
   
3-302   Fire Chief
   
3-303   Membership
   
3-304   Fires
   
3-305   Distant fires
   
3-306   Preservation of property
   
3-307   Mandatory assistance
   
3-308   Power of arrest
   
3-309   Fire investigation
§ 3-301 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   (A)   The city may operate a Fire Department through the Fire Chief and
firefighters.
   (B)   The city shall have power to procure fire engines, hooks, ladders,
buckets and other apparatus, to organize fire engine, hook and ladder and
bucket companies, to prescribe rules of duty and the government of the Fire
Department with such penalties as the City Council may deem proper, not
exceeding $100, and to make all necessary appropriations for the Fire
Department.
(Neb. RS 17-147)
   (C)   If the city has only a Voluntary Fire Department or companies, the
City Council may levy a tax annually of not more than $0.07 on each $100 upon
the taxable value of all the taxable property within the city for the
maintenance and benefit of the Fire Department or companies. The amount of such
tax shall be established at the beginning of the year and shall be included in
the adopted budget statement. Upon collection of such tax, the City Treasurer
shall disburse the same upon the order of the Fire Chief with the approval of
the City Council.
(Neb. RS 17-718)
Statutory reference:
   Fire station acquisition, construction and maintenance, see Neb. RS 17-953
et seq.
§ 3-302 FIRE CHIEF.
   The Fire Chief shall manage the Fire Department, and it shall be his or her
duty to inform the City Council when any of the fire engines, hose, ladders or
other apparatus needs repair. Upon the written consent and directive of the
City Council, the Fire Chief shall cause the repair, improvement or maintenance
of the equipment and shall personally supervise and approve of the same. It
shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to come before the City Council at the
regular meeting in January of each year to give an annual report to the City
Council of the general condition and the proposed additions or improvements
recommended by him or her.
§ 3-303 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Fire Department shall consist of so many members as may be decided
by the City Council. The members may organize themselves in any way they may
decide, subject to the review of the City Council.
   (B)   The Volunteer Fire Department shall not have upon its rolls at one
time more than 25 persons, for each engine and hose company in the Fire
Department, and no hook and ladder company shall have upon its rolls at any one
time more than 25 members. No organization shall be deemed to be a bona fide
fire or hook and ladder company until it has procured for active service
apparatus for the extinguishment or prevention of fires, in case of a hose
company, to the value of $700, and of a hook and ladder company to the value of
$500.
(Neb. RS 35-102)
   (C)   Members in good standing are those who keep their dues promptly paid
up and are present and render active service when called out for the legitimate
purposes of the Fire Department.
(Neb. RS 35-103)
   (D)   Volunteer firefighters of the Fire Department shall be deemed
employees of the city while in the performance of their duties as members of
the Department. Members of the Volunteer Fire Department, before they are
entitled to benefits under the State Workers’ Compensation Act, being Neb. RS
48-101 et seq., shall be recommended by the Fire Chief or some person
authorized to act for the Chief for membership therein to the Mayor and City
Council and upon confirmation shall be deemed employees of the city. Members of
the Fire Department, after confirmation to membership, may be removed by a
majority vote of the City Council and thereafter shall not be considered
employees of the city. Firefighters of the Fire Department shall be considered
as acting in the performance and within the course and scope of their
employment when performing activities outside of the corporate limits of the
city, but only if directed to do so by the Fire Chief or some person authorized
to act for the Chief.
(Neb. RS 48-115)
   (E)   The City Council shall purchase and maintain in force a policy of
group term life insurance to age 65 covering the lives of all of the active
volunteer fire and rescue personnel, except that when any such person serves
more than one city or rural or suburban fire protection district, the policy
shall be purchased only by the first city or district which he or she serves.
The policy shall provide a minimum death benefit of $10,000 for death from any
cause and shall, at the option of the insured, be convertible to a permanent
form of life insurance at age 65. The coverage of such policy shall terminate
as to any individual who ceases to be an active volunteer member of the Fire
Department.
(Neb. RS 35-108)
   (F)   For purposes of the prohibition on receipt of any witness fee,
attendance fee or mileage fee by an employee of the city called as a witness in
connection with his or her officially assigned duties, volunteer firefighters
and rescue squad members testifying in that capacity alone shall not be deemed
employees of the city.
(Neb. RS 33-139.01)
   (G)   The City Council may compensate or reimburse any member of the Fire
Department for expenses incurred in carrying out his or her duties in an amount
set by resolution.
   (H)   All members of the Fire Department shall be subject to such rules and
regulations and shall perform such duties as may be prescribed or required of
them by the Fire Chief or the City Council. The members of the Fire Department
shall, during the time of a fire or great public danger, have and exercise the
powers and duties of police officers and shall have full power and authority to
arrest all persons guilty of any violation of the city code or the laws of the
state.
   (I)   Members of the Fire Department may hold meetings and engage in social
activities with the approval of the City Council. The secretary shall, upon
request, keep a record of all meetings and shall make a report to the City
Council of all meetings and activities of the Fire Department.
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 913, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 3-304 FIRES.
   It shall be the duty of the Fire Department to use all proper means for the
extinguishment of fires, to protect property within the city, and to secure the
observance of all ordinances, laws, and other rules and regulations with
respect to fires and fire prevention.
§ 3-305 DISTANT FIRES.
   Upon the permission of the Mayor or Fire Chief, or pursuant to any agreement
with a fire district for mutual aid protection, such fire equipment of the city
as may be designated by the City Council as rural equipment may be used beyond
the corporate limits to extinguish reported fires. The firefighters of the city
shall be considered as acting in the performance and within the scope of their
duties in fighting fire or saving property or life outside the corporate limits
of the city when directed to do so by the City Council or the Fire Chief or
some person authorized to act for the Chief and, in so doing, may take such
fire equipment of the city as may be designated by the City Council.
§ 3-306 PRESERVATION OF PROPERTY.
   Any official of the Municipal Fire Department shall have the power during
the time of a fire to cause the removal of any private or public property
whenever it shall become necessary to do so for the preservation of such
property from fire, to prevent the spreading of fire or to protect adjoining
property. Said officials may direct the hook and ladder officials to remove any
building, structure or fence for the purpose of checking the progress of any
fire, and the official in charge of the firefighting effort shall have the
power to blow up, or cause to be blown up, with powder or otherwise, any
building or erection during the progress of a fire for the purpose of
extinguishing or checking the same.
§ 3-307 MANDATORY ASSISTANCE.
   Any official of the Municipal Fire Department may command the assistance and
services of any person present at a fire to help in extinguishing the fire, or
in the removal and protection of property. In the event that a spectator
refuses, neglects or fails to assist the Fire Department after a lawful order
to do so, he or she shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 3-308 POWER OF ARREST.
   The Fire Chief or the Assistant Fire Chief shall have the power, during the
time of a fire and for a period of 36 hours after its extinguishment, to arrest
any suspected arsonist or other person hindering or resisting the firefighting
effort, or any person who conducts himself or herself in a noisy or disorderly
manner. The officials shall be severally vested with the usual powers and
authority of city police officers to command all persons to assist them in the
performance of their duties.
§ 3-309 FIRE INVESTIGATION.
   The Fire Chief shall investigate or cause to be investigated the cause,
origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the city by which property
has been destroyed or damaged. All fires of unknown origin shall be reported,
and such officer shall especially make an investigation and report as to
whether the fire was the result of carelessness, accident or design. The
investigation shall begin immediately after the occurrence of the fire, and the
State Fire Marshal shall have the right to supervise and direct the
investigation whenever he or she deems it expedient or necessary. The officer
making the investigation of fires occurring in the city shall forthwith notify
the State Fire Marshal and shall within one week of the occurrence of the fire
furnish him or her written statement of all the facts relating to the cause and
origin of the fire and such further information as he or she may call for.
(Neb. RS 81-506)
ARTICLE 4: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
3-401   Duties
   
3-402   Reserve officer bond
   
3-403   Arrest and enforcement jurisdiction
   
3-404   Police officers; discipline or removal from duty; notice and hearing;
determination
§ 3-401 DUTIES.
   (A)   If the Mayor and City Council have provided for the appointment of a
Police Chief, the Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and
such further number of regular police officers as may be duly ordered by
resolution of the Council.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall, subject to the direction of the Mayor, have
control and management of all matters relating to the Police Department and its
officers and members and shall have the custody and control of all property and
books belonging to the Department. The Chief shall devote his or her whole time
to the city affairs and interests of the city and to the preservation of peace,
order, safety and cleanliness thereof.
   (C)   The Department shall execute and enforce all laws and also the orders
of the Mayor. It shall be the duty of the Department to protect the rights of
persons and property. The Department shall take notice of all nuisances,
impediments, obstructions and defects in the streets, avenues, alleys, business
places and residences of the city. The Department shall execute, or cause to be
executed, the processes issued and shall cause all persons arrested to be
brought before the proper court for trial as speedily as possible. The Chief of
Police and all regular and special police officers shall become thoroughly
conversant with the laws of the city and shall see that the same are strictly
enforced and shall make sworn complaints against any person or persons for
violation of the same. It shall be the duty of every city police officer making
a lawful arrest to search all persons in the presence of some other person,
whenever possible, and to carefully keep and produce to the proper judicial
official upon the trial everything found upon the person of such prisoners. All
personal effects so taken from prisoners shall be restored to them upon their
release. The Police Chief and other police officers shall file such reports as
may be required by the city ordinances and the laws of the state. No law
enforcement official shall have any interest in any establishment having a
liquor license.
   (D)   Suitable badges shall be furnished to the city police by the city. Any
police officer who loses or destroys the same shall be required to pay the
replacement costs. If a police officer leaves the city police force, he or she
shall immediately deliver his or her badge to the Police Chief.
   (E)   City police officers shall have full power and authority to call on
any person whenever necessary to assist them in performing public duties, and
failure, neglect or refusal to render such assistance shall be deemed an
offense.
Penalty, see §
3-1301
§ 3-402 RESERVE OFFICER BOND.
   No appointment of a law enforcement reserve officer shall be valid until a
bond in the amount of $2,000, payable to the city, has been filed with the
Municipal Clerk by the individual appointed, or a blanket surety bond arranged
and paid for by the governing body and bonding all such officers of the
governing body has been filed. Such bonds shall be subject to the provisions of
Neb. RS Chapter 11, article 1.
(Ord. 368, passed 6-1-1987)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 81-1444
§ 3-403 ARREST AND ENFORCEMENT JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The police officers of the municipality shall have the power to arrest
all offenders against the laws of the state or of the city, by day or by night,
in the same manner as the County Sheriff and to keep such offenders in the
municipal prison or other place to prevent their escape until trial can be had
before the proper officer.
   (B)   Every municipal law enforcement officer has the power and authority to
enforce the laws of this state and the municipality or otherwise perform the
functions of that office anywhere within his or her primary jurisdiction.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER IN NEED OF ASSISTANCE.
         (a)   A law enforcement officer whose life is in danger; or
         (b)   A law enforcement officer who needs assistance in making an
arrest and the suspect:
            1.   Will not be apprehended unless immediately arrested;
            2.   May cause injury to himself or herself or others or damage to
property unless immediately arrested; or
            3.   May destroy or conceal evidence of the commission of a crime.
      PRIMARY JURISDICTION. The geographic area within territorial limits of
the municipality.
   (D)   Any municipal law enforcement officer who is within this state but
beyond his or her primary jurisdiction has the power and authority to enforce
the laws of this state or any legal ordinance of any city or incorporated
village or otherwise perform the functions of his or her office, including the
authority to arrest and detain suspects, as if enforcing the laws or performing
the functions within his or her primary jurisdiction in the following cases.
      (1)   Any municipal law enforcement officer, if in a fresh attempt to
apprehend a person suspected of committing a felony, may follow that person
into any other jurisdiction in this state and there arrest and detain that
person and return that person to the officer’s primary jurisdiction.
      (2)   Any municipal law enforcement officer, if in a fresh attempt to
apprehend a person suspected of committing a misdemeanor or a traffic
infraction, may follow that person anywhere in an area within 25 miles of the
boundaries of the officer’s primary jurisdiction and there arrest and detain
that person and return that person to the officer’s primary jurisdiction.
      (3)   Any municipal law enforcement officer has this enforcement and
arrest and detention authority when responding to a call in which a local,
state or federal law enforcement officer is in need of assistance.
      (4)   If the municipality, under the provisions of the Interlocal
Cooperation Act, being Neb. RS 13-801 et seq. or the Joint Public Agency Act,
being Neb. RS 13-2501 et seq., enters into a contract with any other
municipality or county for law enforcement services or joint law enforcement
services, law enforcement personnel may have this enforcement authority within
the jurisdiction of each of the participating political subdivisions if
provided for in the agreement. Unless otherwise provided in the agreement, the
municipality shall provide liability insurance coverage for its own law
enforcement personnel as provided in Neb. RS 13-1802.
   (E)   When probable cause exists to believe that a person is operating or in
the actual physical control of any motor vehicle, motorboat, personal
watercraft or aircraft while under the influence of alcoholic liquor or of any
drug or otherwise in violation of Neb. RS 28-1465, 28-1466, 28-1472, 37-
1254.01, 37-1254.02, 60-4,163, 60-4,164, 60-6,196, 60-6,197, 60-6,211.01 or 60-
6,211.02, a municipal law enforcement officer has the power and authority to do
any of the following or any combination thereof:
      (1)   Transport that person to a facility outside of the law enforcement
officer’s primary jurisdiction for appropriate chemical testing of the person;
      (2)   Administer outside of the law enforcement officer’s primary
jurisdiction any post-arrest test advisement to the person; or
      (3)   With respect to that person, perform other procedures or functions
outside of the law enforcement officer’s primary jurisdiction which are
directly and solely related to enforcing the laws that concern a person
operating or being in the actual physical control of any motor vehicle,
motorboat, personal watercraft or aircraft while under the influence of
alcoholic liquor or of any other drug or otherwise in violation of Neb. RS 28-
1465, 28-1466, 28-1472, 37-1254.01, 37-1254.02, 60-4,163, 60-4,164, 60-6,196,
60-6,197, 60-6,211.01 or 60-6,211.02.
   (F)   If municipal law enforcement personnel are rendering aid in their law
enforcement capacity outside the limits of the municipality in the event of
disaster, emergency or civil defense emergency or in connection with any
program of practice or training for a disaster, emergency or civil defense
emergency when that program is conducted or participated in by the State
Emergency Management Agency or with any other related training program, the law
enforcement personnel have the power and authority to enforce the laws of this
state or any legal ordinances or resolutions of the local government where they
are rendering aid or otherwise perform the functions of their office, including
the authority to arrest and detain suspects, as if enforcing the laws or
performing the functions within their primary jurisdiction. The municipality
shall self-insure or contract for insurance against any liability for personal
injuries or property damage that may be incurred by it or by its personnel as
the result of any movement made pursuant to this subsection (F).
(Ord. 498, passed 2-7-1995; Ord. 594, passed 8-11-1998; Ord. 748, passed 12-6-
2005; Ord. 815, passed 1-3-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-118, 29-215 and 81-829.65
§ 3-404 POLICE OFFICERS; DISCIPLINE OR REMOVAL FROM DUTY; NOTICE AND HEARING;
DETERMINATION.
   (A)   No police officer, including the Chief of Police, shall be
disciplined, suspended, demoted, removed or discharged except upon written
notice stating the reasons for such disciplinary action, suspension, demotion,
removal or discharge. Such notice shall also contain a statement informing the
police officer of his or her right to a hearing before the City Council.
   (B)   Any police officer so disciplined, suspended, demoted, removed or
discharged may, within ten days after being notified by of such disciplinary
action, suspension, demotion, removal or discharge, file with the Municipal
Clerk a written demand for a hearing before the City Council. The City Council
shall set the matter for hearing not less than ten nor more than 20 days after
the filing of the written demand for a hearing. The City Council shall give the
police officer written notice of the hearing not less than seven nor more than
14 days prior to the hearing.
   (C)   At the hearing, the police officer shall have the right to:
      (1)   Respond in person to the charges and to present witnesses and
documentary evidence;
      (2)   Confront and cross-examine available adverse witnesses; and
      (3)   To be represented by counsel.
   (D)   Not later than 30 days following the adjournment of the meeting at
which the hearing was held, the City Council shall vote to uphold, reverse or
modify the disciplinary action, suspension, demotion, removal or discharge. The
failure of the City Council to act within 30 days or the failure of a majority
of the elected Council members to vote to reverse or modify the disciplinary
action, suspension, demotion, removal or discharge shall be construed as a vote
to uphold the disciplinary action, suspension, demotion, removal or discharge.
The decision of the City Council shall be based upon its determination that,
under the facts and evidence presented at the hearing, the challenged
disciplinary action, suspension, demotion, removal or discharge was necessary
for the proper management and the effective operation of the Police Department
in the performance of its duties under the state statutes.
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the peremptory
suspension or immediate removal from duty of an officer, pending the hearing
authorized by this section, in cases of gross misconduct, neglect of duty or
disobedience of orders.
(Ord. 519, passed 12-7-1995)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-107
ARTICLE 5: PARKS
Section
   
3-501   Municipal parks; operation and funding
   
3-502   Municipal parks; injury to property
§ 3-501 MUNICIPAL PARKS; OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   (A)   If the city has already acquired or hereafter acquires land for park
purposes or recreational facilities or has already built or hereafter builds
swimming pools, recreational facilities or dams, the Mayor and City Council may
each year make and levy a tax upon the taxable value of all the taxable
property in the city. The levy shall be collected and put into the City
Treasury and shall constitute the Park and Recreation Fund of the city. The
funds so levied and collected shall be used for amusements, for laying out,
improving and beautifying such parks, for maintaining, improving, managing and
beautifying such swimming pools, recreational facilities or dams, and for the
payment of salaries and wages of persons employed in the performance of such
labor.
(Neb. RS 17-951)
   (B)   If the Mayor and City Council create a Board of Park Commissioners or
Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners, when such Board has been appointed
and qualified, all accounts against the Park Fund or Park and Recreation Fund
shall be audited by the Board, and warrants against the Fund shall be drawn by
the Chairperson of the Board, and warrants so drawn shall be paid by the City
Treasurer out of the Fund.
(Neb. RS 17-952)
   (C)   (1)   Whether the title to real estate for parks, public grounds,
swimming pools or dams, either for recreational or conservational purposes,
shall be acquired by gift, devise or purchase as provided in Neb. RS 17-948,
the jurisdiction of the City Council or Park Board shall at once be extended
over such real estate; and the City Council or Park Board shall have power to
enact bylaws, rules or ordinances for the protection and preservation of any
real estate acquired, and to provide rules and regulations for the closing of
the park or swimming pool, in whole or in part, to the general public, and
charge admission thereto during such closing, either by the city or by any
person, persons or corporation leasing same. They may provide suitable
penalties for the violation of such bylaws, rules or ordinances; and the police
power of the city shall be at once extended over the same.
(Neb. RS 17-949)
      (2)   The Park Board shall not enter into a contract of any nature that
involves an expenditure of funds, except for ordinary operating expenses,
unless the contract has been approved by resolution of the majority of the
members of the City Council prior to the contractual agreement.
Statutory reference:
   Levy limits, see Neb. RS 77-3442
   Parks and recreational facilities generally, see Neb. RS 17-948 through 17-
952
§ 3-502 MUNICIPAL PARKS; INJURY TO PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or willfully cut down,
injure or destroy any tree, plant or shrub in any city park or recreational
facility. It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or destroy any sodded
or planted area or injure or destroy any building, structure, equipment, fence,
bench, table or any other property of any city park or recreational area. No
person shall commit any waste on or litter the city parks or other public
grounds.
Penalty, see §
3-1301
Statutory reference:
   Littering of public and private property, see Neb. RS 28-523
ARTICLE 6: SWIMMING POOL
Section
   
3-601   Operation and funding
   
3-602   Admission charge
   
3-603   Rules and regulations
§ 3-601 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   The municipality owns and manages the Municipal Swimming Pool. The governing
body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the management, maintenance and
improvements of the Swimming Pool may each year levy a tax not exceeding the
maximum limit prescribed by state law, on the actual valuation of all real
estate and personal property within the municipality that is subject to
taxation. The revenue from said tax shall be known as the Swimming Pool Fund
and shall include all gifts, grants, deeds of conveyance, bequests or other
valuable income-producing personal property and real estate from any source for
the purpose of endowing the Swimming Pool. The Swimming Pool Fund shall at all
times be in the custody of the Municipal Treasurer. The Utilities
Superintendent shall manage the Swimming Pool. The governing body shall have
the power and authority to hire the Swimming Pool Manager and such employees as
they may deem necessary and shall pass such rules and regulations for the
operation of the Swimming Pool as may be proper for its efficient operation.
All actions by the Utilities Superintendent shall be under the supervision and
control of the governing body.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-948, 17-951 and 17-952
§ 3-602 ADMISSION CHARGE.
   The governing body may, for the purpose of defraying the expenses involved
in maintaining, improving, managing and beautifying the Swimming Pool, make a
reasonable admission charge for the use by any person of the Municipal Swimming
Pool. Said charges shall be on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk and
shall also be posted in a conspicuous place at the Municipal Swimming Pool for
public inspection. Such rates may be structured for classes of persons in a
reasonable manner; provided, that nothing herein shall be construed to permit
or allow discrimination on the basis of race, creed, color or national origin
in the classification of persons for admission charges.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-949
§ 3-603 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Utilities Superintendent shall have the power and authority to enact
bylaws, rules and regulations for the protection of those using the Swimming
Pool and for the efficient management thereof. He or she may provide suitable
penalties for the violation of such bylaws, rules and regulations subject to
the review and supervision of the governing body.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-949
ARTICLE 7: LIBRARY
Section
   
3-701   Operation and funding
   
3-702   Books
   
3-703   Rules and regulations
   
3-704   Damaged and lost books
   
3-705   Cost of use
   
3-706   Board; annual report
   
3-707   Grounds and building
   
3-708   Sale and conveyance of real estate
   
3-709   Mortgages; release or renewal
   
3-710   Penalties; recovery; disposition
   
3-711   Donations
   
3-712   Improper book removal
   
3-713   Discrimination prohibited
§ 3-701 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   (A)   (1)   The Library Board shall have the power to make and adopt such
bylaws, rules and regulations for its own guidance and for the government of
the library and reading room as it may deem expedient, not inconsistent with
Neb. RS 51-201 through 51-219.
(Neb. RS 51-205)
      (2)   The Library Board may erect, lease or occupy an appropriate
building for the use of such a library, and appoint a suitable librarian and
assistants, fix the compensation of such appointees and remove such appointees
at the pleasure of the Board. The governing body of the city shall approve any
personnel administrative or compensation policy or procedure before
implementation of such policy or procedure by the Library Board.
   (B)   The Library Board may purchase or lease grounds, exercise the power of
eminent domain and condemn real estate for the purpose of securing a site for a
library building. The procedure to condemn property shall be exercised in the
manner set forth in Neb. RS 76-704 through 76-724.
(Neb. RS 51-210)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 831, passed
1-8-2013, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 3-702 BOOKS.
   The Library Board shall have exclusive control of expenditures, of all money
collected or donated to the credit of the Library Fund, of the renting and
construction of any library building and the supervision, care and custody of
the grounds, rooms or buildings constructed, leased or set apart for that
purpose.
(Neb. RS 51-207)
§ 3-703 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   For provisions on the Library Board, see §
2-101.
(Ord. 681, passed 4-2-2002)
§ 3-704 DAMAGED AND LOST BOOKS.
   The Library Board may establish rules and regulations for the government of
the library as may be deemed necessary for its preservation and to maintain its
usefulness and efficiency. The Library Board may fix and impose, by general
rules, penalties and forfeitures for trespasses upon or injury to the library
grounds, rooms, books or other property, for failure to return any book or for
violation of any bylaw, rule or regulation. The Board shall have and exercise
such power as may be necessary to carry out the spirit and intent of Neb. RS
51-201 through 51-219 in establishing and maintaining the library and reading
room.
(Neb. RS 51-211)
§ 3-705 COST OF USE.
   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (B) below, the library and reading
room shall be forever free to the use of the inhabitants of the municipality,
subject always to such reasonable regulations as the Library Board may adopt to
render the library of the greatest use to such inhabitants. The Library Board
may exclude from the use of the library and reading rooms any person who
willfully violates or refuses to comply with rules and regulations established
for the government thereof.
   (B)   The library shall make its basic services available without charge to
all residents of the municipality. The Library Board may fix and impose
reasonable fees, not to exceed the library’s actual cost, for nonbasic
services.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BASIC SERVICES. Includes, but is not limited to, free loan of circulating
print and nonprint materials from the local collection and general reference
and information services.
      NONBASIC SERVICES. Includes, but is not limited to, use of:
         (a)   Photocopying equipment;
         (b)   Telephones, facsimile equipment and other telecommunications
equipment;
         (c)   Media equipment;
         (d)   Personal computers; and
         (e)   Videocassette recording and playing equipment.
(Ord. 681, passed 4-2-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 51-201.01, 51-211 and 51-212
§ 3-706 BOARD; ANNUAL REPORT.
    The Library Board shall, on or before the second Monday in June in each
year, make a report to the governing body of the condition of its trust on June
1 of such year, showing all money received or expended; the number of books and
periodicals on hand; newspapers and current literature subscribed for or
donated to the reading room; the number of books and periodicals ordered by
purchase, gift or otherwise obtained during the year, and the number lost or
missing; the number of and character of books loaned or issued, with such
statistics, information and suggestions as it may deem of general interest, or
as the governing body may require, which report shall be verified by affidavit
of the President and Secretary of the Library Board.
(Ord. 681, passed 4-2-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 51-213
§ 3-707 GROUNDS AND BUILDING.
   (A)   The Library Board may purchase or lease grounds, exercise the power of
eminent domain and condemn real estate for the purpose of securing a site for a
library building. The procedure to condemn property shall be exercised in the
manner set forth in Neb. RS 76-704 through 76-724.
   (B)   The Board may erect, lease or occupy an appropriate building for the
use of the library.
(Ord. 681, passed 4-2-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 51-210 and 51-211
§ 3-708 SALE AND CONVEYANCE OF REAL ESTATE.
   The Library Board may, by resolution, direct the sale and conveyance of any
real estate owned by the Board or by the library, which is not used for library
purposes, or of any real estate so donated or devised to the Board or to the
library upon such terms as the Board may deem best and as otherwise provided in
Neb. RS 51-216.
(Ord. 681, passed 4-2-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 51-216
§ 3-709 MORTGAGES; RELEASE OR RENEWAL.
   The President of the Library Board shall have the power to release, upon
full payment, any mortgage constituting a credit to the Library Fund and
standing in the name of the Library Board. The signature of the President on
any such release shall be authenticated by the Secretary of the Board. The
President and Secretary in like manner, upon resolution duly passed and adopted
by the Board, may renew any such mortgage.
(Ord. 681, passed 4-2-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 51-206
§ 3-710 PENALTIES; RECOVERY; DISPOSITION.
   Penalties imposed or accruing by any bylaw or regulation of the Library
Board and any court costs and attorneys’ fees may be recovered in a civil
action before any court having jurisdiction, such action to be instituted in
the name of the Library Board. Money, other than any court costs and attorneys’
fees, collected in such actions shall be placed in the treasury of the
municipality to the credit of the Library Fund. Attorneys’ fees collected
pursuant to this section shall be placed in the Treasury of the municipality
and credited to the budget of the Municipal Attorney’s office.
(Ord. 681, passed 4-2-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 51-214
§ 3-711 DONATIONS.
   Any person may make donation of money, lands or other property for the
benefit of the library. The title to property so donated may be made to and
shall vest in the Library Board and their successors in office, and the Board
shall thereby become the owners thereof in trust to the uses of the library.
(Ord. 681, passed 4-2-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 51-215
§ 3-712 IMPROPER BOOK REMOVAL.
    It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the regulations made
by the Library Board to take a book or any other material from the Library,
without the consent of the librarian or an authorized employee of the Library.
Any person removing a book or other material from the Library without properly
checking it out shall be deemed to be guilty of an offense.
(Ord. 681, passed 4-2-2002) Penalty, see § 3-1301
§ 3-713 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.
   No library service shall be denied to any person because of race, sex,
religion, age, color, national origin, ancestry, physical handicap or marital
status.
(Ord. 681, passed 4-2-2002) Penalty, see § 3-1301
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 51-211
ARTICLE 8: CEMETERY
Section
   
3-801   Operation and funding
   
3-802   Sexton
   
3-803   Conveyance of lots
   
3-804   Lot transfers
   
3-805   Burial permit
   
3-806   Burial of indigents
   
3-807   Monuments
   
3-808   Grave depth
   
3-809   Destruction of property
   
3-810   Reclamation
§ 3-801 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   (A)   The municipality owns and manages the Municipal Cemetery through the
Cemetery Board. The governing body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of
the care, management, maintenance and beautification of the Cemetery, may each
year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law, on the
actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the
municipality that is subject to taxation. The revenue from said tax shall be
known as the Cemetery Fund and shall include all gifts, grants, deeds of
conveyance, bequests, money, stocks, bonds or other valuable income-producing
personal property and real estate from any source for the purpose of endowing
the Cemetery.
   (B)   The Cemetery Fund shall at all times be in the custody of the
Municipal Treasurer. The Board shall have the power and authority to hire and
supervise such employees as they may deem necessary and to pass such rules and
regulations for the operation of the Cemetery as may be proper for its
efficient operation. All actions by the Board shall be under the supervision
and control of the governing body.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 12-301 through 12-403
§ 3-802 SEXTON.
   (A)   The Cemetery Board, subject to the approval of the governing body,
shall have the authority to appoint a Sexton who shall perform such duties and
make such reports as the Cemetery Board shall direct.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Sexton, upon receiving a burial permit to
locate and direct the party named in the permit to the lot mentioned therein
and to dig and excavate, or cause the same to be dug or excavated, in
compliance with the rules and regulations of the Cemetery Board.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 12-403
§ 3-803 CONVEYANCE OF LOTS.
   The governing body may convey cemetery lots by certificate signed by the
Mayor and countersigned by the Municipal Clerk under the Municipal Seal
specifying that the person to whom the same is issued is the owner of the lot
described therein by number for the purpose of interment. Said certificate
shall give a right in fee simple to the proprietor, his or her heirs and
assigns. The certificate shall then be recorded in the office of the County
Clerk.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-941
§ 3-804 LOT TRANSFERS.
   Any person who wishes to transfer a certificate may do so by surrendering
the original certificate to the Municipal Clerk, who shall issue a new
certificate upon the receipt of the recording fee set by resolution of the
governing body.
§ 3-805 BURIAL PERMIT.
   All persons desiring to bury a deceased person shall first be required to
file a completed death certificate with the Registrar of the County before any
body may be buried in the Municipal Cemetery. If it is impossible to complete
the certificate of death within the legal period of time prescribed by state
law, the funeral director shall notify the Registrar and obtain his or her
written approval before the deceased person may be buried in the Municipal
Cemetery. The burial permit so issued by the Registrar shall then be filed with
the Municipal Clerk. It shall be unlawful for the Sexton, or other person, to
allow the interment of a body without first receiving such permit. The burial
permit shall then be countersigned and dated by the Sexton. The interment of
any body shall be performed under the direct supervision of a licensed funeral
director. The applicant shall also file with the burial permit an application
containing the name, age, sex, race and cause of death of the deceased person
for the records of the Cemetery Board. Upon completion of the requirements
herein, the Municipal Clerk shall then issue a municipal burial permit which
shall entitle the applicant to bury a deceased person in the Municipal
Cemetery. In the event that the removal of the body of any deceased person is
requested, the Municipal Clerk shall issue no permit until the applicant shall
have first complied with the laws of the state with respect to such
disinterment.
Penalty, see §
3-1301
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 71-605
§ 3-806 BURIAL OF INDIGENTS.
   Within the Municipal Cemetery there shall be included a plot of ground which
shall be available for the free burial of indigents and unknown travelers who
may die while they are within the municipality.
§ 3-807 MONUMENTS.
   Persons desiring to erect monuments, tombstones or other structures shall
first procure a permit from the Municipal Clerk. The Cemetery Board shall
review all such applications and shall give written approval for any permit
prior to the issuance by the Municipal Clerk of said permit.
§ 3-808 GRAVE DEPTH.
   Graves shall not be less than six feet deep; provided, that nothing herein
shall be construed to prohibit the use of mausoleums or other recognized
methods of interring deceased persons if such a burial procedure is approved by
the Cemetery Board.
§ 3-809 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   Any person who shall willfully destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or remove
any tomb, monument or gravestone placed in the Cemetery, or any fence, railing
or other work for the protection or ornamentation of the Cemetery, or who shall
willfully destroy, cut, break or injure any tree, shrub or plant shall be
deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-512
§ 3-810 RECLAMATION.
   When any lot has been transferred by warranty deed or by a deed conveying a
fee simple title, but there has been no burial in any such lot or subdivision
thereof and no payment of annual assessments for a period of three years, the
Cemetery Board with the sanction of the governing body, may reclaim the unused
portion of such lot or subdivision after notifying the record owner or his or
her heirs or assigns, if known, by certified mail and publishing notice of its
intention to do so. Such notice shall be published once each week for four
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation throughout the county in which the
cemetery is located, shall describe the lot or subdivision proposed to be
reclaimed, and shall be addressed to the person in whose name such portion
stands of record or, if there is no owner of record, to all persons claiming
any interest in such lot or subdivision. If no person appears to claim such lot
or subdivision and pay all delinquent assessments with interest within 15 days
after the last date of such publication, the Cemetery Board may by resolution
reclaim such lot or subdivision. Such reclamation shall be complete upon a
filing of a verified copy of such resolution, together with proof of
publication, in the office of the Register of Deeds.
(Ord. 369, passed 6-1-1987)
ARTICLE 9: DUMPING GROUNDS
Section
   
3-901   Operation and funding
   
3-902   State regulations
   
3-903   Rates
   
3-904   Municipal tree dumping grounds
§ 3-901 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   The municipality owns and operates the city landfill through the landfill
attendant. The governing body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the
care, management and maintenance of the city landfill may each year levy a tax
not to exceed the maximum limit prescribed by state law, on the actual
valuation of all real estate and personal property within the corporate limits
that is subject to taxation. The revenue from said tax shall be known as the
Dump Fund and shall remain in the custody of the Municipal Treasurer. The
landfill attendant shall have the direct management and control of the city
landfill and shall faithfully carry out the duties of his or her position. The
governing body shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations for the
sanitary and efficient management of the city landfill. The governing body
shall provide by ordinance for the management and operation of the city
landfill and shall set the rates to be charged for services rendered by
resolution and file the same in the office of the Municipal Clerk for public
inspection at any reasonable time.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2101 through 19-2106
§ 3-902 STATE REGULATIONS.
   The municipality shall apply for a license to operate the city landfill.
Application shall be made to the Department of Environmental Control on forms
provided by the Department. No fee shall be charged for such licensing. Each
license so issued shall expire on October 1, following the date of issuance. It
shall be the duty of the landfill attendant to comply with the rules and
regulations prescribed by the Department of Environmental Control for the use
and operation of the city landfill.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 81-1517 and 81-1519
§ 3-903 RATES.
   Pursuant to §
3-901, rates are hereby established for depositing waste materials in the city
landfill, as follows.
Car, per trip                     $2
Commercial hauler/Compactor truck $4/cubic yard
Large trailer                     $10
Medium trailer                    $5
Pickup, 1 ton                     $10
Pickup, 3/4 ton and under         $5
Pickup, 3/4 ton and under w/racks $7
Small trailer                     $3
Truck, over 1 ton                 $20
Garbage from outside the city limits will be double price for each category
If the landfill attendant is asked to go out to the site at any time other
than at a time when the landfill is open, the customer shall be assessed an
additional fee of $7.50
If a business wants the city office to bill them, a $3 billing charge will be
assessed
Mixed loads must be separated to the satisfaction of the landfill attendant,
and the attendant is responsible for determining the cost per load
 
(Ord. 427, passed 3-25-1991)
§ 3-904 MUNICIPAL TREE DUMPING GROUNDS.
   (A)   Purpose. These regulations are enacted to provide a space for
residents of the city to dump trees, limbs, garden and yard waste.
   (B)   Regulations. A tree dump shall be provided for the use of residents of
the city pursuant to the following conditions.
      (1)   The city owns and operates the tree dump through the Utilities
Superintendent, who shall have the direct management and control the facility.
      (2)   The city shall apply to the Department of Environment and Energy
for any permits required to operate the city tree dump.
      (3)   The Utilities Superintendent shall have the authority to adopt
rules and regulations for the sanitary and efficient management of the tree
dump, in compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations, subject
to the supervision and review of the City Council.
      (4)   The city tree dump shall be open solely for the jumping of tree
limbs, grass clippings, leaves and branches by residents of the city or
personnel approved by the Mayor and/or City Clerk.
      (5)   Persons dumping any material other than that described in
subsection (B)(4) above, including, but not limited to, trash, refuse, garbage,
animal matter or putrescible waste, hazardous waste, appliances or construction
debris, therein shall be prosecuted under the ordinances of the city and the
laws of the state for littering or similar offense.
   (C)   Violation. Furthermore, any person who shall violate or refuse to
comply with the provisions of subsection (A) above, or the enforcement thereof,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined not more than $100 for every offense.
(Ord. 962, passed 6-8-2021)
ARTICLE 10: ELECTRICAL SYSTEM
Section
   
3-1001   Ownership
   
3-1002   Contracts and terms
   
3-1003   Licensed electrician
   
3-1004   Installation expense
   
3-1005   Meters
   
3-1006   Fees and collections; dispute of charges
   
3-1007   Meter deposit fund
   
3-1008   Delinquent payments
   
3-1009   Restricted use
   
3-1010   Building moving
   
3-1011   Complaints
   
3-1012   Trimming trees
   
3-1013   Inspections
   
3-1014   Destruction of property
   
3-1015   Residential and commercial services
   
3-1016   Residential reconnect fee
   
3-1017   Commercial reconnect fee
   
3-1018   Load management devices
§ 3-1001 OWNERSHIP.
   The municipality owns and operates the municipal electrical system through
the Utilities Superintendent. The governing body, for the purpose of defraying
the cost of the care, management and maintenance of the municipal electrical
system may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by
state law, on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property
within the corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from said
tax shall be known as the Electrical Fund and shall remain in the custody of
the Municipal Treasurer. The Utilities Superintendent shall have the direct
management and control of the municipal electrical system and shall faithfully
carry out the duties of his or her office. He or she shall have the authority
to adopt rules and regulations for the safe and efficient management of the
electrical system subject to the supervision and review of the governing body.
The governing body shall by resolution set the rates to be charged for services
rendered and shall file the same in the office of the Municipal Clerk for
public inspection at any reasonable time.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-902 through 17-904, 17-906 and 17-909
§ 3-1002 CONTRACTS AND TERMS.
   (A)   The municipality, through its Electrical Department, shall furnish
electric current for light and power purposes to persons whose premises abut on
any supply wire of the distribution system and may furnish electric current to
such other persons within or without its corporate limits, as and when,
according to law, the governing body may see fit to do so. The rules,
regulations and rates for electric service, hereinafter named in this article,
shall be considered a part of every application hereafter made for electric
service and shall be considered a part of the contract between every consumer
now served by the Electrical Department. Without further formality, the making
of application on the part of any applicant for the use or consumption of
electric energy by present customers and the furnishing of electric service to
said applicant or customer shall constitute a contract between applicant or
customer and the municipality, to which both parties are bound.
   (B)   If a customer should violate any of the provisions of said contract or
any reasonable rules and regulations that the governing body may hereafter
adopt, the Utilities Superintendent, or his or her agent, shall cut off or
disconnect the electric service from the building or place of such violation,
and no further connection of electric service for such building or place shall
again be made save or except by order of the Superintendent or his or her
agent.
§ 3-1003 LICENSED ELECTRICIAN.
   (A)   Under no circumstances shall connections be made between the wires of
the electrical distribution system of this municipality and the meter of the
consumer except by an employee of the municipality or a licensed electrician
authorized to do so by the Utilities Superintendent. The consumer may have
wiring done by any competent licensed electrician from the meter to the points
of distribution. All wiring, equipment and apparatus shall be installed
according to the electrical code duly adopted by the municipality.
   (B)   All installation shall be done under the supervision and strictly in
accordance with the rules, regulations and specifications for such installation
prescribed by the Utilities Superintendent and Building Inspector; provided,
that such rules, regulations and specifications have been reviewed and approved
by the governing body.
Penalty, see §
3-1301
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-902 and 19-1404
§ 3-1004 INSTALLATION EXPENSE.
   (A)   The expense of overhead service drop conductors; connectors; and
associated miscellaneous material, including the electrical meter, shall be
provided and installed by the municipality. Maintenance and replacement expense
of overhead service drop shall also be the responsibility of the municipality.
   (B)   All new electrical installations that require a permit from the state
commenced after passage of this section shall be underground installations. The
expense of underground installation and wiring shall be the responsibility of
the consumer. Upon completion of the project and verification by the City
Utilities Superintendent of the underground installation, the consumer will
receive a one-time reimbursement of $400. Maintenance and replacement expense
for underground services shall be the responsibility of the consumer.
   (C)   Installation of new underground distribution lines and associated
expenses shall be the responsibility of the municipality.
   (D)   The municipality is under no obligation to extend existing lines at no
cost to the consumer. In cases where distance from existing lines,
characteristics of the consumer’s specific electrical needs or other factors
are such that revenues from the use of electricity are, in the opinion of the
City Utilities Director, insufficient to justify an extension, the consumer
shall be required to pay a portion of the cost of construction in an amount to
be determined by the City Council.
(Ord. 899, passed 10-3-2017)
§ 3-1005 METERS.
   All electrical meters shall be read at least one time each month during
which electrical service is used between the nineteenth day and the twenty-
fifth day of the month. In the event a meter is broken or otherwise fails to
register accurately the use of electricity by any consumer, the six-month
average of the season one year previous to such breakage shall be used for
billing purposes. For provisions on electric meter deposits, see §
3-1105.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-1404
§ 3-1006 FEES AND COLLECTIONS; DISPUTE OF CHARGES.
   (A)   The governing body has the power and authority to fix the rates to be
paid by electrical consumers for the use of electricity. All rates shall be
filed for public inspection at the office of the Municipal Clerk. The Utility
Superintendent shall bill the consumers and collect all money received by the
municipality on the account of the municipal electrical system. He or she shall
faithfully account for and pay over the same to the Municipal Treasurer all
revenue collected by him or her, taking his or her receipt therefor in
duplicate, filing one with the Municipal Clerk and keeping the other on file in
his or her official records.
   (B)   All bills are due and payable on the first day of the month following
the meter reading and are delinquent after the close of business on the
twentieth day of the month. Upon receiving the monthly billing statement, a
customer of the municipal utility system shall have 30 days to dispute any
charge contained upon said billing statement. Failure to dispute any such
charge contained on a billing statement within 30 days of receipt thereof,
shall be considered, conclusively, that such charges are accurate.
   (C)   In the event any consumer of the municipal utility system disputes a
charge or charges contained in a monthly billing statement, within 30 days of
receipt thereof, such dispute shall be governed by the provisions of §
3-1011.
(Ord. 777, passed 4-1-2008)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-902 and 19-1404
§ 3-1007 METER DEPOSIT FUND.
   The meter deposit required for electrical service shall be promptly paid
upon demand by all customers of the electrical system. From said deposit shall
be deducted all delinquent electrical charges. The meter deposit shall be
collected by the Utilities Superintendent and immediately turned over to the
Municipal Treasurer who shall keep said fees in a trust fund for the customers
of the electrical system. Said fund shall be put out at interest separate and
apart from other funds. Interest arising therefrom shall be expended solely for
the repair of equipment and property of the municipal electrical system.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-1404
§ 3-1008 DELINQUENT PAYMENTS.
   (A)   Electrical fees shall be due and payable monthly at the office of the
Utilities Superintendent. If said fees are not paid within 25 days after the
same become due, the electricity will be turned off after seven days’ notice by
mail to the subscriber and not turned on again until all back fees and charges
are paid, including any penalty charge which the governing body may by
resolution prescribe; provided, that if the delinquent customer is a known
welfare recipient, it shall be the duty of the Municipal Clerk to notify the
customer and also the County Welfare Department by certified mail of the
proposed termination.
   (B)   The owner of the premises will in all cases be held primarily
responsible and will be required to pay for electricity at such premises.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-902 and 19-1404
§ 3-1009 RESTRICTED USE.
   (A)   The municipal electrical system does not guarantee the delivery of
electric current over the lines of the distribution system except when it has
sufficient power, current, equipment and machinery to do so. The Utilities
Superintendent has the power and authority to disconnect or discontinue such
service for any good and sufficient reason without liability.
   (B)   The municipality shall use due care and reasonable diligence to
provide and supply uninterrupted service to consumers but shall not be liable
for damages resulting from interruption of service due to causes over which the
municipality has no control and the municipality expressly reserves the right
to discontinue or disconnect any consumer’s service without preliminary notice.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-902 and 19-1404
§ 3-1010 BUILDING MOVING.
   Should any house or building moving occur or be necessary and it becomes
necessary in said work to remove or disturb any of the property or wires of the
municipal electrical system, the same should not be done except upon written
permission received from the Utilities Superintendent, who shall then order
paid in advance the actual cost of moving said wires and such cost shall be
paid by the applicant prior to the moving of the building or house. All expense
of removing, changing and replacing said wires or apparatus of the electrical
system shall be paid out of the deposit made prior to moving and any surplus
remaining after all expenses are paid shall be returned to the applicant;
provided, that if in the course of moving said building or house it becomes
apparent that additional expense will be incurred, such additional deposit as
deemed necessary may be demanded.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-1404
§ 3-1011 COMPLAINTS.
   Any consumer feeling himself or herself aggrieved by reason of any
controversy with the Utilities Superintendent may appear before the governing
body and present his or her grievance. Any consumer who considers himself or
herself aggrieved by being required to pay the charge demanded for the use of
electricity, or for the resumption of electric service after the same shall
have been shut off, shall pay such charge under protest, in which event the
Municipal Clerk shall write on the receipt given such customer the words “Paid
Under Protest.” Such consumer may then present his or her verified claim in the
manner provided for presenting claims to the governing body for a refund of the
amount so paid under protest. Such claims shall then be considered by the
governing body in the same manner as other claims against the municipality.
§ 3-1012 TRIMMING TREES.
   Any person desiring to cut or remove trees or branches thereof in close
proximity to the lines of the municipal electrical system shall, before doing
said work, give reasonable written notice to the Utilities Superintendent and
shall follow any and all rules and regulations which he or she may prescribe
for doing such work. It shall be unlawful for any person felling or removing
such trees or branches to disrupt or damage the lines without first giving
proper notice and receiving permission in writing to do so. Whenever it becomes
necessary to protect the lines or property of the electrical system, the
governing body shall have the power to order cut and remove any overhanging
branches or limbs of trees so that the lines will be free and safe.
Penalty, see §
3-1301
§ 3-1013 INSPECTIONS.
   The Utilities Superintendent or his or her duly authorized agents shall have
free access at any reasonable time to each premises and building to or in which
electricity is supplied; provided, that in the event of an emergency such
inspections may take place at any time.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-902
§ 3-1014 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break, injure
or deface any building, machinery, apparatus, fixture, attachment or
appurtenance of the municipal electrical system.
Penalty, see §
3-1301
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-512
§ 3-1015 RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICES.
   (A)   Seasonal rates. Summer rates shall be for usage during the months of
June through September and winter rates shall be for usage during the months of
October through May.
      (1)   Residential services.
         (a)   Availability: Available to all single-family residences and
individually metered apartments for all domestic purposes when all service is
supplied through a single meter. Not applicable to resale, stand-by or
auxiliary service.
         (b)   Character of service: AC, 60 Hertz, single-phase, at any of the
city’s standard voltages where the service may be supplied by a single power
transformation.
         (c)   Rates:
Effective date:            October 1,2018
Customer charge, per month $13
Energy charge
Summer
   First 500 kWh, per kW$0.1210
   Excess, per kWh      $0.0950
Winter
   First 500 kWh, per kW$0.1210
   Excess, per kWh      $0.9000
 
         (d)   Minimum bill: The sum of the customer charge and energy charge.
      (2)   Residential service; electric heat.
         (a)   Availability: Available to single-family residences and
individually metered apartments for all domestic purposes, including space
heating, when all services are supplied through a single and the primary source
of winter space heating is electrical energy. Not applicable to resale, stand-
by or auxiliary service.
         (b)   Character of service: AC, 60 Hertz, single-phase, at any of the
city’s standard voltages where the service may be supplied by a single power
transformation.
         (c)   Rates:
Effective date:            October 1, 2018
Customer charge, per month $13
Energy charge
Summer
   First 500 kWh, per kW$0.1210
   Excess, per kWh      $0.0900
Winter
   First 500 kWh, per kW$0.1150
   Excess, per kWh      $0.0800
 
         (d)   Minimum bill: The sum of the customer charge and energy charge.
      (3)   Commercial service.
         (a)   Availability: Available to any customer for general commercial
lighting and miscellaneous power service at standard voltages. This rate shall
also apply, at the option of the city, when more than one dwelling unit is
served through one meter. Not applicable to resale, stand-by or auxiliary
service.
         (b)   Character of service: AC, 60 Hertz, single-phase, at any of the
city’s standard voltages where the service may be supplied by a single power
transformation.
         (c)   Rates:
Effective date:            October 1,2018
Customer charge, per month $18
Energy charge
Summer
   First 500 kWh, per kW$0.1460
   Excess, per kWh      $0.1000
Winter
   First 500 kWh, per kW$0.1460
   Excess, per kWh      $0.0900
 
         (d)   Minimum bill: The sum of the customer charge and energy charge.
      (4)   Commercial service electric heat.
         (a)   Availability: Available to all customers taking service under
commercial rate where permanently installed electric heating equipment is in
regular use to supply the entire heating and requirements of the business. Not
applicable to resale, stand-by or auxiliary service.
         (b)   Character of service: AC, 60 Hertz, single-phase or three-phase,
at any of the city’s standard voltages where the service may be supplied by a
single power transformation.
         (c)   Rates:
Effective date:            October 1, 2018
Customer charge, per month $18
Energy charge
Summer
   First 500 kWh, per kW$0.1460
   Excess, per kWh      $0.0900
Winter
   First 500 kWh, per kW$0.1300
   Excess, per kWh      $0.0800
 
         (d)   Minimum bill: The sum of the customer charge and energy charge.
      (5)   Commercial three-phase service.
         (a)   Availability: Available to any customer for general commercial
service and miscellaneous power service at standard voltages. This rate shall
also apply, at the option of the city, when more than one dwelling unit is
served through one meter. Not applicable to resale, stand-by or auxiliary
service.
         (b)   Character of service: AC, 60 Hertz, three-phase, at any of the
city’s standard voltages where the service may be supplied by a single power
transformation.
         (c)   Rates:
Effective date:            October 1, 2018
Customer charge, per month $24
Energy charge
Summer
   First 500 kWh, per kW$0.1460
   Excess, per kWh      $0.1000
Winter
   First 500 kWh, per kW$0.1460
   Excess, per kWh      $0.0900
 
         (d)   Minimum bill: The sum of the customer charge and energy charge.
   (B)   Due date. All bills are due and payable on the first day of the month
following the meter reading and are delinquent after the close of business on
the twentieth day of the month.
   (C)   Late penalty. There shall be a 10% penalty applied to all accounts to
which this section is applicable that are unpaid as of the close of business on
the twentieth day of the month following the billing period.
   (D)   Residential reconnection. A reconnect fee, in the amount of $50, shall
be charged to any residential customer who has had electric utility service
disconnected for nonpayment of charges. Electrical service shall not be
reconnected until the reconnect fee of $50 is paid, together with the charges
due up to and including the date of disconnection.
   (E)   Commercial reconnection. A reconnect fee, in the amount of $100, shall
be charged to any commercial customer who has had electric utility service
disconnected for nonpayment of charges. Electrical service shall not be
reconnected until the reconnect fee of $100 is paid, together with all charges
due up to and including the date of disconnection.
   (F)   Cost of electricity. The rates set forth in all schedules are based on
the cost of electricity purchased by the City Department of Municipal
Utilities. The city reserves the right to increase the cost per kWh to
compensate for any increase in the cost of electricity.
(Ord. 904, passed 8-7-2018)
§ 3-1016 RESIDENTIAL RECONNECT FEE.
   (A)   A reconnect fee, in the amount of $50, shall be charged to any
residential customer who has had electric utility service disconnected for
nonpayment of charges.
   (B)   Electrical service shall not be reconnected until the reconnect fee of
$50 is paid, together with all charges due up to and including the date of
disconnection.
(Ord. 489, passed 6-7-1994; Ord. 706, passed 9-2-2003; Ord. 761, passed 3-6-
2007; Ord. 763, passed 6-5-2007; Ord. 789, passed 4-7-2009)
§ 3-1017 COMMERCIAL RECONNECT FEE.
   A reconnect fee, in the amount of $100, shall be charged to any commercial
customer who has had electric utility service disconnected for nonpayment of
charges. Electrical service shall not be reconnected until the reconnect fee of
$100 is paid, together with all charges due up to and including the date of
disconnection.
(Ord. 489, passed 6-7-1994; Ord. 706, passed 9-2-2003; Ord. 761, passed 3-6-
2007; Ord. 763, passed 6-5-2007; Ord. 789, passed 4-7-2009)
§ 3-1018 LOAD MANAGEMENT DEVICES.
   (A)   The city hereby establishes a surcharge on all municipal electric
service rates and charges for customers that do not utilize an approved load
management device on central space air cooling systems.
   (B)   The surcharge referred to in subsection (A) above shall be equal to
20% of the electrical service rates generated by any customer that does not
utilize an approved load management device for the months of June, July, August
and September of each year. Said surcharge shall be added to the monthly
statement of any such customer and be subject to the same collection and
delinquency rates and penalties as other utility services.
   (C)   No customer of the municipal electrical distribution system, agent
thereof or repairperson employed by any customer shall be permitted to remove,
disconnect or bypass the load management device currently in place. Any
customer wishing to have such device removed or disconnected shall be required
to contact the city office for the purpose of making such request and, after
disconnection or removal by city personnel or designees, shall be responsible
for payment of the surcharge.
   (D)   In the event that a central space air cooling system is replaced by a
contractor, supplier, service person or other individual that is not an
employee of the city, any load management device previously in use shall be
reinstalled by such contractor, supplier, service person or other individual
not an employee of the city, or alternatively, returned and delivered to the
City Clerk. All load management devices are property of the city.
   (E)   Any newly installed central space air cooling system shall be reported
by the contractor, supplier, service person or individual not in the employment
of the city to the City Clerk so that the necessary load management device may
be installed thereon by city personnel.
   (F)   No wiring of central space air cooling systems, within the electrical
service jurisdiction of the city, shall be done by any individuals of firms
that are not licensed by the city.
(Ord. 653, passed 8-7-2001)
ARTICLE 11: UTILITIES GENERALLY
Section
   
3-1101   Discontinuance of service, notice procedure
   
3-1102   Diversion of services; civil action
   
3-1103   Diversion of services, meter tampering, unauthorized reconnection,
prohibited; evidence
   
3-1104   Denial of utility service; when prohibited
   
3-1105   Utility meter deposits
   
3-1106   Mandatory hookup
   
3-1107   Landlord consent and liability
§ 3-1101 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE, NOTICE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DOMESTIC SUBSCRIBER. Shall not include municipalities, cities, villages,
political subdivisions, companies, corporations, partnerships, limited
liability companies or businesses of any nature.
(Neb. RS 70-1602)
   (B)   No public or private utility company, including any utility owned and
operated by the city, furnishing water, natural gas or electricity at retail in
this city shall discontinue service to any domestic subscriber for nonpayment
of any past-due account unless the utility company first gives notice to any
subscriber whose service is proposed to be terminated. Such notice shall be
given in person, by first-class mail, or by electronic delivery, except that
electronic delivery shall only be used if the subscriber has specifically
elected to receive such notices by electronic delivery. If notice is given by
first-class mail or electronic delivery, such notice shall be conspicuously
marked as to its importance. Service shall not be discontinued for at least
seven days after notice is sent or given. Holidays and weekends shall be
excluded from the seven days. A public or private utility company shall not
charge a fee for the discontinuance or reconnection of utility service that
exceeds the reasonable costs of providing such service.
(Neb. RS 70-1605)
   (C)   The notice required by subsection (A) above shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The reason for the proposed disconnection;
      (2)   A statement of the intention to disconnect unless the domestic
subscriber either pays the bill or reaches an agreement with the utility
regarding payment of the bill;
      (3)   The date upon which service will be disconnected if the domestic
subscriber does not take appropriate action;
      (4)   The name, address and telephone number of the utility’s employee or
department to whom the domestic subscriber may address an inquiry or complaint;
      (5)   The domestic subscriber’s right, prior to the disconnection date,
to request a conference regarding any dispute over such proposed disconnection;
      (6)   A statement that the utility may not disconnect service pending the
conclusion of the conference;
      (7)   A statement to the effect that disconnection shall be postponed or
prevented upon presentation of a duly licensed physician’s, physician
assistant’s or advanced practice registered nurse’s certificate, which shall
certify that a domestic subscriber or resident within such subscriber’s
household has an existing illness or handicap which would cause such subscriber
or resident to suffer an immediate and serious health hazard by the
disconnection of the utility’s service to that household. Such certificate
shall be filed with the utility within five days of receiving notice under this
section, excluding holidays and weekends, and will prevent the disconnection of
the utility’s service for a period of at least 30 days from such filing. Only
one postponement of disconnection shall be required under this subsection (C)
(7) for each incidence of nonpayment of any past-due account;
      (8)   The cost that will be borne by the domestic subscriber for
restoration of service;
      (9)   A statement that the domestic subscriber may arrange with the
utility for an installment payment plan;
      (10)   A statement to the effect that those domestic subscribers who are
welfare recipients may qualify for assistance in payment of their utility bill
and that they should contact their caseworker in that regard; and
      (11)   Any additional information not inconsistent with this section
which has received prior approval from the City Council or Board of Public
Works, in the case of a city utility, or the board of directors or
administrative board of any other utility.
(Neb. RS 70-1606)
   (D)   The utility shall establish a third-party notice procedure for the
notification of a designated third party of any proposed discontinuance of
service and shall advise its subscribers, including new subscribers, of the
availability of such procedures.
(Neb. RS 70-1607)
   (E)   The provisions of Neb. RS 70-1608 through 70-1614 shall apply to
disputes over a proposed discontinuance of service.
   (F)   The procedures adopted for resolving utility bills by the City Council
or Board of Public Works for any city utility, one copy of which is on file in
the office of the City Clerk, are hereby incorporated by reference in addition
to any amendments thereto and are made a part of this section as though set out
in full.
   (G)   This section shall not apply to any disconnections or interruptions of
services made necessary by the utility for reasons of repair or maintenance or
to protect the health or safety of the domestic subscriber or of the general
public.
(Neb. RS 70-1615)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 958, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 3-1102 DIVERSION OF SERVICES; CIVIL ACTION.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, the definitions found in Neb. RS 25-
21,275 shall apply.
   (B)   (1)   The municipality may bring a civil action for damages against
any person who commits, authorizes, solicits, aids, abets or attempts:
         (a)   Bypassing;
         (b)   Tampering; or
         (c)   Unauthorized metering when such act results in damages to a
municipal utility.
      (2)   The municipality may bring a civil action for damages pursuant to
this section against any person receiving the benefit of utility service
through means of bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering.
      (3)   In any civil action brought pursuant to this section, the
municipality shall be entitled, upon proof of willful or intentional bypassing,
tampering or unauthorized metering to recover as damages:
         (a)   The amount of actual damage or loss if the amount of the damage
or loss is susceptible of reasonable calculation; or
         (b)   Liquidated damages of $750 if the amount of actual damage or
loss is not susceptible of reasonable calculation.
      (4)   In addition to damage or loss under subsection (B)(2)(a) or (B)(2)
(b) above, the municipality may recover all reasonable expenses and costs
incurred on account of the bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering,
including, but not limited to, disconnection, reconnection, service calls,
equipment, costs of the suit and reasonable attorneys’ fees in cases within the
scope of Neb. RS 25-1801.
   (C)   (1)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a tenant or
occupant at any premises where bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering is
proven to exist caused or had knowledge of such bypassing, tampering or
unauthorized metering if the tenant or occupant:
         (a)   Had access to the part of the utility supply system on the
premises where the bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering is proven to
exist; and
         (b)   Was responsible or partially responsible for payment, either
directly or indirectly, to the utility or to any other person for utility
services to the premises.
      (2)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a customer at any
premises where bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering is proven to exist
caused or had knowledge of such bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering
if the customer controlled access to the part of the utility supply system on
the premises where the bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering was proven
to exist.
   (D)   The remedies provided by this section shall be deemed to be
supplemental and additional to powers conferred by existing laws. The remedies
provided in this section are in addition to and not in limitation of any other
civil or criminal statutory or common-law remedies.
(Ord. 343, passed 11-1-1983; Ord. 699, passed 5-6-2003)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 25-21,276 through 25-21,278
§ 3-1103 DIVERSION OF SERVICES, METER TAMPERING, UNAUTHORIZED RECONNECTION,
PROHIBITED; EVIDENCE.
   (A)   It is an offense for any person:
      (1)   To connect any instrument, device or contrivance with any wire
supplying or intended to supply electricity or electric current or to connect
any pipe or conduit supplying water, without the knowledge and consent of the
municipality, in such manner that any portion thereof may be supplied to any
instrument by or at which electricity, electric current or water may be
consumed without passing through the meter made or provided for measuring or
registering the amount or quantity thereof passing through it;
      (2)   To knowingly use or knowingly permit the use of electricity,
electric current or water obtained unlawfully pursuant to this section;
      (3)   To reconnect electrical or water service without the knowledge and
consent of the municipality if the service has been disconnected pursuant to
Neb. RS 70-1601 through 70-1615 or § 3-1101; or
      (4)   To willfully injure, alter or by any instrument, device or
contrivance in any manner interfere with or obstruct the action or operation of
any meter made or provided for measuring or registering the amount or quantity
of electricity, electric current or water passing through it, without the
knowledge and consent of the municipality.
   (B)   Proof of the existence of any wire, pipe or conduit connection or
reconnection or of any injury, alteration, interference or obstruction of a
meter is prima facie evidence of the guilt of the person in possession of the
premises where such connection, reconnection, injury, alteration, interference
or obstruction is proved to exist.
(Ord. 518, passed 2-7-1995; Ord. 700, passed 5-6-2003) Penalty, see §
3-1301
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-515.02
§ 3-1104 DENIAL OF UTILITY SERVICE; WHEN PROHIBITED.
   No applicant for the services of a public or private utility company
furnishing water, natural gas or electricity at retail in this municipality
shall be denied service because of unpaid bills for similar service which are
not collectible at law because of statutes of limitations or discharge in
bankruptcy proceedings.
(Ord. 617, passed 4-13-1999)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 70-1601
§ 3-1105 UTILITY METER DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Electric meter deposit. Upon application to the city for electric
service, the applicant shall deposit the sum of $200 as an electric meter
deposit. This deposit shall be paid in full at the time of applying for such
service.
   (B)   Water meter deposit. Upon application to the city for water service,
the applicant shall deposit the sum of $50 as a water meter deposit. This
deposit shall be paid in full at the time of applying for such service.
   (C)   Refund of meter deposits. Upon the consumer making timely payment of
all electric, water and other utility charges, prior to the same becoming
delinquent, for a period of 24 consecutive months, the electric meter deposit
and water meter deposit shall be refunded to the individual or individuals
posting the same.
   (D)   Multiple meters. No additional electric meter deposit or water meter
deposit shall be required of an applicant who is, at the time of making
application for such service, a customer of the electrical and water system and
who has timely satisfied, prior to the same becoming delinquent, all utility
charges for a period of 12 consecutive months prior to making application for
such additional service.
(Ord. 768, passed 8-7-2007; Ord. 776, passed 4-1-2008)
§ 3-1106 MANDATORY HOOKUP.
   All occupied residential structures located within the municipality shall be
hooked up to the municipal water system, the municipal sewer system and the
municipal electrical system (hereinafter municipal services). In the event that
an occupied residential structure, located within the municipality, is not
properly hooked up to each of said municipal services, all of such services
shall be subject to disconnection in accordance with the procedure identified
in §
3-1101.
(Ord. 803, passed 7-5-2011)
§ 3-1107 LANDLORD CONSENT AND LIABILITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure utility charges are
adequately paid and provide the city with a remedy for delinquent citizens.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ACTIONS BY THE MUNICIPALITY. Actions which may be undertaken pursuant to
the authority of either the Mayor or the City Council.
      DELINQUENT. An overdue payment that is in violation of this article.
      LANDLORD. The owner of a property whose primary purpose is to be rented
out to other persons.
      UTILITY or UTILITIES. Water, sewer, electric and trash services.
   (C)   Meter deposits. Every person or persons desiring utility services must
make an application therefor to the City Clerk, who shall require the applicant
to make a service deposit and tap fee for water, trash, electrical and sewer
services in such amounts as set by resolution of the City Council and placed on
file at the office of the City Clerk. No new application for utility services
will be accepted for any applicant who, at the time of making the application,
has unpaid utility charges due and owing to the city. No additional deposit
will be required for a consumer who is relocating and has maintained a utility
account with the city which has not been delinquent during the 12 months
preceding the application. If the property is used as a rental, the landlord
shall be responsible for meter deposit after a tenant’s deposit has been
returned after they have vacated the property.
   (D)   Application by tenant. Before a tenant’s utility application will be
accepted, the landlord shall be required to sign an owner’s consent form and
agree to pay unpaid utility charges for their property, not to exceed $100 per
any individual unit. Any landlord signing the required consent form shall be
notified of any delinquent notices in the same manner as the customer.
   (E)   Refund of deposits. The meter deposits referred to above shall be
returned to the tenant depositing the same after the passage of 24 months
without any late payment on the account. The occurrence of one late payment
will cause the 24-month period to start completely over. If a tenant moves to
another residence prior to being refunded their deposit, the meter deposit will
be applied to their final bill. If there is any credit balance remaining, a
check shall be issued to the account payor.
   (F)   Termination of service by consumer. A customer relocating and desiring
to have a final reading of their meter shall make the request for such final
reading at least three business days in advance thereof or be subject to a
service charge of $50 for such service.
   (G)   Applications, permits and other forms. The City Clerk is authorized to
create and promulgate application, permit and other forms in furtherance of
this section without further approval by the City Council.
(Ord. 971, passed 2-7-2023)
ARTICLE 12: NATURAL GAS RATE FILING FEE
Section
   
3-1201   Natural gas rate filing fee
   
3-1202   Natural gas; schedule of rates for the sale of natural gas in the city
§ 3-1201 NATURAL GAS RATE FILING FEE.
   (Repealed by Ord. 718, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 3-1202 NATURAL GAS; SCHEDULE OF RATES FOR THE SALE OF NATURAL GAS IN THE
CITY.
   (A)   The rates charged by KN Energy, Inc. (KNE or company) for natural gas
transportation to customers in the city, unless otherwise approved by the Mayor
and City Council, shall not exceed the following, effective on or after the
date KNE implements the unbundling of residential sales service.
Type of Charge Billing Unit Base SSIR HEAT
Type of Charge        Billing Unit Base     SSIR   HEAT
Residential
   Customer charge Per month    $15.45   $3.78  $0.29
   Volumetric charge
      First 20 tPer therm    $0.50858
      Over 20 thPer therm    $0.15000
Commercial
   Customer charge Per month    $28.43   $11.35 $0.29
   Volumetric charge
      First 40 tPer therm    $0.50858
      Over 40 thPer therm    $0.15000
Commercial - EO
   Customer charge Per month    $28.43   $11.35 $0.29
   Volumetric charge
      First 40 tPer therm    $0.50858
      Over 40 thPer therm    $0.15000
 
   (B)   When any municipality or other taxing authority imposes a franchise,
occupation, business, sales, service, license, excise, privilege or similar tax
of any kind on the company, the amounts thereof, insofar as practical, shall be
charged on a pro rata basis to all applicable customers receiving gas service
from the company within the municipality. This charge, in all cases, will be in
addition to the regular charges for gas service. Where such tax is levied on a
percentage of gross receipts, from customers or a class of customers, that
percentage will be applied to each affected customer’s bill, and the amount so
computed will be added to such bill. The amount of the tax charged to each
affected customer in each billing period will be shown as a separate item on
the customer’s bill and identified as such.
(Ord. 417, passed 12-18-1990; Ord. 571, passed 2-4-1998; Ord. 573, passed 2-4-
1998)
ARTICLE 13: PENAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
3-1301   Violations; penalty
§ 3-1301 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, or any person’s agent or servant, who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided herein,
shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined in any sum not exceeding $500. A new violation shall be deemed to have
been committed every 24 hours of failure to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the
municipality may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin, abate and remove the
same in the manner provided by law.
      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists,
the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.
(Ord. 642, passed 5-10-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-505, 18-1720 and 18-1722
CHAPTER 4: HEALTH AND SANITATION
   Article
      
1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2.   CONTAGIOUS DISEASE
      
3.   GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
      
4.   NUISANCES
      
5.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION
      
6.   WELL-HEAD PROTECTION
      
7.   PENAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
4-101   Health; regulations
   
4-102   Health; enforcement official
   
4-103   Health; state rules
   
4-104   Health; County Health Board
§ 4-101 HEALTH; REGULATIONS.
   For the purpose of promoting the health and safety of the residents of the
city, the Board of Health shall, from time to time, adopt such rules and
regulations relative thereto and shall make such inspections, prescribe such
penalties and make such reports as may be necessary toward that purpose.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 17-121
§ 4-102 HEALTH; ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.
   The Police Chief or other official designated by the City Council, as the
quarantine officer, shall be the chief health officer of the city. It shall be
his or her duty to notify the City Council and the Board of Health of health
nuisances within the city and its zoning jurisdiction.
Statutory reference:
   Quarantine officer, see Neb. RS 17-121
§ 4-103 HEALTH; STATE RULES.
   (Repealed by Ord. 648, passed 6-5-2001)
§ 4-104 HEALTH; COUNTY HEALTH BOARD.
   It shall be the duty of the Board of Health to work closely with the County
Health Board in protecting the health and welfare of the residents of the city.
ARTICLE 2: CONTAGIOUS DISEASE
Section
   
4-201   Disease; contagious
   
4-202   Disease; spreading contagion
   
4-203   Disease; medical attention required
§ 4-201 DISEASE; CONTAGIOUS.
   It shall be the duty of every physician called in to care for or treat a
person afflicted with any contagious disease or any epidemic disease to make a
report of the same within 24 hours after being called in for such care, to the
Municipal Police Chief. In the event that no physician is in attendance, it
shall be the duty of the person in charge of the care of such ill patient to
make a report within 24 hours from the time the disease is recognized.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 71-503
§ 4-202 DISEASE; SPREADING CONTAGION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to spread disease, willfully or
negligently, or to cause the spread of the same.
Penalty, see §
4-701
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-114 and 17-123
§ 4-203 DISEASE; MEDICAL ATTENTION REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person responsible
for any child to fail or neglect to secure proper medical treatment for said
child when he or she is afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease.
Penalty, see §
4-701
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-114 and 17-123
ARTICLE 3: GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Section
   
4-301   Garbage collection and disposal
   
4-302   Municipal Solid Waste Disposal Department; operation and funding
   
4-303   Municipal Solid Waste Disposal Department; persons to whom services
furnished
   
4-304   Municipal Solid Waste Disposal Department; mandatory pick-up
   
4-305   Municipal Solid Waste Disposal Department; manner of collection and
disposal
   
4-306   Solid waste; liability for charges; proof of proper disposal
   
4-307   Municipal tree and yard waste disposal site
§ 4-301 GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      GARBAGE. Food wastes from kitchens, shops and stores, including peelings,
vegetable tops, wastes from meats, fish and poultry and such leftovers as are
not usable or suitable for keeping, spoiled fruits, vegetables and meats and
other perishable wastes, that attend the preparation, use, cooking or the
dealing in or storage of meats, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables.
      RUBBISH or TRASH. Discarded machinery, chips, pieces of wood, sticks,
dead trees, branches, bottles, broken glass, crockery, tin cans, boxes, papers,
rags or any other litter or debris that is not an immediate hazard to the
health of the residents of the municipality.
      SPECIAL REFUSE. All manner of waste materials which, due to weight, bulk,
quantity or composition of the material, renders it impractical or impossible
to handle in garbage packer trucks. Some examples of SPECIAL REFUSE are:
building materials waste such as lumber, plaster, concrete, stone, brick and
tile; large metal objects such as car bodies or stoves; limbs, branches or tree
trunks over two and one-half inches in diameter; sod, dirt and all other refuse
when the quantity exceeds 100 pounds at any one pick up, or where dimensions
exceed four feet in length and two feet in girth, regardless of weight.
      WASTE. Cinders, ashes, plaster, brick, stone, sawdust or sand.
      YARD REFUSE. All nonburnable rubbish normally accumulated in the process
of caring for a yard and garden. It shall include, but is not necessarily
limited to, leaves, grass and hedge clippings and/or trees hedge and shrub
trimmings not to exceed two and one-half inches in diameter. It shall not
include dirt, trees, hedges or shrub branches over two and one-half inches in
diameter.
   (B)   Garbage; trash and waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep
in, on or about any dwelling, building or premises, or any other place in the
municipality, decayed vegetable or animal substance, garbage or refuse matter
of any kind that may be injurious to the public health or offensive to the
residents of the municipality unless the same is kept in receptacles of heavy
plastic or metal as nearly airtight as may be practical. It shall be unlawful
to throw or sweep into the streets, alleys, parks or other public grounds any
dirt, paper, nails, pieces of glass, refuse, waste or rubbish of any kind. No
person may permit garbage, rubbish, waste or refuse to accumulate and all
persons shall remove the same from their property within 24 hours after being
notified to do so by the Municipal Police Chief who shall represent the Board
of Health. Any person having garbage, rubbish, waste or refuse that is subject
to decay or fermentation within a short period of time shall be required to
place the same in a standard garbage can constructed of heavy plastic or metal,
with a tight cover.
   (C)   Garbage; care and disposal. Garbage shall be drained, wrapped and
placed in covered metal or heavy plastic containers or cans, said containers to
be placed at the curbside adjacent to the premises, or in such other place as
may be designated by the governing body. Garbage collection shall be made by a
municipally licensed garbage collector. Garbage pick-up shall commence no
earlier than 7:00 a.m. and end no later than 5:00 p.m. on days established by
the collector and the municipality. In no event shall any garbage collection
occur or take place on Sunday.
   (D)   Yard refuse; care and disposal. Yard refuse such as grass clippings
and small hedge clippings shall be piled in a neat pile beside the garbage
container. Larger hedge, plant and tree trimmings not exceeding two and one-
half inches in diameter shall be tied in bundles, not to exceed four feet in
length and two feet in girth, and not weighing more than 100 pounds, and shall
be placed beside the garbage container for pick up.
   (E)   Special refuse; care and disposal. Special refuse must not be placed
or piled in the streets or alleys of the city but must be kept on the premises
of the person responsible for the refuse until it can be properly hauled away.
Such refuse must be kept piled as neatly as possible and under no circumstances
be allowed to blow or scatter over adjacent areas. Special refuse must not be
permitted to accumulate over long periods of time but must be regularly
disposed of before it becomes a nuisance or health hazard. In the event that
special refuse is allowed to accumulate until the City Health Department has
deemed it to be a nuisance or health hazard, the city shall notify the owner of
such refuse by regular mail to remove it from the premises. Upon receipt of
such notice, the owner shall be given 72 hours to remove the refuse. If said
refuse is not removed at the end of this period, the City Health Department
shall cause the refuse to be removed and the owner thereof shall be billed by
the municipality for the cost of such services. Special refuse, as defined
herein, may be hauled and/or collected, and/or disposed of by municipally
licensed garbage collectors. If this is done, such special refuse shall be
carried in such a manner that there is no scattering or blowing of the refuse
while it is being hauled to the ultimate place of disposal.
   (F)   Dead animals. All dead animals shall be immediately removed by the
owner of such animals and, if the owner of such animals cannot be found within
two hours after discovering the same, then, and in that event, such animals
shall be removed and buried by and at the expense of the city. Dead animals
shall not be buried within the corporate limits of the city nor in or above the
course of ground water that is used for drinking purposes by the city or its
inhabitants.
   (G)   Manure. It shall be the duty of all property owners and tenants
occupying premises upon which manure of any kind accumulates to provide
receptacles with a tight, fly-proof cover therefor, and said receptacles shall
be emptied promptly and completely when full, and the contents thereof shall be
disposed of in a manner satisfactory to the Board of Health.
   (H)   Violations; penalty. Any person who shall violate, disobey, fail,
neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in any sum
not to exceed $100 for each such offense. Each day that any violation shall
continue to exist shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as
such.
(Ord. 372, passed 3-3-1987; Ord. 444, passed 5-11-1992) Penalty, see §
4-701
§ 4-302 MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL DEPARTMENT; OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   The municipality shall operate the municipal solid waste disposal system and
may contract for the day to day operation of the same with a qualified
individual or company in the collection and disposal of solid waste. The
governing body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of operation of the
municipal solid waste disposal system may each year levy a tax not exceeding
the maximum limit prescribed by state law on the actual value of all real
estate and personal property within the corporate limits that is subject to
taxation. The revenue from said tax shall be known as the Solid Waste System
Maintenance Fund. The governing body, or its designee, shall have the direct
management and control of the Solid Waste Disposal Department and shall have
the authority to adopt rules and regulations for the sanitary and efficient
management thereof.
(Ord. 442, passed 4-28-1992)
§ 4-303 MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL DEPARTMENT; PERSONS TO WHOM SERVICES
FURNISHED.
   (A)   The municipality, through the Municipal Solid Waste Disposal
Department, shall furnish solid waste pick-up and disposal services to all
persons within its corporate limits who are customers of the city electrical
distribution system, including both residential customers and commercial
customers.
   (B)   The municipality may also furnish solid waste pick-up and disposal
service to persons whose premises are situated outside the corporate limits of
the municipality as and when, according to law, the governing body may see fit
to do so.
(Ord. 442, passed 4-28-1992)
§ 4-304 MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL DEPARTMENT; MANDATORY PICK-UP.
   All customers of the municipal electrical distribution system, both
residential and commercial, shall become customers of the Municipal Solid Waste
Disposal Department and shall be assessed a monthly fee for municipal services
provided in this regard, as established by separate ordinance.
(Ord. 442, passed 4-28-1992)
§ 4-305 MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL DEPARTMENT; MANNER OF COLLECTION AND
DISPOSAL.
   The manner of solid waste collection and disposal by the municipality, or
its contractor, shall be accomplished in conformance with the provisions of §
4-301, the same pertaining to garbage collection and disposal.
(Ord. 442, passed 4-28-1992)
§ 4-306 SOLID WASTE; LIABILITY FOR CHARGES; PROOF OF PROPER DISPOSAL.
   (A)   The governing body has separately established charges to be paid to it
by each person whose premises are served by the municipal solid waste
collection system. For purposes of such charges, a person’s premises are deemed
to be served by the municipal solid waste collection system, and the owner and
occupant of the premises shall be deemed served and therefore liable for the
charges unless the owner or occupant proves to the governing body that:
      (1)   The premises are unoccupied; or
      (2)   The solid waste generated at the premises during the applicable
billing period was lawfully collected and hauled to a permitted facility or was
otherwise disposed of in conformance with all applicable laws, regulations and
ordinances.
   (B)   Proof of proper disposal during the applicable billing period may be
provided by means of any of the following:
      (1)   A billing receipt or other statement from a duly permitted solid
waste hauling service for collection of solid waste at the premises during the
applicable billing period;
      (2)   A billing receipt or register tab from a duly permitted transfer
station or disposal facility or landfill for solid waste received during the
applicable billing period; or
      (3)   Such other documentation of proper disposal as may be acceptable to
the governing body.
(Ord. 616, passed 4-13-1999)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 13-2020
§ 4-307 MUNICIPAL TREE AND YARD WASTE DISPOSAL SITE.
   (A)   Establishment of site. The city shall designate a site for the
disposal of trees and yard waste for use by residents of the municipality.
   (B)   Waste disposal allowed. The only waste that may be disposed of at said
site, without exception, consists of trees, grass clippings, hedge clippings,
branches, grass, leaves and other yard waste.
   (C)   Prohibited waste disposal. All other waste is prohibited.
Specifically, garbage, rubbish, waste and special refuse as defined in § 4-301;
and dead animals, manure or other waste of any nature except as set forth in
subsection (B) above, shall not be disposed of at the municipal tree and yard
waste disposal site.
   (D)   Violation; penalty. Any person who shall violate, disobey, fail,
neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in any sum
not to exceed $500 for each such offense.
(Ord. 771, passed 11-6-2007) Penalty, see §
4-701
ARTICLE 4: NUISANCES
Section
   
4-401   Nuisances; generally defined
   
4-402   Nuisances; specifically defined
   
4-403   Nuisances: jurisdiction
   
4-404   Nuisances; abatement procedure
   
4-405   Nuisances; failure to correct
   
4-406   Nuisances; dead or diseased trees
§ 4-401 NUISANCES; GENERALLY DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NUISANCE. Consists in doing any unlawful act or omitting to perform a duty,
or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act,
omission, condition or thing either:
      (1)   Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of
others;
      (2)    Offends decency;
      (3)   Is offensive to the senses;
      (4)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, tends to obstruct or renders
dangerous for passage any stream, public park, parkway, square, street or
highway in the municipality;
      (5)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of
property; or
      (6)   Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.
(Ord. 265, passed 5-15-1979; Ord. 794, passed 12-1-2009) Penalty, see §
4-701
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1720
§ 4-402 NUISANCES; SPECIFICALLY DEFINED.
   The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting of any of
the following specific acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are
hereby declared to be nuisances:
   (A)   Any odorous, putrid, unsound or unwholesome grain, meat, hides, skins,
feathers, vegetable matter or the whole or any part of any dead animal, fish or
fowl;
   (B)   Privies, vaults, cesspools, dumps, pits or like places which are not
securely protected from flies or rats, or which are foul or malodorous;
   (C)   Filthy, littered or trash-covered cellars, house yards, barnyards,
stable yards, factory yards, mill yards, vacant areas in rear of stores,
granaries, vacant lots, houses, buildings or premises;
   (D)   Animal manure in any quantity which is not securely protected from
flies and the elements, or which is kept or handled in violation of any
ordinance of the municipality;
   (E)   Liquid household waste, human excreta, garbage, butcher’s trimmings
and offal, parts of fish or any waste vegetable or animal matter in any
quantity; provided, that nothing herein contained shall prevent the temporary
retention of waste in receptacles in a manner provided by the Mayor of the
municipality, nor the dumping of nonputrifying waste in a place and manner
approved by the Mayor;
   (F)   Tin cans, bottles, glass, cans, ashes, small pieces of scrap iron,
wire metal articles, bric-a-brac, broken stone or cement, broken crockery,
broken glass, broken plaster and all trash or abandoned material, unless the
same be kept in covered bins or galvanized iron receptacles;
   (G)   Trash, litter, rags, accumulations of barrels, boxes, crates, packing
crates, mattresses, bedding, excelsior, packing hay, straw or other packing
material, lumber not neatly piled, scrap iron, tin or other metal not neatly
piled, old automobiles or parts thereof, or any other waste materials when any
of said articles or materials create a condition in which flies or rats may
breed or multiply, or which may be a fire danger or which are so unsightly as
to depreciate property values in the vicinity thereof;
   (H)   Any unsightly building, billboard or other structure, or any old,
abandoned or partially destroyed building or structure or any building or
structure commenced and left unfinished, which said buildings, billboards or
other structures are either a fire hazard, a menace to the public health or
safety, or are so unsightly as to depreciate the value of property in the
vicinity thereof;
   (I)   All places used or maintained as junkyards, or dumping grounds, or for
the wrecking and dissembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of
any kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn-out, wrecked or abandoned
automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind, or of any of the parts
thereof, or for the storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment used by
contractors or builders or by other persons, which said places are kept or
maintained so as to essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of
life or property by others, or which are so unsightly as to tend to depreciate
property values in the vicinity thereof;
   (J)   Stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground;
   (K)   Stockyards, granaries, mills, pig pens, cattle pens, chicken pens or
any other place, building or enclosure, in which animals or fowls of any kind
are confined or on which are stored tankage or any other animal or vegetable
matter, or on which any animal or vegetable matter, including grain, is being
processed, when said premises in which said animals are confined, or said
premises on which said vegetable or animal matter is located, are maintained
and kept in such a manner that foul and noxious odors are permitted to emanate
therefrom, to the annoyance of inhabitants of the municipality, or are
maintained and kept in such a manner as to be injurious to the public health;
   (L)   Any dead or diseased trees within the right-of-way of streets or upon
private property within the corporate limits of the municipality;
   (M)   Weeds, grasses or worthless vegetation growing upon any lot within the
municipality, specifically including any weed (of any height) or grass growth
of more than 12 inches in height; weeds shall include, but not be limited to,
bindweed, puncture vine, leafy spurge, Canada thistle, perennial pepper grass,
Russian knapweed, Johnson grass, nodding or musk thistle, quack grass,
perennial sow thistle, horse nettle, bowl thistle, buckthorn, hemp plant and
ragweed;
   (N)   The accumulation of litter on property within the municipality; for
the purpose of this subsection (N), the term LITTER shall include, but not be
limited to:
      (1)   Trash, rubbish, refuse, garbage, paper, rags and ashes;
      (2)   Wood, plaster, cement, brick or stone building rubble;
      (3)   Grass, leaves and worthless vegetation;
      (4)   Offal and dead animals;
      (5)   Any machine, vehicle or parts of a machine or vehicle which have
lost their identity, character, utility or service ability as such through
deterioration, dismantling or the ravages of time, are inoperative or unable to
perform their intended functions, or are cast off, discarded or thrown away or
left as waste, wreckage or junk; or
      (6)   Any motor vehicle not housed in a storage or other building and not
being currently licensed.
   (O)   Any dangerous building maintained upon property within the
municipality. For the purpose of this subsection (O), DANGEROUS BUILDING shall
mean:
      (1)   Any building, shed, fence or other human-made structure which is
dangerous to the public health because of its condition, and which may cause or
aid in the spread of disease or injury to the health of its occupants or
neighboring structures;
      (2)   Any building, shed, fence or other human-made structure which,
because of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause,
is especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire hazard;
      (3)   Any building, shed, fence or other human-made structure which, by
reason of faulty construction or any other cause, is liable to cause injury or
damage by collapsing or by a collapse or fall of any part of such structure; or
      (4)   Any building, shed, fence or other human-made structure which,
because of its condition or because of lack of doors or windows, readily admits
birds and animals or is an attraction for the children or other persons to
enter.
   (P)   The pollution of air within the municipality. Air shall be considered
to be polluted when the discharge into the open air of dust, fumes, gases,
mist, odors, smoke or any combination thereof is of such character and in a
quantity which to any group of persons interferes with their health, repose or
safety or causes severe annoyance or discomfort or is offensive and
objectionable to normal persons or causes injury to real and personal property
of any kind; the standards for air pollution established or adopted by the
state, or the United States Government, or any agency thereof, shall be
presumptive evidence as to when the air is deemed to be polluted under this
section;
   (Q)   To obstruct or impede without legal authority any waterway within the
municipality, or to corrupt and render unwholesome or impure any water course,
stream or other water supply; the standards for water quality established or
adopted by the state shall be presumptive evidence as to when the water is
deemed to be polluted under this provision; being in a position to cause
pollution to the public water supply, specifically including the following acts
or events within the specified footage of any municipal public water supply
shall likewise constitute a nuisance.
Category Distance
         Feet Meters
Category                                         Distance
                                                 Feet  Meters
Absorption of disposal field for waste:          500   150
   Receiving 2,000 or more gallons per day (gp1,000 300
   Receiving less than 2,000 (gpd)            500   150
Cesspool                                         500   150
Chemical or petroleum product storage            1,000 300
Closed-loop food grade heat pump                 500   150
Corral                                           500   150
Domestic water well                              1,000 300
Dump                                             1,000 300
Feedlot or feedlot runoff                        1,000 300
Nonpotable water well                            1,000 300
Pit toilet                                       500   150
Sanitary landfill                                1,000 300
Sanitary sewer connection                        100   30
Sanitary sewer line                              50    15
Sanitary sewer line (permanently watertight)     10    3
Sanitary sewer manhole                           100   30
Septic tank                                      500   150
Sewage lagoon                                    1,000 300
Sewage treatment plant                           500   150
Sewage wet well                                  500   150
Storm sewer                                      50    15
 
   (R)   Any irrigation or industrial well or well of any other public water
supply or drilled within 1,000 feet or any municipal well of the city, except
as allowed under special permit issued by the Director of the State Department
of Water Resources; and
   (S)   All other things specifically designated as nuisances elsewhere in
this municipal code.
(Ord. 794, passed 12-1-2009)
§ 4-403 NUISANCES: JURISDICTION.
   The Mayor, City Council and city law enforcement officers shall have the
authority to enforce this code against all nuisances. The jurisdiction of the
Mayor, City Council and city law enforcement, as well as the court, shall
extend to, and the territorial application of this article shall include, all
territory adjacent to the limits of the municipality within two miles thereof
and all territory within the corporate limits.
(Ord. 794, passed 12-1-2009)
§ 4-404 NUISANCES; ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The owner or occupant of any real estate within the corporate limits
or extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of the city shall keep such real estate
free of nuisances. Except to the extent that conflicting procedures are
otherwise provided, the procedures in this section shall apply to abatement of
nuisances.
   (B)   Upon determination by the Board of Health or designated official that
the owner or occupant of any such real estate has failed to keep the real
estate free of nuisances, notice to abate and remove such nuisance and notice
of the right to a hearing before the City Council and the manner in which it
may be requested shall be given to each owner or owner’s duly authorized agent
and to the occupant, if any, by personal service or by certified mail. If
notice by personal service or certified mail is unsuccessful, notice shall be
given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or by
conspicuously posting the notice on the real estate upon which the nuisance is
to be abated and removed. The notice shall describe the condition as found by
the Board of Health or designated official and state that the condition has
been declared a nuisance and must be remedied at once.
   (C)   If, within five days after receipt of such notice or publication or
posting, whichever is applicable, the owner or occupant of the real estate does
not request a hearing with the city or fails to comply with the order to abate
and remove the nuisance, the city may have such work done.
   (D)   If, within five days after receipt of such notice or publication or
posting, whichever is applicable, the owner or occupant requests in writing a
hearing with the City Council, the Council shall fix a time and place at which
a hearing will be held. Notice of the hearing shall be given by personal
service or certified mail and require the owner or occupant to appear before
the Council to show cause why such condition should not be found to be a
nuisance and remedied. The notice shall be given not less than seven nor more
than 14 days before the time of the hearing. Upon the date fixed for the
hearing and pursuant to the notice, the Council shall hear all objections made
by the owner or occupant and shall hear evidence submitted by the Board of
Health or designated official. If, after consideration of all the evidence, the
City Council finds that the condition is a nuisance, it shall by resolution
order and direct the owner or occupant to remedy the nuisance at once. If the
owner or occupant refuses or neglects to promptly comply with the order to
abate and remove the nuisance, the Council may have such work done.
   (E)   The costs and expenses of any such work shall be paid by the owner. If
unpaid for two months after such work is done, the city may either:
      (1)   Levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work upon the real
estate so benefitted as a special assessment in the same manner as other
special assessments for improvements are levied and assessed; or
      (2)   Recover in a civil action the costs and expenses of the work upon
the real estate and the adjoining streets and alleys.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate and abate nuisances, see Neb. RS 18-1720
   Nuisances prohibited, see Neb. RS 28-1321
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-563
   Zoning jurisdiction, Neb. RS 17-1001
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 881, passed
3-1-2016, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 4-405 NUISANCES; FAILURE TO CORRECT.
   In the event that the owner or occupant of said premises, as described in
the preceding section, fails to correct and eliminate said nuisance, he or she
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The continued violation on each successive
day after the expiration of the notice provided for in the previous section
shall be a separate offense.
(Ord. 794, passed 12-1-2009) Penalty, see §
4-701
§ 4-406 NUISANCES; DEAD OR DISEASED TREES.
   (A)   (1)   It is hereby declared a nuisance for a property owner to permit,
allow or maintain any dead or diseased trees within the right-of-way of streets
within the corporate limits of the city or within its extraterritorial zoning
jurisdiction.
      (2)   Notice to abate and remove such nuisance and notice of the right to
a hearing and the manner in which it may be requested shall be given to each
owner or owner’s duly authorized agent and to the occupant, if any. The city
shall establish the method of notice by ordinance. If notice is given by first-
class mail, such mail shall be conspicuously marked as to its importance.
Within five days after receipt of such notice, the owner or occupant of the lot
or piece of ground may request a hearing with the city to appeal the decision
to abate or remove the nuisance by filing a written appeal with the office of
the City Clerk. A hearing on the appeal shall be held within 14 days after the
filing of the appeal and shall be conducted by an elected or appointed officer
as designated in the ordinance. The hearing officer shall render a decision on
the appeal within five business days after the conclusion of the hearing. If
the appeal fails, the city may have the work done to abate and remove the dead
or diseased trees. If the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground does
not request a hearing with the city within five days after receipt of such
notice or fails to comply with the order to abate and remove the nuisance, the
city may have such work done. The city may levy and assess all or any portion
of the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground so
benefitted as a special assessment.
(Neb. RS 17-555)
   (B)   It is hereby declared a nuisance for a property owner to permit, allow
or maintain any dead or diseased trees on private property within the corporate
limits of the city or within its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction. The
provisions in subsection (A)(2) above shall apply to such nuisances. For the
purpose of carrying out the provisions of this section, the city police shall
have the authority to enter upon private property to inspect the trees thereon.
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 880, passed
3-1-2016, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
ARTICLE 5: GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION
Section
   
4-501   Garbage and refuse collection; authority
   
4-502   Garbage and refuse collection; notice; removal
   
4-503   Garbage and refuse collection; nuisance
   
4-504   Garbage and refuse collection; lien
   
4-505   Garbage and refuse collection; rates
§ 4-501 GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION; AUTHORITY.
   The governing body for the city may provide for the collection and removal
of garbage or refuse found upon any lot or land within its corporate roads or
alleys abutting such lot or land which constitutes a public nuisance. The city
may require the owner, duly authorized agent or tenant of such lot or land to
remove the garbage or refuse from such lot or land and streets, roads or
alleys.
(Ord. 388, passed 2-7-1989)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-926
§ 4-502 GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION; NOTICE; REMOVAL.
   (A)   Notice that removal of garbage or refuse is necessary shall be given
to each owner or owner’s duly authorized agent and to the tenant if any. Such
notice shall be provided by personal service or by certified mail.
   (B)   After providing such notice, the city through its proper offices
shall, in addition to other proper remedies, remove the garbage or refuse or
cause it to be removed from such lot or land and streets, roads or alleys.
(Ord. 388, passed 2-7-1989)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-926
§ 4-503 GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION; NUISANCE.
   If the Mayor declares that the accumulation of such garbage or refuse upon
any lot or land constitutes an immediate nuisance and hazard to public health
and safety, the city shall remove the garbage or refuse or cause it to be
removed from such lot or land within 48 hours after notice by personal service
or following receipt of a certified letter in accordance with §
4-502 if such garbage or refuse has not been removed.
(Ord. 388, passed 2-7-1989)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-926
§ 4-504 GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION; LIEN.
   Whenever a city removes any garbage or refuse or causes it to be removed
from any lot or land pursuant to this article, it shall, after a hearing
conducted by the governing board, assess the cost of the removal against such
lot or land.
(Ord. 388, passed 2-7-1989)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-926
§ 4-505 GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION; RATES.
   A schedule of rates for monthly garbage services for all customers of the
Municipal Utilities Department is hereby established as follows.
   (A)   Weekly residential pickup. $19.50 per customer with a 90-gallon
container.
   (B)   Single/senior rate.
      (1)   A single/senior rate of $18.75 with a 45-gallon container per
customer will be offered to customers with less usage than that contemplated by
the 90-gallon container provided. Regulations for qualifications based upon the
age of the customer and past usage will be established by the city and the
contractor.
      (2)   Any customer wishing to be considered for this rate shall make
application therefor to the City Clerk and shall be required to provide their
own container, with maximum storage capacity of 45 gallons.
   (C)   Commercial pickup.
Size of Container Provided By Contractor Number of Pickups Per Week
                                         1 2 3
Size of Container Provided By Contractor Number of Pickups Per Week
                                         1       2       3
1-1/2 yards                              $39.14  $76.44  $102.78
2 yards                                  $62.07  $98.76  $132.56
3 yards                                  $88.76  $142.83 $196.55
4 yards                                  $113.73 $184.91 $261.56
6 yards                                  $160.62 $269.77 $385.77
8 yards                                  $209.54 $352.24 $385.23
 
(Ord. 388, passed 2-7-1989; Ord. 619, passed 11-1-2005; Ord. 781, passed 8-12-
2008; Ord. 796, passed 5-4-2010; Ord. 872, passed 11-3-2015; Ord. passed 5-17-
2022)
ARTICLE 6: WELL-HEAD PROTECTION
Section
   
4-601   Purpose
   
4-602   Definitions
   
4-603   Placement, maintenance and construction; prohibitions
   
4-604   Applications; approval required
   
4-605   Existing wells
   
4-606   Violation; penalty
   
4-607   Designation of well-head protection area
§ 4-601 PURPOSE.
   The intent of this article is to establish control by the city over the
location of future potential sources of contamination within the proximity of
the city’s drinking water system, so as to prevent or minimize any hazard to
the safety of the city’s drinking water.
(Ord. 464, passed 5-3-1994)
§ 4-602 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   WATER WELL. Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven,
dug, jetted or otherwise constructed for the purpose of exploring for
groundwater, monitoring groundwater, utilizing the geothermal properties of the
ground or extracting water from or injecting water into the underground water
reservoir. WATER WELLS shall not include any excavation made for obtaining or
prospecting for oil, natural gas, minerals or products mined or quarried or
inserting media to repressure oil or natural gas-bearing formations.
(Ord. 464, passed 5-3-1994)
§ 4-603 PLACEMENT, MAINTENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION; PROHIBITIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to place, maintain, construct or replace any of the
following structures or conduct any of the following activities within the
distance specified below from an existing municipal water well.
Category Distance
         Feet Meters
Category                                         Distance
                                                 Feet  Meters
Absorption of disposal field for waste           500   150
   Receiving 2,000 or more gallons per day (gp1,000 300
   Receiving less than 2,000 (gpd)            500   150
Cesspool                                         500   150
Chemical or petroleum product storage            1,000 300
Closed-loop food grade heat pump                 500   150
Corral                                           500   150
Domestic water well                              1,000 300
Dump                                             1,000 300
Feedlot or feedlot runoff                        1,000 300
Nonpotable water well                            1,000 300
Pit toilet                                       500   150
Sanitary landfill                                1,000 300
Sanitary sewer connection                        100   30
Sanitary sewer line                              50    15
Sanitary sewer line (permanently watertight)     10    3
Sanitary sewer manhole                           100   30
Septic tank                                      500   150
Sewage lagoon                                    1,000 300
Sewage treatment plant                           500   150
Sewage wet well                                  500   150
Storm sewer                                      50    15
 
(Ord. 464, passed 5-3-1994) Penalty, see § 4-606
§ 4-604 APPLICATIONS; APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   The governing body may consider allowing placement of water
wells, as defined by state regulations governing public water supply systems
(Title 179, NAC 2) and state regulations governing water well construction,
pump installation and water well abandonment standards (Title 178, NAC 12), as
amended from time to time, closer to a municipal water well than the
limitations set forth in §
4-603.
      (2)   Closer placement shall be allowed only under the following
conditions: An application must first be filed with the city showing the type
of water well to be installed, the materials used, the operation of the
proposed unit and the person responsible for the actual installation of the
water well. Preference, for approval, will be given to installations that do
not disturb any bearing strata.
   (B)   (1)   The city shall refer the application to its engineer for
evaluation and report. The estimated cost of the engineer’s fees must be paid
at the time of filing the application. Any additional costs, which are
reasonably incurred by the engineer in making his or her examination and report
shall be paid by the applicant, in addition to any previously paid estimated
costs.
      (2)   The governing body shall consider the engineer’s report and any
additional information submitted by the applicant. In reaching its decision on
whether to allow the placement of a water well, as above defined, the governing
body must act to prevent all sources of possible or likely water contamination.
   (C)   If the governing body approves the installation, it shall submit the
application, together with the engineer’s report to the State Department of
Health for final approval or denial.
   (D)   No installation shall be made without the approval of both the
governing body and the State Department of Health.
§ 4-605 EXISTING WELLS.
   Water wells in existence and use, as of the effective date of this article,
shall continue to be permitted unless such a continued existence or use
presents a hazard to the quality or quantity of the drinking water for public
use. The owner of any water well shall have the burden of establishing the
existence and use of such well at the time of effective date of this article.
§ 4-606 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found violating any provision of this article shall be
subject to a fine, not to exceed $100. The continuation of a violation of this
article shall be deemed an additional offense for every 24 hours of such
continued violation.
   (B)   In addition, the city may obtain injunctive relief and sue for damage
and remediation and pursue any other remedy available to it under the laws of
the state, the ordinances of the city or other authority having jurisdiction
over such matters.
§ 4-607 DESIGNATION OF WELL-HEAD PROTECTION AREA.
   The City Council designates a Well-Head Protection Area for the purpose of
protecting the public water supply system. The boundaries of the Well-Head
Protection Area are referenced by the map attached to Ord. 610, passed February
9, 1999. This delineation is based upon a map prepared by the State Rural Water
Association (Robert Lukash) and presented to the city on February 9, 1999.
(Ord. 610, passed 2-9-1999)
ARTICLE 7: PENAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
4-701   Violations; penalty
   
4-702   Abatement of nuisance
§ 4-701 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, or any person’s agent or servant, who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided herein,
shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined in any sum not exceeding $500. A new violation shall be deemed to have
been committed every 24 hours of failure to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the
municipality may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin, abate and remove the
same in the manner provided by law.
      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists,
the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.
(Ord. 642, passed 5-10-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-505, 18-1720 and 18-1722
§ 4-702 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (Repealed by Ord. 642, passed 5-10-2000)
CHAPTER 5: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
   Article
      
1.   DEFINITIONS
      
2.   MUNICIPAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
3.   OPERATOR AND VEHICLE QUALIFICATIONS
      
4.   PARKING
      
5.   BICYCLES
      
6.   MINIBIKES, MOTORCYCLES AND SNOWMOBILES
      
7.   PROHIBITIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
      
8.   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND UTILITY VEHICLES
      
9.   PENAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
5-101   Definitions
§ 5-101 DEFINITIONS.
   The words and phrases used in this chapter pertaining to motor vehicles and
traffic regulations shall be construed as defined in Neb. RS Chapter 60,
article 6, as now existing or hereafter amended. If not defined in the
designated statutes, the word or phrase shall have its common meaning.
(Ord. 470, passed 5-3-1994)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-606 through 60-676
ARTICLE 2: MUNICIPAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
5-201   Truck routes
   
5-202   Traffic lanes; designation
   
5-203   Turning; U-turns
   
5-204   Turning; hand signals
   
5-205   Turning; generally
   
5-206   Turning; cautious
   
5-207   Right-of-way
   
5-208   Position of vehicle on highway; generally
   
5-209   Crosswalks
   
5-210   Signs, signals
   
5-211   Stop signs
   
5-212   Signs, traffic control devices, traffic surveillance devices; defacing
or interfering with
   
5-213   School crossing zones; designation
   
5-214   School crossing zones; overtaking and passing
§ 5-201 TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   The City Council may by ordinance or resolution prohibit the operation
of vehicles upon any highway or impose restrictions as to the weight of
vehicles, for a total period not to exceed 180 days in any one calendar year,
when operated upon any highway under the jurisdiction of and for the
maintenance of which the City Council is responsible whenever any such highway
by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic condition will be
seriously damaged or destroyed unless the use of vehicles thereon is prohibited
or the permissible weight thereof reduced. The City Council shall erect or
cause to be erected and maintained signs designating the provisions of the
ordinance or resolution at each end of that portion of any highway affected
thereby, and the ordinance or resolution shall not be effective until such
signs are erected and maintained.
   (B)   The City Council may also by ordinance or resolution prohibit the
operation of trucks or other commercial vehicles or impose limitations as to
the weight thereof on designated highways, which prohibitions and limitations
shall be designated by appropriate signs placed on such highways.
(Neb. RS 60-681)
§ 5-202 TRAFFIC LANES; DESIGNATION.
   The governing body may by resolution mark lanes for traffic on street
pavements at such places as it may deem advisable.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-680
§ 5-203 TURNING; U-TURNS.
   No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction,
except at a street intersection. No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in
the opposite direction at any intersection where an automatic signal is in
operation or where a sign is posted indicating that U-turns are prohibited.
Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-680 and 60-6,160
§ 5-204 TURNING; HAND SIGNALS.
   (A)   A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given
continuously during not less than the last 50 feet traveled by the vehicle
before turning. The signals herein required shall be given either by means of
the hand and arm, or by a signal device of a type approved by the Department of
Roads.
   (B)   The hand and arm signals herein required shall be given from the left
side of the vehicle in the following manner:
      (1)   Stop or decreased speed, hand and arm extended downward;
      (2)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally; and
      (3)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,161 through 60-6,163
§ 5-205 TURNING; GENERALLY.
   (A)   Vehicles turning to the right into an intersecting street shall
approach such intersection in the lane of traffic nearest to the right-hand
side of the highway and must turn the corner as near the right-hand curb as
possible to keep between the curb to the right and the center of the
intersection of the two streets. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to
the left shall approach such centerline of the highway and, in turning, shall
pass as near as possible to the center of the intersection, passing as closely
as practicable to the right thereof before turning such vehicle to the left.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CENTER OF THE INTERSECTION. The meeting point of the medial lines of the
highways intersecting one another.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,159
§ 5-206 TURNING; CAUTIOUS.
   The operator of a vehicle shall, before stopping, turning or changing the
course of such vehicle, see that there is sufficient space to make such
movement in safety. If any pedestrian might be affected by such movement, the
operator shall give a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn, and,
whenever the operation of any other vehicle may be affected by such movement,
he or she shall give some unmistakable signal to the driver of all other
vehicles of his or her intention to make such movement.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-680, 60-6,109 and 60-6,161
§ 5-207 RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   When two vehicles approach, or enter an intersection at approximately
the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-
way to the vehicle on the right when the paths of such vehicles intersect and
there is danger of a collision, unless otherwise directed by a municipal police
officer stationed at the intersection.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection, or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within
the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle on any street shall yield the right-of-way to
a pedestrian crossing such street within any clearly marked crosswalk, or at
any regular pedestrian crossing at the end of a block where the movement of
traffic is being regulated by traffic officers or traffic direction devices.
Every pedestrian crossing a street at any point other than a pedestrian
crossing, crosswalk or intersection shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles
upon the street.
   (D)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from or entering an alley, building,
private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
approaching on any sidewalk.
   (E)   The driver of a vehicle entering a municipal street from a private
road or drive shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such
streets.
   (F)   The driver of a vehicle upon a street shall yield the right-of-way to
authorized emergency vehicles when the latter are operated upon official
business and the drivers thereof make proper use of visual or audible signals.
(Ord. 471, passed 5-3-1994)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,146 through 60-6,154
§ 5-208 POSITION OF VEHICLE ON HIGHWAY; GENERALLY.
   (A)   Upon all highways of sufficient width, one-way streets excepted, the
driver of a vehicle shall drive the same on the right half of the roadway.
   (B)   In passing or meeting other vehicles, drivers shall give each other at
least one-half of the main traveled portion of the roadway.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,131
§ 5-209 CROSSWALKS.
   The governing body may by resolution establish and maintain, by appropriate
devices, markers or lines upon the street, crosswalks, at intersections where
there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street and at such other
places as it may deem necessary.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-680
§ 5-210 SIGNS, SIGNALS.
   (A)   The governing body may by resolution provide for the placing of stop
signs or other signs, signals, standards or mechanical devices in any street or
alley for the purpose of regulating, or prohibiting traffic thereon.
   (B)   Such resolution shall describe the portion of the street or alley
wherein traffic is to be regulated or prohibited; the regulation or
prohibition; the location where such sign, signal, standard or mechanical
device shall be placed; and the hours when such regulation or prohibition shall
be effective.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to
comply with such regulation or prohibition.
Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-680 and 60-6,119 through 60-6,121
§ 5-211 STOP SIGNS.
   Every person operating any vehicle shall, upon approaching any stop sign
erected in accordance with the resolution prescribed heretofore, cause such
vehicle to come to a complete stop before entering or crossing any street,
highway or railroad crossing.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-680 and 60-6,119 through 60-6,121
§ 5-212 SIGNS, TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES, TRAFFIC SURVEILLANCE DEVICES; DEFACING
OR INTERFERING WITH.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously deface,
injure, remove, obstruct, knock down or interfere with any official traffic
sign or signal, traffic control device or traffic control surveillance device.
(Ord. 405, passed 3-6-1990) Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,129 and 60-6,130
§ 5-213 SCHOOL CROSSING ZONES; DESIGNATION.
   (A)   Neb. RS 60-682.01 provides fines for operating a motor vehicle in
violation of authorized speed limits and states that the fines are doubled if
the violation occurs within a school crossing zone.
   (B)   Neb. RS 60-6,134.01 makes it unlawful for a person operating a motor
vehicle to overtake and pass another vehicle in a school crossing zone in which
the roadway has only one lane of traffic in each direction and provides fines
for violation of that prohibition.
   (C)   (1)   The governing body may by resolution designate to the public any
area of a roadway, other than a freeway, as a school crossing zone through the
use of a sign or traffic control device as specified by the governing body in
conformity with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
      (2)   Any school crossing zone so designated starts at the location of
the first sign or traffic control device identifying the school crossing zone
and continues until a sign or traffic control device indicates that the school
crossing zone has ended.
(Ord. 595, passed 8-11-1998) Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-658.01
§ 5-214 SCHOOL CROSSING ZONES; OVERTAKING AND PASSING.
   A person operating a motor vehicle may not overtake and pass another vehicle
in any school crossing zone designated by the governing body in which the
roadway has only one lane of traffic in each direction.
(Ord. 596, passed 8-11-1998)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,134.01
ARTICLE 3: OPERATOR AND VEHICLE QUALIFICATIONS
Section
   
5-301   Registration; operator and vehicle license
   
5-302   Registration; trailers
   
5-303   License plates
   
5-304   Vehicles; equipment and maintenance
   
5-305   Vehicles; unobstructed view
   
5-306   Vehicle; muffler
§ 5-301 REGISTRATION; OPERATOR AND VEHICLE LICENSE.
   (A)   No person shall operate or park a motor vehicle upon any street, alley
or public highway within the municipality without having first registered the
same in accordance with Neb. RS Chapter 60, article 3, and Neb. RS 60-321,
except as provided in this subsection (A). A person may operate a motor vehicle
without registration for a period not to exceed 30 days from the date of
purchase. Upon registration, such vehicle shall have the required number plates
displayed upon said vehicle in the manner and places provided for by Neb. RS
60-323. If a citation is issued to an owner or operator of a vehicle for a
violation of this subsection (A) and the owner properly registers and licenses
the vehicle not in compliance and pays all taxes and fees due and the owner or
operator provides proof of such registration to the prosecuting attorney within
ten days after the issuance of the citation, no prosecution for the offense
cited shall occur.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon any street, alley or
public highway without having obtained a motor vehicle operator’s license in
accordance with Neb. RS Chapter 60, article 4. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate a motor vehicle upon any street, alley or public highway
during the period that his or her operator’s license has been revoked or
canceled.
(Ord. 435, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 472, passed 5-3-1994; Ord. 520, passed 12-7-
1995) Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-302, 60-321, 60-323, 60-362, 60-4,108 et
seq. and 60-4,186
§ 5-302 REGISTRATION; TRAILERS.
   No trailer, semi-trailer or cabin trailer shall be operated or parked on any
street, alley or public highway within the municipality without having first
registered the same in accordance with Neb. RS Chapter 60, article 3, and Neb.
RS 60-321, except as provided in this section. A person may pull such trailer,
semi-trailer or cabin trailer without registration for a period not to exceed
30 days from the date of purchase. Upon registration, such trailer, semi-
trailer or cabin trailer shall have the required number plate displayed upon
said trailer as provided for by Neb. RS 60-311. If a citation is issued to an
owner or operator of a vehicle for a violation of this section and the owner
properly registers and licenses the vehicle not in compliance and pays all
taxes and fees due and the owner or operator provides proof of such
registration to the prosecuting attorney within ten days after the issuance of
the citation, no prosecution for the offense cited shall occur.
(Ord. 473, passed 5-3-1994; Ord. 521, passed 12-7-1995) Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-302, 60-321, 60-362 and 60-389
§ 5-303 LICENSE PLATES.
   The license plates, required on every motor vehicle by laws of the state, or
by laws of any other state while such vehicle is operated within the corporate
limits, shall be kept clear and free from grease, dust or other blurring matter
so they will be plainly visible at all times and shall be attached in such
manner as to be clearly readable at a distance of 100 feet, and under no
circumstances shall they be obstructed by any portion of the vehicle.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-324 and 60-325
§ 5-304 VEHICLES; EQUIPMENT AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle, while in use on the streets, alleys or highways
of the municipality shall be equipped with efficient brakes adequate to control
the movement of, to stop and to hold such vehicle, including two separate means
of applying the brakes, and shall be further equipped with a good and
sufficient horn in good working order or other efficient signal devices. From
sunset to sunrise, and any other time when there is not sufficient light to
render clearly discernible persons or vehicles upon the street, alley or
highway at a distance of 500 feet, every motor vehicle shall be equipped with
lighted headlights, and every motor vehicle and trailer shall be equipped with
one or more taillights at the rear of the motor vehicle or trailer, exhibiting
a red light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the rear of such
vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall operate any vehicle which is equipped with an electric
light or lights that confuse travelers or pedestrians on streets or crosswalks
within the municipality. Every motor vehicle having a width of 80 inches or
more shall display clearance lights as required by state law. All vehicle
brakes shall be maintained in good working order; provided, that motorcycles
need only be equipped with one brake.
   (C)   All horns on motor vehicles shall be capable of emitting sound audible
under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 200 feet; provided,
that no vehicle except as herein provided, shall be equipped with, nor shall
any person use upon a vehicle, any siren or horn otherwise than as reasonable
warning; nor shall any person use any horn or warning device upon a vehicle to
make any unnecessary, loud or harsh sound; and provided further, that every
Police and Fire Department vehicle, ambulance or other authorized emergency
vehicle used for emergency calls shall be equipped with a bell, siren or
whistle of the type approved by the governing body.
(Ord. 474, passed 5-3-1994; Ord. 522, passed 12-7-1995)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,219, 60-6,220, 60-6,224, 60-6,235, 60-
6,244 and 60-6,285
§ 5-305 VEHICLES; UNOBSTRUCTED VIEW.
   No person shall drive on a street any motor vehicle constructed or loaded in
such a way as to prevent the driver from obtaining a view of the street to the
rear unless such vehicle is equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to
the driver a view of the street for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear
of such vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive upon a street,
any vehicle with a sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front
windshield, side windows or rear windows of such motor vehicle other than a
certificate or paper required to be so displayed by law. Every windshield on a
motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for removing rain, snow or other
moisture from the windshield, which device shall be so constructed as to be
operated by the driver within the vehicle.
Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,254 through 60-6,256
§ 5-306 VEHICLE; MUFFLER.
   Every motor vehicle operated within this municipality shall be provided with
a muffler in good working order to prevent excessive or unusual noise or smoke.
It shall be unlawful to use a “muffler cut-out” on any motor vehicle upon any
streets; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to
authorized emergency vehicles.
Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,286
ARTICLE 4: PARKING
Section
   
5-401   Generally
   
5-402   Designation
   
5-403   Areas
   
5-404   Obstructing alley
   
5-405   Congested area unloading
   
5-406   Curbs, painted
   
5-407   Maximum time limit
   
5-408   Emergency vehicles
   5-409   Bureau of Violations
   
5-409.01   Length of vehicle restrictions
   
5-410   Handicapped or disabled persons; designation of on-street parking
spaces and access aisles; display of permits
   
5-410.01   Handicapped or disabled persons; designation of off-street parking
stalls, spaces and access aisles
   
5-410.02   Handicapped or disabled persons; definitions
   
5-410.03   Handicapped or disabled persons; personal permit issuance; renewal
   
5-410.04   Handicapped or disabled persons; motor vehicle permit; issuance;
renewal
   
5-410.05   Handicapped or disabled persons; permits; prohibited issuance;
duplicate permits
   
5-410.06   Handicapped or disabled persons; permits; period valid; renewal of
temporary permits
   
5-410.07   Handicapped or disabled persons; permits nontransferable;
violations; suspension
   
5-410.08   Handicapped or disabled persons; removal of unauthorized vehicle;
penalty
   
5-410.09   Handicapped or disabled persons; citation, issuance; complaint;
trial; dismissal
   
5-411   Removal of illegally parked vehicles
   
5-412   Abandoned vehicles; constitute nuisance
   
5-413   Abandoned vehicles; restricted on city property
   
5-414   Abandoned vehicles; abolition of liability
   
5-415   Abandoned vehicles; notification of owner
   
5-416   Abandoned vehicles; service of notice
   
5-417   Abandoned vehicles; charges
   
5-418   Abandoned vehicles; lien
   
5-419   Abandoned vehicles; receipt required
   
5-420   Abandoned vehicles; impoundment no defense
   
5-421   Abandoned vehicles; right of entry
   
5-422   Abandoned vehicles; sale
   
5-423   Abandoned vehicles; disposal
   
5-424   Golf carts; operation; equipment
§ 5-401 GENERALLY.
   (A)   No person shall park any vehicle, or approach the curb with a vehicle,
except when headed in the direction of the traffic. Vehicles, when parked,
shall stand parallel with and adjacent to the curb or edge of the roadway, in
such manner as to have both right wheels within 12 inches of the curb or edge
of the roadway, and so as to leave at least four feet between the vehicle so
parked and any other parked vehicles, except where the governing body
designates that vehicles shall be parked at an angle so as to have the front
right wheel at the curb or edge of the roadway. Where stalls are designated
either on the curb or pavement, vehicles shall be parked within such stalls.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be parked upon a roadway when there is a shoulder
adjacent to the roadway which is available for parking.
(Ord. 478, passed 5-3-1994) Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-680 and 60-6,167
§ 5-402 DESIGNATION.
   The governing body may by resolution designate any street, or portion
thereof, where vehicles shall be parked parallel with and adjacent to the curb
or where vehicles shall be parked at an angle. Where stalls are designated
either on the curb or pavement, vehicles shall be parked within such stalls.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-680 and 60-6,167
§ 5-403 AREAS.
   (A)   The governing body may by resolution set aside any street, alley,
public way or portion thereof where the parking of a particular kind or class
of vehicle shall be prohibited, or where the parking of any vehicle shall be
prohibited, or where the parking of any vehicle shall be prohibited.
   (B)   No vehicle prohibited from parking thereon shall stand or be parked on
said street, alley, public way or portion thereof, longer than a period of time
necessary to load and unload freight or passengers.
Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-680
§ 5-404 OBSTRUCTING ALLEY.
   No person shall park a vehicle with any portion thereof projecting into any
alley entrance. No person shall park a vehicle in any alley, except for the
purpose of loading or unloading during the time necessary to load or unload,
which shall not exceed the maximum limit of one-half hour. Every vehicle while
loading or unloading in an alley shall be parked in such manner as will cause
the least obstruction possible to traffic in the alley.
Penalty, see §
5-901
§ 5-405 CONGESTED AREA UNLOADING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck with an overall
length of more than 20 feet to park or stop such vehicle on a street within the
Business District except to load or unload when loading or unloading in an
alley is impossible and then only for the period of time reasonably necessary
to load or unload.
   (B)   If the City Council provides truck parking areas adjoining or adjacent
to the Business District, all truck operators shall use such parking areas for
all parking purposes.
   (C)   Except in an area provided for by the City Council by resolution, it
shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck, including an oil tanker, to
park or stop for any period of time within the limits of any street outside the
Business District except for the purpose of loading or unloading the cargo
thereof in the ordinary course of business.
Penalty, see §
5-901
§ 5-406 CURBS, PAINTED.
   (A)   The curb space within 15 feet in either direction of a fire hydrant
shall be painted red, or another color specified by the City Council, to
indicate that parking is prohibited in such area.
   (B)   If the City Council adopts a resolution regulating or prohibiting the
parking or stopping of vehicles at the curb on highways in front of certain
facilities or at certain locations, the curbs adjacent to any such facility or
location shall be painted in such manner as directed by the City Council to
indicate such regulation or prohibition.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the City Council or its agent to cause the
curb space to be painted and to keep the same painted as provided in this
article or as specified by the City Council. The marking or designating of
portions of highways where the parking of vehicles is prohibited or limited
shall be done only by the city through its proper officers, at the direction of
the City Council. No person shall paint the curb of any highway or in any
manner set aside, or attempt to prevent the parking of vehicles in, any highway
or part thereof, except at such places where the parking of vehicles is
prohibited by the provisions of this article or by a resolution adopted by the
City Council.
Penalty, see §
5-901
§ 5-407 MAXIMUM TIME LIMIT.
   (A)   The parking of a vehicle or trailer, as hereinafter defined, on a
public street for over 48 consecutive hours is unlawful.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      TRAILER. Any device without motive power designed for carrying persons or
property and being towed by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of
its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
      VEHICLE. Every device designed to transport any person or property upon a
highway, except devices moved solely by human power or used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
(Ord. 711, passed 2-3-2004; Ord. 775, passed 2-5-2008) Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-3,164
§ 5-408 EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this article regulating the movement, parking and standing
of vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles, as defined in
this article, while the driver of such vehicle is operating the same in an
emergency in the necessary performance of public duties.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,114
§ 5-409 BUREAU OF VIOLATIONS.
   There is hereby created the Bureau of Violations within the powers and
duties of the office of the Municipal Clerk. A copy of each citation issued for
nonmoving traffic violations shall be deposited with the Municipal Clerk, whose
duty it shall be to collect all fines and to maintain appropriate and accurate
records of all such fines paid to him or her. Fines shall be payable at the
office of the Clerk. Such fines shall be in the amount of $10 for each
violation if paid within 30 days from the date of issuance. Should any such
fine not be paid within the 30-day period, the Clerk shall ask the appropriate
court to issue a warrant for the arrest of the violator. The fine for any such
violation after the warrant is issued shall be $20 plus costs. All money
collected by the Municipal Clerk under this section shall be transferred to the
Clerk of the County Court at the end of each month.
(Ord. 712, passed 2-3-2004)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1729
§ 5-409.01 LENGTH OF VEHICLE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle of an overall
length of 22 feet, with or without load, to stop or park such vehicle for a
period of time longer than 30 minutes, except as hereinafter provided, on the
following streets within the municipality: on the south side of East Railway
Avenue from the alley between First and Second Street to Third Street and on
the south side of East Railway Avenue from Fourth Street to Fifth Street, all
in the city.
   (B)   Such vehicles my stop or park for such time as is necessary, in no
case longer than one-half hour, expeditiously load or unload their contents in
alleys where such stopping is possible; provided, that it shall be lawful for
such vehicle to stop or park elsewhere on highways in said prohibited area if
stopping or loading or unloading in alleys is impossible, only after the
operator of the designated vehicle shall have obtained written permission from
the City Clerk to do so. It shall also be unlawful for the operator of any such
truck-tractor, or semi-trailer regardless of length of same, to park said
vehicle with the end gates of the same down and extended beyond the body of
said vehicle; nor shall such vehicle stop, stand or park within a street
intersection, on a crosswalk, in front of a private driveway or on a sidewalk,
job sites excepted.
(Ord. 752, passed 6-6-2006) Penalty, see §
5-901
§ 5-410 HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; DESIGNATION OF ON-STREET PARKING
SPACES AND ACCESS AISLES; DISPLAY OF PERMITS.
   (A)   (1)   The governing body may designate parking spaces, including
access aisles, for the exclusive use of:
         (a)   Handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles display the
distinguishing license plates issued to handicapped or disabled persons
pursuant to Neb. RS 60-3,113;
         (b)   Handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles display a
distinguishing license plate issued to a handicapped or disabled person by
another state;
         (c)   Such other handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily
handicapped or disabled persons, as certified by the municipality, whose motor
vehicles display the permit specified in Neb. RS 18-1739; and
         (d)   Such other motor vehicles, as certified by the municipality,
which display the permit specified in Neb. RS 18-1739.
      (2)   All such permits shall be displayed by hanging the permit from the
motor vehicle’s rearview mirror so as to be clearly visible through the front
windshield. The permit shall be displayed on the dashboard only when there is
no rearview mirror.
   (B)   If the governing body so designates a parking space or access aisle,
it shall be indicated by posting above ground and immediately adjacent to and
visible from each space or access aisle a sign as described in Neb. RS 18-1737.
In addition to such sign, the space or access aisle may also be indicated by
blue paint on the curb or edge of the paved portion of the street adjacent to
the space or access aisle.
(Ord. 436, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 479, passed 5-3-1994; Ord. 523, passed 12-7-
1995; Ord. 555, passed 6-3-1997; Ord. 612, passed 4-13-1999; Ord. 663, passed
4-2-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1736
§ 5-410.01 HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; DESIGNATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING
STALLS, SPACES AND ACCESS AISLES.
   The municipality and any person in lawful possession of any off-street
parking facility may designate stalls or spaces, including access aisles, in
such facility owned or operated by the municipality or person for the exclusive
use of:
   (A)   Handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles display the
distinguishing license plates issued to such individuals pursuant to Neb. RS
60-3,113;
   (B)   Such other handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped
or disabled persons, as certified by the municipality, whose motor vehicles
display the permit specified in Neb. RS 18-1739; and
   (C)   Such other motor vehicles, as certified by the municipality, which
display such permit. Such designation shall be made by posting above ground and
immediately adjacent to and visible from each stall or space, including access
aisles, a sign which is in conformance with the requirements in Neb. RS 18-
1737.
(Ord. 436, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 480, passed 5-3-1994; Ord. 556, passed 6-3-
1997; Ord. 664, passed 4-2-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1737
§ 5-410.02 HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
5-410 through
5-410.09, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESS AISLE. A space adjacent to a handicapped parking space or passenger
loading zone which is constructed and designed in compliance with the federal
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq. and
the federal rules and regulations adopted and promulgated in response to the
Act.
   HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSON. Any individual with a severe visual or
physical impairment which limits personal mobility and results in an inability
to travel unassisted more than 200 feet without the use of a wheelchair,
crutch, walker or prosthetic, orthotic or other assistant device, any
individual whose personal mobility is limited as a result of respiratory
problems, any individual who has a cardiac condition to the extent that his or
her functional limitations are classified in severity as being Class III or
Class IV, according to standards set by the American Heart Association, and any
individual who has permanently lost all or substantially all the use of one or
more limbs.
   HANDICAPPED PARKING INFRACTION. The violation of any section of this article
regulating:
      (1)   The use of parking spaces, including access aisles, designated for
use by handicapped or disabled persons;
      (2)   The unauthorized possession, use or display of handicapped or
disabled parking permits; or
      (3)   The obstruction of any wheelchair ramps constructed or created in
accordance and in conformity with the federal Americans with Disabilities Act
of 1990.
   TEMPORARILY HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSON. Any handicapped or disabled
person whose personal mobility is expected to be limited in such manner for no
longer than one year.
(Ord. 436, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 481, passed 5-3-1994; Ord. 524, passed 12-7-
1995; Ord. 557, passed 6-3-1997; Ord. 662, passed 4-2-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1736, 18-1741.01, 60-3,113.02 and 60-
3,113.03
§ 5-410.03 HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; PERSONAL PERMIT ISSUANCE; RENEWAL.
   (A)   The Municipal Clerk may take an application from a handicapped or
disabled person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person or his or her
parent, legal guardian or foster parent for a permit which will entitle the
holder thereof or a person driving a motor vehicle for the purpose of
transporting such holder to park in those spaces or access aisles provided for
by this article when the holder of the permit will enter or exit the motor
vehicle while it is parked in such spaces or access aisles. For the purpose of
this section, the handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped or
disabled person shall be considered the holder of the permit.
   (B)   A person applying for a permit or for the renewal of a permit shall
complete an application, shall provide proof of identity and shall submit a
completed medical form containing the statutory criteria for qualification and
signed by a physician, physician assistant or advanced practice registered
nurse certifying that the person who will be the holder meets the definition of
handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person.
No applicant shall be required to provide his or her Social Security number. In
the case of a temporarily handicapped or disabled person, the certifying
physician, physician assistant or advanced practice registered nurse shall
indicate the estimated date of recovery or that the temporary handicap or
disability will continue for a period of six months, whichever is less.
   (C)   A person may hold only one permit under this section and may hold
either a permit under this section or a permit under §
5-410.04, but not both.
   (D)   A copy of the completed application form shall be given to each
applicant. The Municipal Clerk shall submit to the Department of Motor Vehicles
the name, address and license number of all persons applying for a permit
pursuant to this section.
   (E)   An application for the renewal of a permit under this section may be
filed within 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit. The existing permit
shall be invalid upon receipt of the new permit.
   (F)   The Municipal Clerk shall not accept the application for a permit of
any person making application contrary to the provisions of Neb. RS 60-3,113 et
seq.
(Ord. 436, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 525, passed 12-7-1995; Ord. 558, passed 6-3-
1997; Ord. 605, passed 6-5-2001; Ord. 665 passed 4-2-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-3,113 et seq.
§ 5-410.04 HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; MOTOR VEHICLE PERMIT; ISSUANCE;
RENEWAL.
   (A)   The Municipal Clerk shall take an application from any person for a
motor vehicle permit which will entitle the holder thereof or a person driving
the motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting handicapped or disabled
persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons to park in those spaces
or access aisles provided for by this article if the motor vehicle is used
primarily for the transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or
temporarily handicapped or disabled persons. Such parking permit shall be used
only when the motor vehicle for which it was issued is being used for the
transportation of a handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped
or disabled person and such person will enter or exit the motor vehicle while
it is parked in such designated spaces or access aisles.
   (B)   A person applying for a permit or for the renewal of a permit pursuant
to this section shall apply for a permit for each motor vehicle used for the
transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or
disabled persons, shall complete such forms as are provided to the Municipal
Clerk by the Department of Motor Vehicles and shall demonstrate to the
Municipal Clerk that each such motor vehicle is used primarily for the
transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or
disabled persons. A copy of the completed application form shall be given to
each applicant.
   (C)   No more than one such permit shall be issued for each motor vehicle. A
person may hold either a permit under this section or a permit under §
5-410.03, but not both.
   (D)   An application for the renewal of a permit under this section may be
filed within 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit. The existing permit
shall be invalid upon receipt of the new permit.
   (E)   The Municipal Clerk shall submit to the Department of Motor Vehicles
the name, address and license number of all persons applying for a permit
pursuant to this section.
   (F)   The Municipal Clerk shall not accept the application for a permit of
any person making application contrary to Neb. RS 60-3,113 et seq..
(Ord. 436, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 526, passed 12-7-1995; Ord. 559, passed 6-3-
1997; Ord. 666, passed 4-2-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-3,113 et seq.
§ 5-410.05 HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; PERMITS; PROHIBITED ISSUANCE;
DUPLICATE PERMITS.
   (A)   No permit shall be issued to any person or for any motor vehicle if
any parking permit has been issued to such person or for such motor vehicle and
such permit has been suspended pursuant to §
5-410.07. At the expiration of such suspension, a permit may be renewed in the
manner provided for renewal in this article.
   (B)   A duplicate permit may be provided without cost if the original permit
is destroyed, lost or stolen. Such duplicate permit shall be issued in the same
manner as the original permit, except that a newly completed medical form need
not be provided if a completed medical form submitted at the time of the most
recent application for a permit or its renewal is on file with the Municipal
Clerk or the Department of Motor Vehicles. A duplicate permit shall be valid
for the remainder of the period for which the original permit was issued.
(Ord. 436, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 454, passed 3-2-1993; Ord. 527, passed 12-7-
1995; Ord. 560, passed 6-3-1997; Ord. 667, passed 4-2-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1739
§ 5-410.06 HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; PERMITS; PERIOD VALID; RENEWAL OF
TEMPORARY PERMITS.
   (A)   Permanently issued permits for handicapped or disabled parking
authorized under this article issued prior to August 1, 2005, shall be valid
for a period ending on September 30 of the third year after the date of
issuance and shall expire on that date. Permanently issued permits issued on or
after August 1, 2005 shall be valid for a period ending on the last day of the
month of the applicant’s birthday in the third year after issuance and shall
expire on that day.
   (B)   (1)   All permits authorized under this article for temporarily
handicapped or disabled parking shall be issued for a period ending not more
than six months after the date of issuance but may be renewed one time for a
period not to exceed six months.
      (2)   For the renewal period, there shall be submitted an additional
application with proof of a handicap or disability.
(Ord. 436, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 482, passed 5-3-1994; Ord. 528, passed 12-7-
1995; Ord. 561, passed 6-3-1997; Ord. 668, passed 4-2-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-3,113 et seq.
§ 5-410.07 HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; PERMITS NONTRANSFERABLE;
VIOLATIONS; SUSPENSION.
   (A)   Permits issued under this article shall not be transferable and shall
be used only by the party to whom issued or for the motor vehicle for which
issued and only for the purpose for which it is issued. No person shall alter
or reproduce in any manner a permit issued pursuant to this article. No person
shall knowingly hold more than one permit or knowingly provide false
information on an application for a permit.
   (B)   No person who is not the holder of a handicapped or disabled parking
permit issued to him or her as a handicapped or disabled person shall display a
handicapped or disabled parking permit and park in a space or access aisle
designated for the exclusive use of a handicapped or disabled person.
   (C)   No person who is the holder of a handicapped or disabled parking
permit issued for the use of such person when transporting a handicapped or
disabled person shall display his or her handicapped or disabled parking permit
and park in a space or access aisle designated for the exclusive use of a
handicapped or disabled person unless a handicapped or disabled person is
actually in the vehicle displaying the permit at the time it is parked, has
left the vehicle while it was parked and will return to the vehicle before it
leaves the designated space or access aisle.
   (D)   No person who is not the holder of a handicapped or disabled parking
permit issued for use when a vehicle is transporting a handicapped or disabled
person shall display a handicapped or disabled parking permit and park in a
space or access aisle designated for the exclusive use of a handicapped or
disabled person unless a handicapped or disabled person is actually in the
vehicle displaying the permit at the time it is parked, has left the vehicle
while it was parked and will return to the vehicle before it leaves the
designated space or access aisle.
   (E)   Any violation of this section shall constitute a handicapped parking
infraction and shall be cause for suspension of such permit for a period of six
months and imposition of the penalty provided for violation of this chapter. In
addition, the trial court shall impose a fine of not more than $250 which may
be waived by the court if, at the time of sentencing, all handicapped parking
permits issued to or in the possession of the offender are returned to the
court. At the expiration of such six-month period, a suspended permit may be
renewed in the manner provided for renewal in this article.
(Ord. 436, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 529, passed 12-7-1995; Ord. 562, passed 6-3-
1997; Ord. 669, passed 4-2-2002) Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-3,113 et seq.
§ 5-410.08 HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE;
PENALTY.
   (A)   The owner or person in lawful possession of an off-street parking
facility, after notifying the municipal police, and the municipality, if it
provides on-street parking or owns, operates or provides an off-street parking
facility, may cause the removal, from a stall or space, including access
aisles, designated exclusively for handicapped or disabled persons or
temporarily handicapped or disabled persons or motor vehicles for the
transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or
disabled persons, of any vehicle not displaying the proper permit or the
distinguishing license plates specified in this article if there is posted
above ground and immediately adjacent to and visible from such stall or space,
including access aisles, a sign which clearly and conspicuously states the area
so designated as a tow-in zone.
   (B)   A person who parks a vehicle in any on-street parking space or access
aisle which has been designated exclusively for handicapped or disabled persons
or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons or motor vehicles for the
transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or
disabled persons, or in any so exclusively designated parking space or access
aisle in any off-street parking facility, without properly displaying the
proper permit or when the handicapped or disabled person to whom or for whom,
as the case may be, the license plate or permit is issued will not enter or
exit the vehicle while it is parked in the designated space or access aisle
shall be guilty of a handicapped parking infraction and shall be subject to the
penalties and procedures set forth in §
5-410.09. The display on a motor vehicle of a distinguishing license plate or
permit issued to a handicapped or disabled person by and under the duly
constituted authority of another state shall constitute a full and complete
defense in any action for a handicapped parking infraction. If the identity of
the person who parked the vehicle in violation of this section cannot be
readily determined, the owner or person in whose name the vehicle is registered
shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation and shall be guilty
and subject to the penalties and procedures described in this section.
   (C)   In the case of a privately owned off-street parking facility, the
municipality shall not require the owner or person in lawful possession of such
facility to inform the municipality of a violation of this section prior to the
municipality issuing the violator a handicapped parking infraction citation.
(Ord. 436, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 455, passed 3-2-1993; Ord. 483, passed 5-3-
1994; Ord. 530, passed 12-7-1995; Ord. 564, passed 6-3-1997; Ord. 670, passed
4-2-2002) Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1737
§ 5-410.09 HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; CITATION, ISSUANCE; COMPLAINT;
TRIAL; DISMISSAL.
   (A)   For any offense classified as a handicapped parking infraction, a
handicapped parking citation may be issued by any peace officer or by any
person designated by ordinance by the governing body to exercise the authority
to issue a citation for any handicapped parking infraction.
   (B)   When a handicapped parking citation is issued for a handicapped
parking infraction, the person issuing the handicapped parking citation shall
enter thereon all required information, including the name and address of the
cited person or, if not known, the license number and description of the
offending motor vehicle, the offense charged and the time and place the person
cited is to appear in court. Unless the person cited requests an earlier date,
the time of appearance shall be at least three days after the issuance of the
handicapped parking citation. One copy of the handicapped parking citation
shall be delivered to the person cited or attached to the offending motor
vehicle.
   (C)   At least 24 hours before the time set for the appearance of the cited
person, either the Municipal Attorney or other person authorized by law to
issue a complaint for the particular offense shall issue and file a complaint
charging such person with a handicapped parking infraction or such person shall
be released from the obligation to appear as specified.
   (D)   The trial of any person for a handicapped parking infraction shall be
by the court without a jury. A person cited for a handicapped parking violation
may waive his or her right to trial.
   (E)   For any handicapped parking citation issued for a handicapped parking
infraction by reason of the failure of a vehicle to display a handicapped
parking permit issued pursuant to Neb. RS 60-3,113 et seq., the complaint shall
be dismissed if, within seven business days after the date of issuance of the
citation, the person cited filed with the court the affidavit included on the
citation, signed by a peace officer certifying that the recipient is the lawful
possessor in his or her own right of a handicapped parking permit issued under
Neb. RS 60-3,113 et seq. and that the peace officer has personally viewed the
permit.
(Ord. 484, passed 5-3-1994; Ord. 563, passed 6-3-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1741.01, 18-1741.04 and 18-1741.06
§ 5-411 REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Whenever any police officer shall find a vehicle standing upon a
street or alley in violation of any of the provisions of this article, such
individual may remove or have such vehicle removed, or require the driver or
other person in charge of the vehicle to move such vehicle, to a position off
the roadway of such street or alley or from such street or alley.
   (B)   The owner or other person lawfully entitled to the possession of such
vehicle towed or stored shall be charged with the reasonable cost of towing and
storage fees. Any such towing or storage fee shall be a lien upon the vehicle
prior to all other claims. Any person towing or storing a vehicle shall be
entitled to retain possession of such vehicle until such charges are paid. The
lien provided for in this section shall not apply to the contents of any
vehicles.
(Ord. 356, passed 10-1-1985; Ord. 391, passed 2-7-1989)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-680 and 60-6,165
§ 5-412 ABANDONED VEHICLES; CONSTITUTE NUISANCE.
   It is hereby expressly found and determined that the unrestricted parking or
storage of vehicles on the public streets or on city property in residential
areas is an obstruction and hazard to the proper and efficient flow of traffic
and use of the streets and city property and constitutes a nuisance to the
citizens and residents of the city. It is hereby expressly found and determined
that the storage of unlicensed vehicles on private property is a hazard to the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens and residents of the city and
constitutes a nuisance to the citizens and residents of the city.
(Ord. 434, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 456, passed 3-2-1993)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 37-310 and 60-1903.02
§ 5-413 ABANDONED VEHICLES; RESTRICTED ON CITY PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall park or leave standing any abandoned or unlicensed
vehicle on any street, sidewalk, terrace or on any city property within a
residential area at any time nor for any period of time.
   (B)   No person shall park or leave standing any licensed vehicle on any
sidewalk at any time nor for any period of time.
   (C)   No person shall park or leave standing any licensed vehicle on any
terrace except where specifically permitted by resolution of the Mayor and
Council; and where so permitted, no person shall park or leave standing any
licensed vehicle for more than 72 hours. For the purpose of this section,
TERRACE shall be defined as the space on each side of a street between the
sidewalk and the property line.
   (D)   No person shall park or leave standing any licensed vehicle on the
traveled portion of any street or on city property for more than 72 hours.
   (E)   Any vehicle so parked or left standing where so prohibited or for more
than the permitted time limits shall be presumptively abandoned.
   (F)   For the purpose of this section, RESIDENTIAL AREA shall be determined
in accordance with the zoning map of the city.
(Ord. 434, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 456, passed 3-2-1993)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-1901
§ 5-414 ABANDONED VEHICLES; ABOLITION OF LIABILITY.
   City law enforcement authorities are hereby authorized and directed to
remove or have removed any such presumptively abandoned or unlicensed vehicle
and to convey the same to a storage pound and to there store the same until
redeemed or disposed of at the risk and expense of the owner thereof. Neither
the law enforcement authorities or the city shall be liable to the owner for
any loss or damage to such vehicle in the removal or storage thereof.
(Ord. 434, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 456, passed 3-2-1993)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-1906
§ 5-415 ABANDONED VEHICLES; NOTIFICATION OF OWNER.
   Upon removal of such vehicle, the law enforcement authorities shall notify
the owner thereof of such impoundment and that the same may be redeemed by the
owner upon payment of the lien for removal and storage charges at any time
prior to the next public sale of abandoned property. Such notice shall be in
writing, shall describe the vehicle with as much particularity as to year,
make, model, color, body type, serial or identification number as is obtainable
from any registration certificate attached to the vehicle or is obtainable upon
reasonable inquiry from any County Clerk or County Treasurer if such vehicle
bears a state license plate or is obtainable upon reasonable inquiry from any
other state if such vehicle bears a license plate issued by another state or is
reasonably obtainable from observation of the vehicle. Such notice shall advise
the amount of removal charge and rate of accrual of storage charges and that it
will be offered for sale at any time after 30 days from impoundment to satisfy
the lien for such charges.
(Ord. 434, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 456, passed 3-2-1993)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-1903
§ 5-416 ABANDONED VEHICLES; SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   (A)   All notices provided by this article shall be served upon any one or
more of the last registered owners at the address shown on any registration
certificate attached to the vehicle or obtainable upon reasonable inquiry from
any County Clerk or County Treasurer if such vehicle bears a state license
plate issued during the current or preceding license period or obtainable upon
reasonable inquiry from any other state if such vehicle bears a license plate
issued by another state during the current or preceding license period. If the
foregoing information as to identity and address of the owner cannot be
obtained as aforesaid, such notice shall be posted on the vehicle.
   (B)   In addition, if such vehicle was located on private property, such
notice shall also be served on the owner or occupant of the property at the
location of the property. All such notices may be served in person or by first-
class United States Mail or by posting on the vehicle or private property.
Notice shall be deemed to have been received when personally served or five
days after mailing thereof or five days after posting on the vehicle or private
property.
(Ord. 434, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 456, passed 3-2-1993)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-1903
§ 5-417 ABANDONED VEHICLES; CHARGES.
   The charges for removal and storage to be paid by the owner prior to
redemption of the vehicle shall be as from time to time set by resolution of
the Mayor and Council.
(Ord. 434, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 456, passed 3-2-1993)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-1909
§ 5-418 ABANDONED VEHICLES; LIEN.
   In order to redeem any impounded vehicle, the owner shall pay the removal
and storage charges which shall be a lien against such vehicle; and in
addition, if the vehicle is of a type required to be licensed, shall procure
for and affix to such vehicle current license plates and registration before
removing it from the storage pound under its own power.
(Ord. 434, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 456, passed 3-2-1993)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-1905
§ 5-419 ABANDONED VEHICLES; RECEIPT REQUIRED.
   Law enforcement authorities of the city shall issue a duplicate receipt for
all money collected for redemption of vehicles. The original receipt shall be
delivered to the person redeeming the same; the duplicate receipt shall be
delivered to the City Treasurer on the first day of each month together with
the amount of money shown on such receipt. The money will be deposited to the
General Fund and used to defray the cost of administration. City law
enforcement authorities shall keep a book in which a record of impounded
vehicles is kept. It shall show as much of the following information as is
available: the name of the owner, the description of the vehicle, license
number, date and hour of impounding, location before impounded, date of service
of notice, date and hour of release and the amount of fee paid.
(Ord. 434, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 456, passed 3-2-1993)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-1903.01
§ 5-420 ABANDONED VEHICLES; IMPOUNDMENT NO DEFENSE.
   The fact that a vehicle is impounded and charge paid for towing and storage
shall not be a defense to a prosecution for violation of this article or other
provisions of the state statutes, this code or other ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 434, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 456, passed 3-2-1993)
§ 5-421 ABANDONED VEHICLES; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   City law enforcement authorities are hereby authorized to enter upon
private property at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting any
vehicle unlawfully parked thereon and for removing the same if it be
presumptively abandoned under the terms of this article. If consent to such
entry be refused, such law enforcement authorities are authorized to apply for
an inspection warrant under the laws of the state.
   (B)   After obtaining such warrant, it shall be unlawful for any person to
interfere with or prevent law enforcement authorities from entering on private
property for the purpose of carrying out his or her duties in the enforcement
of this article.
(Ord. 434, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 456, passed 3-2-1993) Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-1901
§ 5-422 ABANDONED VEHICLES; SALE.
   (A)   All vehicles which have not been redeemed by the owner by payment of
removal and storage charges prior to the next public sale, shall be abandoned
vehicles if at least 30 days shall have elapsed since the notice of impoundment
was served. Public sales of abandoned vehicles to satisfy the lien of removal
and storage charges shall be held at such times as the law enforcement
authorities shall determine at the place where such vehicles are stored or at
such other place as the law enforcement authorities shall designate.
   (B)   Notice of each such sale shall be published once a week for two
successive weeks in some paper of general circulation in the city and the first
publication shall be at least 15 days prior to the date of sale. At such sale,
the law enforcement authorities shall offer such vehicles for sale to the
highest bidder for cash; provided, that the owner of such vehicle may not
purchase the same for less than the removal and storage charges on such
vehicle; and provided further, that no one employed by the city or working in
law enforcement in the county shall purchase any such vehicle at any such sale.
The proceeds of sale of any vehicle shall be delivered to the City Treasurer
for deposit to the General Fund and used first to pay the cost of removal and
storage of the vehicle and expense of sale; any excess of funds shall be held
for the owner of the vehicle without interest.
   (C)   No vehicle of a type required to be licensed or registered shall be
removed under its own power until the purchaser shall have procured for and
affixed to such vehicle current license plates and registration.
(Ord. 434, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 456, passed 3-2-1993)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-1905
§ 5-423 ABANDONED VEHICLES; DISPOSAL.
   Any vehicle which remains unsold at the conclusion of such sale may at the
option of the city be junked or disposed of in any manner or may be retained
for sale at future public sales.
(Ord. 434, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 456, passed 3-2-1993)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-1905
§ 5-424 GOLF CARTS; OPERATION; EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   The operation of golf carts on all public streets and thoroughfares
within the corporate limits of the city by individuals age 19 or older is
hereby authorized.
   (B)   Any such golf cart operated in accordance with this section shall be
equipped in accordance with all standards established by the statutes of the
state.
   (C)   Any such golf cart operated pursuant to the authority granted by this
section shall be operated in accordance with the rules of the road as set forth
in the statutes of the state.
(Ord. 507, passed 5-2-1995)
ARTICLE 5: BICYCLES
Section
   
5-501   Bicycle; operation
§ 5-501 BICYCLE; OPERATION.
   (A)   No person shall operate a bicycle on a street or highway within the
municipality with another person on the handlebars or in any position in front
of the operator.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be operated faster than is reasonable and proper, but
every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the safety of the
operator and any other persons upon the streets and highways.
   (C)   Persons operating bicycles shall observe all traffic signs and stop at
all stop signs.
   (D)   No bicycle shall be operated on any street or highway from sunset to
sunrise without a headlight visible from the front thereof for not less than
500 feet on a clear night and a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall
be visible on a clear night from all distances between 100 feet and 600 feet to
the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlights on a motor
vehicle. A red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be
used in addition to such red reflector.
   (E)   Any person who operates a bicycle upon a street or highway shall not
ride more than single file except on parts of streets or highways set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (F)   (1)   Any person who operates a bicycle upon a roadway at less than
the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under conditions then
existing shall ride as near to the right-hand curb or right-hand edge of the
roadway as practicable except when:
         (a)   Overtaking and passing another bicycle or vehicle proceeding in
the same direction;
         (b)   Preparing for a left turn onto a private road or driveway or at
an intersection;
         (c)   Reasonably necessary to avoid conditions that make it unsafe to
continue along the right-hand curb or right-hand edge of the roadway, including
fixed or moving objects, stopped or moving vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians,
animals or surface hazards;
         (d)   Riding upon a lane of substandard width which is too narrow for
a bicycle and a vehicle to travel safely by side within the lane; or
         (e)   Lawfully operating a bicycle on the paved shoulders of a highway
included in the state highway system as provided in Neb. RS 60-6,142.
      (2)   Any person who operates a bicycle upon a roadway with a posted
speed limit of 35 mph or less on which traffic is restricted to one direction
of movement and which has two or more marked traffic lanes may ride as near to
the left-hand curb or left-hand edge of the roadway as practicable. Whenever a
person operating a bicycle leaves the roadway to ride on the paved shoulder or
leaves the paved shoulder to enter the roadway, the person shall clearly signal
his or her intention and yield the right-of-way to all other vehicles.
   (G)   No person shall park a bicycle on any sidewalk unless a bicycle stand
is located on said sidewalk.
   (H)   No person shall operate a bicycle on the sidewalks within the Business
District.
(Ord. 475, passed 5-3-1994) Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,315, 60-6,317 and 60-6,318
ARTICLE 6: MINIBIKES, MOTORCYCLES AND SNOWMOBILES
Section
   
5-601   Operation on public lands
   
5-602   Motorcycle; helmet required
§ 5-601 OPERATION ON PUBLIC LANDS.
   Minibikes, go-carts, motorcycles and snowmobiles shall not be operated on
public lands owned by the municipality or public streets located within the
municipality without the operator first receiving permission from the governing
body; provided, that after permission is granted, such vehicles shall be
operated in a manner which does not endanger, annoy or disturb others using the
lands and which does not damage or destroy vegetation, fixtures or other
property owned by the municipality. Nothing herein shall prohibit a licensed
motor vehicle and licensed vehicle operator of that vehicle to operate on
public streets.
(Ord. 609, passed 2-1-1999) Penalty, see §
5-901
§ 5-602 MOTORCYCLE; HELMET REQUIRED.
   A person shall not operate or be a passenger on a motorcycle or moped on any
highway unless such person is wearing a protective helmet of the type and
design manufactured for use by operators of such vehicles and unless such
helmet is secured properly on his or her head with a chin strap while the
vehicle is in motion. All such protective helmets shall be designed to reduce
injuries to the user resulting from head impacts and shall be designed to
protect the user by remaining on the user’s head, deflecting blows, resisting
penetration and spreading the force of impact. Each such helmet shall consist
of lining, padding and chin strap and shall meet or exceed the standards
established in the United States Department of Transportation’s Federal Motor
Vehicle Safety Standard No. 218, 49 C.F.R. § 571.218, for motorcycle helmets.
(Ord. 389, passed 2-7-1989; Ord. 476, passed 5-3-1994) Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,278 through 60-6,282
ARTICLE 7: PROHIBITIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
5-701   Littering
   
5-702   Signs; defacing or interfering with
   
5-703   Quiet zones; unnecessary noise
   
5-704   Speed; residential
   
5-705   Speed; public places
   
5-706   Drunken driving
   
5-707   Reckless driving
   
5-708   Emergency regulations
   
5-709   Police; enforcement
   
5-710   Police; refusal to obey
   
5-711   Traffic citations; form and records
   
5-712   Traffic citations; disposition and records
   
5-713   Traffic citation; illegal cancellation
   
5-714   Summons; destruction
   
5-715   Radar device; prohibited
   
5-716   Muddy alleys; driving regulated
   
5-717   Driving on shoulders of highway
   
5-718   Child passengers; use of restraint system or occupant protection system
   
5-719   Maximum speed limits
§ 5-701 LITTERING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drop, or cause to be left, upon any
municipal highway, street or alley, except at places designated by the
governing body, any rubbish, debris or waste, and whosoever shall be guilty of
such littering will be fined not less than $25 nor more than $100.
Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 39-311
§ 5-702 SIGNS; DEFACING OR INTERFERING WITH.
   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down or remove any traffic control device, any railroad
sign or signal or any part of such a device, sign or signal.
(Neb. RS 60-6,129) Penalty, see §
5-901
§ 5-703 QUIET ZONES; UNNECESSARY NOISE.
   All streets, or portions thereof, lying within 300 feet of any hospital,
nursing home or school, and which have been declared to be “quiet zones” by the
governing body shall be respected as such by all drivers, and no driver of any
vehicle shall, within such zones, make any unnecessary noise or sound the horn,
or other warning device, of such vehicle except in an emergency. It shall be
unlawful for any person in any part of said municipality to make, or cause to
be made, any unnecessary noise with any signal device, or to use the same
except as a road signal.
Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-680
§ 5-704 SPEED; RESIDENTIAL.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street, alley or other place
within the Residential District at a rate of speed greater than 25 mph or at
any speed exceeding that which is reasonable for the conditions unless a
different rate of speed is specifically permitted by ordinance.
Penalty, see §
5-901
§ 5-705 SPEED; PUBLIC PLACES.
   Vehicles approaching railway stations, churches, public buildings or crowded
spaces, or vehicles in the congested district must be operated in a cautious
manner, and always on the proper side of the street. In no case shall the speed
be greater than 20 mph when entering such an area unless a different rate of
speed is specifically permitted by ordinance.
Penalty, see §
5-901
§ 5-706 DRUNKEN DRIVING.
   (Repealed by Ord. 485, passed 5-3-1994)
§ 5-707 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   Any person who drives a motor vehicle in such a manner as to indicate an
indifferent or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property shall be
deemed to be guilty of reckless driving, and as such shall be punished as
provided by statute.
Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-4,182, 60-6,213 and 60-6,215
§ 5-708 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
   The law enforcement authorities are hereby empowered to make and enforce
temporary traffic regulations to cover emergencies.
(Ord. 268, passed 5-15-1979)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 81-2005
§ 5-709 POLICE; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   All peace officers are hereby specifically directed and authorized,
and it shall be deemed and considered a part of the official duties of each of
such officers, to enforce the provisions of the State Rules of the Road and
this article, including the specific enforcement of maximum speed limits, and
any other state or city law regulating the operation of vehicles or the use of
the highways.
   (B)   To perform the official duties imposed by this section, peace officers
shall have the power:
      (1)   To make arrests upon view and without warrant for any violation
committed in their presence of any of the provisions of the Motor Vehicle
Operator’s License Act, being Neb. RS 60-462 to 60-4,189 or this article, or of
any other law regulating the operation of vehicles or the use of the highways,
if and when designated or called upon to do so as provided by law;
      (2)   To make arrests upon view and without warrant for any violation
committed in their presence of any provision of the laws of this state relating
to misdemeanors or felonies or of similar city ordinances if and when
designated or called upon to do so as provided by law;
      (3)   At all times to direct all traffic in conformity with law or, in
the event of a fire or other emergency or in order to expedite traffic or
ensure safety, to direct traffic as conditions may require;
      (4)   When in uniform, to require the driver of a vehicle to stop and
exhibit his or her operator’s license and registration certificate issued for
the vehicle and submit to an inspection of such vehicle and the license plates
and registration certificate for the vehicle and to require the driver of a
motor vehicle to present the vehicle within five days for correction of any
defects revealed by such motor vehicle inspection as may lead the inspecting
officer to reasonably believe that such motor vehicle is being operated in
violation of the statutes of the state, the rules and regulations of the
Director of Motor Vehicles or any city ordinance or regulation;
      (5)   To inspect any vehicle of a type required to be registered
according to law in any public garage or repair shop or in any place where such
a vehicle is held for sale or wrecking;
      (6)   To serve warrants relating to the enforcement of the laws
regulating the operation of vehicles or the use of the highways; and
      (7)   To investigate traffic accidents for the purpose of carrying on a
study of traffic accidents and enforcing motor vehicle and highway safety laws.
(Neb. RS 60-683)
Statutory reference:
   Motor Vehicle Operator’s License Act, see Neb. RS 60-462
§ 5-710 POLICE; REFUSAL TO OBEY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, or fail to comply with, any
lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer.
Penalty, see §
5-901
§ 5-711 TRAFFIC CITATIONS; FORM AND RECORDS.
   (A)   The Municipal Clerk shall provide, in appropriate form, traffic
citations containing notices to appear which shall be issued in books with
citations in triplicate.
   (B)   The Municipal Clerk shall be responsible for the issuance of such
books and shall maintain a record of every such book, and each citation number
therein issued to the municipal police. The Clerk shall require and retain a
receipt for every book so issued.
§ 5-712 TRAFFIC CITATIONS; DISPOSITION AND RECORDS.
   (A)   (1)   The municipal police upon issuing a copy of the traffic citation
to an alleged violator for a moving violation shall deposit the original
traffic citation with the Municipal Attorney, who shall take, at his or her
discretion, appropriate action, unless the citation is just a warning.
      (2)   Upon action brought by the Municipal Attorney in the appropriate
court, the citation may be disposed of only by trial in said court, or other
official action by the judge of the court, including a forfeiture of bail, or
by the deposit of sufficient bail with, or payment of a fine to the court by
the person to whom such traffic citation has been issued.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the municipal police to dispose of a traffic
citation, or copies thereof, or of the record of the issuance of the same in a
manner other than as required herein.
   (C)   The Municipal Clerk shall require the return of all copies of every
traffic citation which has been spoiled, or upon which any entry has been made,
and not issued to an alleged violator.
Penalty, see §
5-901
§ 5-713 TRAFFIC CITATION; ILLEGAL CANCELLATION.
   Any person who cancels, or solicits the cancellation of any traffic citation
in any manner other than as provided herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Penalty, see §
5-901
§ 5-714 SUMMONS; DESTRUCTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to tear up or destroy a parking tag
placed upon any vehicle by the municipal police, or to disregard the summons
contained on such tag, and fail to appear in court as directed by said tag.
Penalty, see §
5-901
§ 5-715 RADAR DEVICE; PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or possess any radar
transmission device while operating a motor vehicle on any road, street,
highway or interstate highway in this municipality; except that this section
shall not apply to any such device which has been lawfully licensed by the
Federal Communications Commission or is being used by law enforcement officials
in their official duties.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      POSSESSION. To have a device defined above in a motor vehicle if such
device is not:
         (a)   Disconnected from all power sources; and
         (b)   In the rear trunk, which shall include the spare tire
compartment, or any other compartment which is not accessible to the driver or
any other person in the vehicle while such vehicle is in operation. If no such
compartment exists in a vehicle, then such device must be disconnected from all
power sources and be placed in a position not readily accessible to the driver
or any other person in the vehicle.
      RADAR TRANSMISSION DEVICE. Any mechanism designed to interfere with the
reception of radio microwaves in the electromagnetic spectrum, which
microwaves, commonly referred to as radar, are employed by law enforcement
officials to measure the speed of motor vehicles.
      TRANSCEIVER. An apparatus contained in a single housing, functioning
alternately as a radio transmitter and receiver.
(Ord. 320, passed 9-7-1982) Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,274 to 60-6,276
§ 5-716 MUDDY ALLEYS; DRIVING REGULATED.
   (A)   No person shall drive, haul, tow, push or otherwise move any vehicle
with a gross vehicle weight exceeding 5,850 pounds through an unpaved alley
which is muddy, saturated or soft, to such a degree that the passage of such
vehicle with hauling capacity of more than 5,850 pounds would cause damage to
the grading and surface of the alley.
   (B)   Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit any person
owning or leasing property abutting upon any alley from using such alley to
reach the abutting property even if other means exist to reach said property.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit any police, fire or
emergency vehicle from using any alley at any time, nor shall it be construed
to prohibit city, county or other vehicles from passing through any alley for
the purpose of repairing or maintaining such alley.
(Ord. 332, passed 7-5-1983) Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-567 and 60-680
§ 5-717 DRIVING ON SHOULDERS OF HIGHWAY.
   No person shall drive on the shoulders of highways, except that vehicles may
be driven onto the shoulders of roadways by federal mail carriers while
delivering the United States mail or to safely remove a vehicle from traffic
lanes and implements of husbandry may be driven onto the shoulders of roadways.
(Ord. 390, passed 2-7-1989) Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,142
§ 5-718 CHILD PASSENGERS; USE OF RESTRAINT SYSTEM OR OCCUPANT PROTECTION
SYSTEM.
   (A)   Any person who drives any motor vehicle which has or is required to
have an occupant protection system shall ensure that:
      (1)   All children up to six years of age being transported in such
vehicle use a child passenger restraint system of a type which meets Federal
Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 213 as developed by the National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration, as such standard existed on July 20, 2002, and which is
correctly installed in such vehicle; and
      (2)   All children six years of age and less than 16 years of age being
transported in such vehicle use an occupant protection system. This subsection
(A) shall apply to every motor vehicle which is equipped with an occupant
protection system or is required to be equipped with restraint systems pursuant
to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208, as such standard existed on July
20, 2002, except taxicabs, mopeds, motorcycles and any motor vehicle designated
by the manufacturer as a 1963 year model or earlier which is not equipped with
an occupant protection system.
   (B)   Whenever any licensed physician determines, through accepted medical
procedures, that use of a child passenger restraint system by a particular
child would be harmful by reason of the child’s weight, physical condition or
other medical reason, the provisions of subsection (A) above shall be waived.
The driver of any vehicle transporting such a child shall carry on his or her
person or in the vehicle a signed written statement of the physician
identifying the child and stating the grounds for such waiver.
   (C)   The drivers of authorized emergency vehicles shall not be subject to
the requirements of subsection (A) above when operating such authorized
emergency vehicles pursuant to their employment.
   (D)   (1)   The failure to provide a child restraint system for more than
one child in the same vehicle at the same time, as required in subsection (A)
above, shall not be treated as a separate offense.
      (2)   Enforcement of subsection (A)(2) above shall be accomplished only
as a secondary action when an operator of a motor vehicle has been cited or
charged with a violation of some other offense.
(Ord. 421, passed 1-2-1991; Ord. 646, passed 6-5-2001; Ord. 701, passed 5-6-
2003) Penalty, see §
5-901
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,267 and 60-6,268
§ 5-719 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed for
compliance with §§
5-704 and
5-705, the limits set forth in this section and Neb. RS 60-6,187, 60-6,188, 60-
6,305 and 60-6,313 shall be the maximum lawful speeds unless reduced pursuant
to subsection (B) below, and no person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a
speed in excess of such maximum limits:
      (1)   Twenty-five mph in any Residential District;
      (2)   Twenty mph in any Business District;
      (3)   Fifty mph upon any highway that is gravel or not dustless surfaced;
      (4)   Fifty-five mph upon any dustless-surfaced highway not a part of the
state highway system;
      (5)   Sixty-five mph upon any four-lane divided highway not a part of the
state highway system; and
      (6)   Sixty-five mph upon any part of the state highway system other than
an expressway, a super-two highway or a freeway.
   (B)   The maximum speed limits established in subsection (A) above may be
reduced by the Department of Transportation or the City Council pursuant to
Neb. RS 60-6,188.
   (C)   The City Council may erect and maintain suitable signs along highways
under its jurisdiction in such number and at such locations as it deems
necessary to give adequate notice of the speed limits established pursuant to
subsections (A) or (B) above upon such highways.
(Neb. RS 60-6,186) Penalty, see §
5-901
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 914, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
ARTICLE 8: ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND UTILITY VEHICLES
Section
   
5-801   Definitions
   
5-802   Operation
   
5-803   Equipment
   
5-804   Registration
   
5-805   Operator requirements
   
5-806   Registration permit
   
5-807   Time limits
   
5-808   Speed limits
   
5-809   Work permit
   
5-810   Application
   
5-811   State laws applicable
   
5-812   Penalty
§ 5-801 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE. Any motorized off highway vehicle which is 50 inches or
less in width; has a dry weight of 900 pounds or less; travels on three or more
low-pressure tires; is designed for operator use only with no passengers or as
specifically designed by the original manufacturer for the operator and one
passenger; has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator; and
has handle bars or any other steering assembly for steering control.
   GOLF CART. A motorized vehicle designed for one operator and one passenger
and intended by the manufacturer to be used primarily for travel on golf
courses.
   SCOOTER. Any two-wheel motorized (50cc or less) vehicle.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary limits of any
street, road, avenue, boulevard or way which is publicly maintained when any
part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
   UTILITY VEHICLE. Any side by side vehicle (e.g. gator, mule or prowler).
(Ord. 828, passed 8-7-2012)
§ 5-802 OPERATION.
   An all-terrain vehicle, scooter, utility vehicle or golf cart may be
operated on the streets and highways within the corporate limits of the city
only if the operator and the vehicle comply with the provisions of this
article.
(Ord. 828, passed 8-7-2012)
§ 5-803 EQUIPMENT.
   An all-terrain vehicle, scooter, utility vehicle or golf cart may be
operated on the streets and highways within the corporate limits of the city
only if such vehicle is equipped with headlights, taillights, brake lights, an
OEM muffler and a federally-approved bicycle safety flag which extends not less
than five feet above ground attached to the rear of such vehicle. The bicycle
safety flag shall be triangular in shape with an area of not less than 30
square inches and shall be day glow in color.
(Ord. 828, passed 8-7-2012)
§ 5-804 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   In order to be authorized for operation on the streets and highways of
the city, an all-terrain vehicle, scooter, utility vehicle or golf cart must be
registered with the office of the City Clerk. A registration sticker will be
issued upon submitting proof of the following:
      (1)   A certificate from the city office indicating that the all-terrain
vehicle, scooter, utility vehicle or golf cart has been inspected by an
official or officials designated by the Mayor and Council of the city and that
said vehicle complies, in full, with the equipment requirements identified in §
5-803;
      (2)   Proof of liability insurance coverage for the all-terrain vehicle,
scooter, utility vehicle or golf cart while operating such vehicle on a street
or highway; and
      (3)   Payment of a $10 annual fee for registration of the vehicle. A $25
annual fee shall be required of dealers of all-terrain vehicles, scooters,
utility vehicles or golf carts within the city. All such fees paid shall be
credited to the street fund of the city.
   (B)   Upon compliance with the registration requirements identified herein,
the City Clerk shall issue a registration sticker for the all-terrain vehicle,
scooter, utility vehicle or golf cart being registered. Said registration
sticker must be prominently displayed upon the rear of said vehicle at all
times while such vehicle is in operation on the streets and highways of the
city.
(Ord. 828, passed 8-7-2012)
§ 5-805 OPERATOR REQUIREMENTS.
   Any person operating an all-terrain vehicle, scooter, utility vehicle or
golf cart authorized by this article shall be at least 21 years old and shall
possess a valid driver’s license issued by the State of Nebraska or another
state. The individual operating the all-terrain vehicle, scooter, utility
vehicle or golf cart shall provide proof of such insurance coverage, as
required elsewhere in this article, to any peace officer requesting such proof
within five days of the request being made. No person shall operate an all-
terrain vehicle, scooter, utility vehicle or golf cart on the streets or
highways of the city in violation of the State Rules of the Road as established
by state statutes.
(Ord. 828, passed 8-7-2012) Penalty, see §
5-812
§ 5-806 REGISTRATION PERMIT.
   Upon compliance with the registration requirements identified herein, the
City Clerk shall issue a registration permit for the all-terrain vehicle,
scooter, utility vehicle or golf cart being registered. Said registration
permit must be carried in the registered vehicle at all times that the vehicle
is in operation on streets or highways of the city. In addition to the
registration permit, the City Clerk shall issue a registration sticker. The
registration sticker will entitle the vehicle to be operated on the streets and
highways of the city from May 1 of any year to April 30 of the following year
and shall be renewable annually. The annual fee shall not be prorated for any
part of a year. The registration sticker shall be displayed on the left lower
corner of the windshield of the registered vehicle or, if the vehicle is not
equipped with a windshield, at the left front of the vehicle.
(Ord. 828, passed 8-7-2012)
§ 5-807 TIME LIMITS.
   No all-terrain vehicle, scooter, utility vehicle or golf cart shall be
operated on the streets and highways of the city after sunset and prior to
sunrise of any day.
(Ord. 828, passed 8-7-2012) Penalty, see §
5-812
§ 5-808 SPEED LIMITS.
   No all-terrain vehicle, scooter, utility vehicle or golf cart shall be
operated within the city limits at a speed in excess of the posted speed limit
or 30 mph, whichever is less.
(Ord. 828, passed 8-7-2012) Penalty, see §
5-812
§ 5-809 WORK PERMIT.
   (A)   The city may issue a work permit to an operator that otherwise
complies with all terms of this article with exception of age. A work permit
shall be issued by the City Clerk, upon receipt of the following:
      (1)   Application signed by the applicant, who is at least 16 years of
age as of the date thereof, and the parent or legal guardian of the applicant.
The application will acknowledge receipt of a copy of this article and
certification of the applicant and parent/guardian that the applicant will
fully comply with all provisions hereof.
      (2)   All other documentation required in §§
5-804 and
5-805, inclusive, including, but not limited to, a valid drivers license, proof
of liability insurance coverage and registration information.
   (B)   (1)   Upon issuance of a work permit, the holder thereof may operate
an all-terrain vehicle, scooter, utility vehicle or golf cart for legitimate
employment purposes (snow removal, lawn care or agricultural use) to or from
the site where the operator is engaged in such employment and the residence of
the operator, over the most direct and accessible route through the streets of
the city.
      (2)   The holder of the work permit shall not use any type of interactive
wireless communication device while operating an all-terrain vehicle, scooter,
utility vehicle or golf cart on the streets of the city.
(Ord. 828, passed 8-7-2012)
§ 5-810 APPLICATION.
   This article shall not apply to self-propelled chairs used by persons who
are disabled or electric powered assistive mobility devices.
(Ord. 828, passed 8-7-2012)
§ 5-811 STATE LAWS APPLICABLE.
   Except as may be otherwise provided herein, the operation of all-terrain
vehicles, scooters, utility vehicles and golf carts within the city limits is
subject to all state statutory provisions with respect to said vehicles and the
operation thereof.
(Ord. 828, passed 8-7-2012)
§ 5-812 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this article, specifically by
operating an all-terrain vehicle, scooter, utility vehicle or golf cart on the
streets and highways of the city in violation of any provision of this article,
shall be punished as provided generally in this code and, specifically, shall
be subject to having the all-terrain vehicle, scooter, utility vehicle or golf
cart, which was operated in violation of this article, impounded for a period
of 30 days. The owner of any impounded all-terrain vehicle, scooter, utility
vehicle or golf cart shall pay an impoundment fee of $10 for each day of
impoundment. This fee must be paid in full prior to the release of the vehicle.
(Ord. 828, passed 8-7-2012)
ARTICLE 9: PENAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
5-901   Violations; penalty
§ 5-901 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, or any person’s agent or servant, who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided herein,
shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined in any sum not exceeding $500. A new violation shall be deemed to have
been committed every 24 hours of failure to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the
municipality may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin, abate and remove the
same in the manner provided by law.
      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists,
the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.
(Ord. 642, passed 5-10-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-505, 18-1720 and 18-1722
CHAPTER 6: POLICE REGULATIONS
   Article
      
1.   DOGS AND CATS
      
2.   ANIMALS GENERALLY
      
3.   MISCELLANEOUS MISDEMEANORS
      
4.   SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY
      
5.   PENAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1: DOGS AND CATS
Section
   
6-101   License
   
6-101.01   Dog guides, hearing aid dogs and service dogs: exempt from license
tax
   
6-102   Dogs; license tags
   
6-103   Wrongful licensing
   
6-104   “Owner” defined
   
6-105   Proclamation
   
6-106   Collar or harness required
   
6-107   Dogs and cats; running at large
   
6-108   Capture impossible
   
6-109   Vicious dogs; exception
   
6-110   Dogs and cats; interference with police
   
6-111   Barking and chasing; complaints
   
6-112   Liability of owner
   
6-113   Removal of tags
   
6-114   Rabies
   
6-115   Dogs and cats; officer’s compensation
   
6-116   Impounding
   
6-117   Dangerous dogs; definitions
   
6-118   Dangerous dogs; actions required; costs; limitations on transport;
permanent relocation; procedure
   
6-119   Dangerous dogs; confinement required; warning signs
   
6-120   Dangerous dogs; confiscation: when; costs
   
6-121   Dangerous dogs; additional regulations
   
6-122   Domestic or hybrid animal or livestock; postexposure management
§ 6-101 LICENSE.
   Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog over the age of six months
within the municipality shall, within 30 days after the acquisition of said
dog, acquire a license for each such dog annually by or before May 1 of each
year. The license fee shall be delinquent from and after May 10 of each year;
provided, that the possessor of any dog brought into or harbored within the
corporate limits subsequent to May 1 of any year shall be liable for the
payment of the license fee levied herein. Licenses shall be issued by the
Municipal Clerk upon the payment of a license fee of $10 for each dog and $20
for any dog whose license fee is not paid by May 10. Said license shall not be
transferable and no refund will be allowed in case of death, sale or other
disposition of the licensed dog. The owner shall state at the time the
application is made, and upon printed forms provided for such purpose, his or
her name and address and the name, breed, color and sex of each dog owned and
kept by him or her. A certificate that the dog has had a rabies shot, effective
for the ensuing year of the license, shall be presented when the license is
applied for, and no license or tag shall be issued until the certificate is
shown.
(Ord. 895, passed 2-7-2017)
§ 6-101.01 DOG GUIDES, HEARING AID DOGS AND SERVICE DOGS: EXEMPT FROM LICENSE
TAX.
   Every dog guide for a blind or visually-impaired person, hearing aid dog for
a deaf or hearing-impaired person and service dog for a physically limited
person shall be licensed as required by this code, but no license tax shall be
charged upon a showing by the owner that the dog is a graduate of a recognized
training school for dog guides, hearing aid dogs or service dogs. Upon the
retirement or discontinuance of the dog as a dog guide, hearing aid dog or
service dog, the owner of the dog shall be liable for the payment of the
required license tax.
(Ord. 597, passed 8-11-1998)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 54-603
§ 6-102 DOGS; LICENSE TAGS.
   Upon the payment of the license fee, the Municipal Clerk shall issue to the
owner of a dog a license certificate and a metallic tag for each dog so
licensed. The metallic tags shall be properly attached to the collar or harness
of all dogs so licensed and shall entitle the owner to keep or harbor said dog
until April 30 following such licensing. In the event that a license tag is
lost, and upon satisfactory evidence that the original plate or tag was issued
in accordance with the provisions herein, the Municipal Clerk shall issue a
duplicate or new tag for the balance of the year for which the license tax has
been paid. All license fees and collections shall be immediately credited to
the General Fund. It shall be the duty of the Municipal Clerk to issue tags of
a suitable design that are different in appearance each year.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-526 and 54-603
§ 6-103 WRONGFUL LICENSING.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or harborer of any dog to permit
or allow such dog to wear any license, metallic tag or other municipal
identification than that issued by the Municipal Clerk for dogs.
Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-526 and 54-603
§ 6-104 “OWNER” DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OWNER. Any person who shall harbor or permit any dog to be for ten days or
more in or about his or her house, store or enclosure, or to remain to be fed,
shall be deemed the owner and possessor of such dog and shall be deemed to be
liable for all penalties herein prescribed.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 54-606 and 71-4401
§ 6-105 PROCLAMATION.
   Whenever in its opinion the danger to the public safety from a species of
rabid animals is great or imminent, the City Council shall issue a proclamation
ordering all owners of any such species to muzzle the animal or to confine it
for a period of not less than 30 days or more than 90 days from the date of the
proclamation or until the danger is passed. The animal may be harbored by any
good and sufficient means in a house, garage or yard on the premises on which
the owner may reside. Upon issuance of a proclamation, all owners of any such
species shall muzzle or confine the animal as provided in this section.
Penalty, see §
6-501
§ 6-106 COLLAR OR HARNESS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner of a dog to securely place upon
the neck of the dog a good and sufficient collar with a metallic plate thereon.
The plate shall be plainly inscribed with the name of the owner.
(Neb. RS 54-605)
   (B)   The owner of a dog may use a harness instead of a collar as long as
the harness meets all other requirements of subsection (A) above.
Penalty, see §
6-501
§ 6-107 DOGS AND CATS; RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the municipal police to cause any dog or cat
found to be running at large within the municipality to be taken up and
disposed of either by killing or finding a suitable home, at the discretion of
the Chief of Police.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, RUNNING AT LARGE shall mean any dog
or cat found off the premises of the owner, and not under control of the owner
or a responsible person, either by leash, cord, chain, wire, rope, cage of
other suitable means of physical restraint.
§ 6-108 CAPTURE IMPOSSIBLE.
   The person designated by the governing body shall have the authority to kill
any animals showing vicious tendencies or characteristics of rabies which make
capture impossible because of the danger involved.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 54-605
§ 6-109 VICIOUS DOGS; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor a vicious
dog unless said person is in compliance with subsection (C) below.
   (B)   A vicious dog is defined as any member of the following breeds of dogs
or any dog having the following described characteristics or disposition:
      (1)   Any dog of the bull terrier breed;
      (2)   Any dog of the Staffordshire bull terrier breed;
      (3)   Any dog of the American pit bull terrier breed;
      (4)   Any dog of the American Staffordshire terrier breed;
      (5)   Any dog of mixed breed or of other breeds than those specific
breeds listed herein which is commonly known as a pit bull, pit bull dog or pit
bull terrier;
      (6)   Any dog which has the appearance and characteristics of being
predominantly of the breed bull terrier, Staffordshire bull terrier, American
pit bull terrier, American Staffordshire bull terrier or any other breed
commonly known as pit bulls, pit bull dogs or pit bull terriers, or any
combination of said breeds;
      (7)   Any dog of the Rottweiler breed;
      (8)   Any dog of the Chow breed;
      (9)   Any dog that is a wolf hybrid;
      (10)   Any dog that is a cross-breed of any of the above mentioned
breeds;
      (11)   Any other dog which is of a dangerous or ferocious disposition
which habitually snaps or manifests a disposition to bite persons or other
animals; or
      (12)   Any trained attack dog.
   (C)   The owner of a dog identified as vicious in subsection (B) above may
possess such dog by complying with the following.
      (1)   The owner shall license the dog as provided in this code and pay an
annual licensing fee equal to twice the amount of the standard fee.
      (2)   No person shall permit a vicious dog to go outside its kennel or
pen unless such dog is securely leashed with a non-retractable leash no longer
than six feet in length. No person shall permit a vicious dog to be in any city
park, playground or on any designated public walking trail. No person shall
permit a vicious dog to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside
its kennel or pen unless a person over the age of 19 is in physical control of
the leash. Such dogs may not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees,
posts, buildings and the like.
      (3)   All vicious dogs shall be securely confined indoors or in a
securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when leashed as above
provided. Such pen, kennel or structure must have secure sides and a secure top
attached to the sides. All structures used to confine vicious dogs must be
locked with a key or combination lock when such animals are within the
structure. Such structure must have a secure bottom or floor attached to the
sides of the pen or the sides of the pen must be embedded in the ground no less
than two feet. All structures erected to house vicious dogs must comply with
all zoning and building regulations of the city. All such structures must be
adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
      (4)   No vicious dog may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a
house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such building on its own
volition. In addition, no such animal may be kept in a house or structure when
the windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors are the only
obstacle preventing the dog from exiting the structure.
      (5)   All owners, keepers or harborers of vicious dogs within the city
shall within ten days of the effective date of this section display in a
prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable by the public using
the words “Beware of Dog.” In addition, a similar sign is required to be posted
on the kennel or pen of such animal.
      (6)   All owners, keepers or harborers of vicious dogs within the city
shall within ten days of the effective date of this section present to the City
Clerk proof that he or she has procured liability insurance or a surety bond in
the amount of not less than $1,000,000 covering any damage or injury that may
be caused by such dog. The policy shall contain a provision requiring that the
city be notified immediately by the agent issuing the policy in the event that
the insurance policy is canceled, terminated or expired.
      (7)   All owners, keepers or harborers of vicious dogs within the city
shall notify the City Clerk immediately if such dog escapes from its enclosure
or restraint and is at large. Such immediate notification shall also be
required if the dog bites or attacks a person or domestic animal.
      (8)   If any vicious dog is kept in any manner other than as required in
this section or allowed to run at large, the person designated by the governing
body shall have the authority to put the dog to death.
   (D)   The keeping or maintaining of such dogs as described in subsections
(A) through (C) above shall be considered to be a specific nuisance, in
addition to those identified in §
4-402, and may be abated in accordance with the provisions of § 4-404.
   (E)   In addition to the abatement procedure identified in subsection (D)
above, the Mayor and City Council shall be authorized to maintain an action for
abatement of such activity in the County District Court against the owner,
occupant, lessee or mortgagee, or agent thereof, who is deemed to be in
violation of subsections (A) through (C) above. Such action is authorized under
the powers granted to second class cities pursuant to the provisions of Neb. RS
17-123.
   (F)   Furthermore, any owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or agent thereof
who shall violate or refuse to comply with the provisions of subsections (A)
through (C) above, or the enforcement thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100 for
every offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24
hours of such failure to comply.
(Ord. 894, passed 2-7-2017) Penalty, see §
6-501
§ 6-110 DOGS AND CATS; INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, delay or interfere with any
police officer or animal control officer who is performing any duty enjoined
upon that person by the provisions of this article or to break open, or in any
manner directly or indirectly aid, counsel or advise the breaking open, of the
Animal Shelter, any ambulance wagon or any other vehicle used for the
collecting or conveying of animals to the Shelter.
Penalty, see §
6-501
§ 6-111 BARKING AND CHASING; COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner to allow a dog to annoy or disturb
any neighborhood or person by loud, continued or frequent barking, howling or
yelping or to habitually bark at or chase pedestrians, drivers or owners of
horses or vehicles while they are on any public sidewalks, streets or alleys in
the city.
   (B)   Upon the written complaint of two or more affected persons from
different households, filed within any 30-day period with the City Clerk or
animal control officer, that any dog owned by the person named in the complaint
is an annoyance or disturbance, or otherwise violates the provisions of this
section, the city police or animal control officer shall investigate the
complaint and, if in his or her opinion the situation warrants, notify the
owner to silence and restrain the dog.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not be construed to apply to the
City Animal Shelter.
Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Authority to guard against annoyances, see Neb. RS 17-526
§ 6-112 LIABILITY OF OWNER.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner to allow a dog to injure or destroy any
real or personal property of any description belonging to another person. The
owner of the dog, in addition to the usual judgment upon conviction, may be
made to be liable to the person injured in an amount equal to the value of the
damage sustained.
Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Authority to guard against injuries or annoyances, see Neb. RS 17-526
   Statutory liability for damages, see Neb. RS 54-601, 54-602 and 54-606
§ 6-113 REMOVAL OF TAGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed, the
collar, harness or metallic tag from any licensed dog without the consent of
the owner, keeper or possessor thereof.
Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-526
§ 6-114 RABIES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CAT. A cat which is a household pet.
      DEPARTMENT. The State Department of Health and Human Services.
      DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any dog of the species Canis familiaris, cat of the
species Felis domesticus or ferret of the species Mustela putorius furo.
      HYBRID ANIMAL. Any animal which is the product of the breeding of a
domestic dog with a nondomestic canine species.
      OWN. To possess, keep, harbor or have control of, charge of, or custody
of a domestic or hybrid animal. This term does not apply to domestic or hybrid
animals owned by other persons which are temporarily maintained on the premises
of a veterinarian or kennel operator for a period of not more than 30 days.
      OWNER. Any person possessing, keeping, harboring or having charge or
control of any domestic or hybrid animal or permitting any domestic or hybrid
animal to habitually be or remain on or be lodged or fed within the person’s
house, yard or premises. This term does not apply to veterinarians or kennel
operators temporarily maintaining on their premises domestic or hybrid animals
owned by other persons for a period of not more than 30 days.
      RABIES CONTROL AUTHORITY. City health and law enforcement officials who
shall enforce the provisions of this article relating to the vaccination and
impoundment of domestic or hybrid animals. Such public officials shall not be
responsible for any accident or disease of a domestic or hybrid animal
resulting from the enforcement of such sections.
      VACCINATION AGAINST RABIES. The inoculation of a domestic or hybrid
animal with a United States Department of Agriculture-licensed rabies vaccine
administered consistent with its labeling. The vaccination shall be performed
by a veterinarian duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state or
licensed in the state where the vaccination was administered.
(Neb. RS 71-4401)
   (B)   Post-incident management. Any domestic animal which has bitten any
person or caused an abrasion of the skin of any person shall be subjected to
post-incident management as provided in rules and regulations adopted and
promulgated by the Department.
(Neb. RS 71-4406)
Penalty, see §
6-501
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 928, passed
1-5-2021, and 929, passed 1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024
basic code section.
§ 6-115 DOGS AND CATS; OFFICER’S COMPENSATION.
   For destroying and burying dogs and cats under the provisions of this
article, the official appointed to destroy said dogs shall be paid, in addition
to his or her regular salary, the sum of $1 for each dog or cat so destroyed
and buried.
§ 6-116 IMPOUNDING.
   It shall be the duty of the municipal police officers to capture, secure and
remove in a humane manner to the Municipal Animal Shelter any dog violating any
of the provisions of this article. The dogs so impounded shall be treated in a
humane manner and shall be provided with a sufficient supply of food and fresh
water each day. Each impounded dog shall be kept and maintained at the pound
for a period of not less than three days for licensed dogs and five days for
unlicensed dogs after public notice has been given unless reclaimed earlier by
the owner. Notice of impoundment of all animals, including any significant
marks or identifications, shall be posted at the office of the Municipal Clerk
within 24 hours after impoundment as public notification of such impoundment.
Any dog may be reclaimed by its owner during the period of impoundment by
payment of $10 for each day of impoundment plus the cost of such impoundment.
The owner shall then be required to comply with the licensing and rabies
vaccination requirements within 72 hours after release. If the dog is not
claimed at the end of required waiting period after public notice has been
given the municipal police officers may dispose of the dog in accordance with
the applicable rules and regulations pertaining to the same; provided, that if,
in the judgment of the municipal police officers, a suitable home can be found
for any such dog within the municipality, said dog shall be turned over to that
person and the new owner shall then be required to pay all fees and meet all
licensing and vaccinating requirements provided in this article. The
municipality shall acquire legal title to any unlicensed dog impounded in the
Animal Shelter for a period longer than the required waiting period after
giving notice. All dogs shall be destroyed and buried in the summary and humane
manner as prescribed by the Board of Health unless a suitable home can be found
for such dog.
(Ord. 228, passed 4-1-1975; Ord. 269, passed 5-15-1979)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-548 and 71-4408
§ 6-117 DANGEROUS DOGS; DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
6-117 through
6-120, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY. An entity authorized to enforce the animal control
laws of the municipality and includes any local law enforcement agency or other
agency designated by the Mayor to enforce the animal control laws of the
municipality.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any individual employed, appointed or authorized by
an animal control authority for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement of any
ordinance relating to the licensure of animals, control of animals or seizure
and impoundment of animals and includes any state or local law enforcement
officer or other employee whose duties in whole or in part include assignments
that involve the seizure and impoundment of any animal.
   DANGEROUS DOG.
      (1)   A dog that, according to the records of an animal control
authority:
         (a)   Has killed a human being;
         (b)   Has inflicted injury on a human being that requires medical
treatment;
         (c)   Has killed a domestic animal without provocation; or
         (d)   Has been previously determined to be a POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG
by an animal control authority, the owner has received notice from an animal
control authority or an animal control officer of such determination, and the
dog inflicts an injury on a human being that does not require medical
treatment, injures a domestic animal or threatens the safety of humans or
domestic animals.
      (2)   (a)   A dog shall not be defined as a DANGEROUS DOG under
subsection (1)(b) of this definition, and the owner shall not be guilty of any
offense, if the individual was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog at the
time of the injury or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have
tormented, abused or assaulted the dog.
         (b)   A dog shall not be defined as a DANGEROUS DOG under subsection
(1)(d) of this definition, and the owner shall not be guilty of any offense, if
the injury, damage or threat was sustained by an individual who, at the time,
was committing a willful trespass as defined in Neb. RS 20-203, 28-520 or 28-
521, was committing any other tort upon the property of the owner of the dog,
was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or has, in the past, been
observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog, or was
committing or attempting to commit a crime.
         (c)   A dog shall not be defined as a DANGEROUS DOG under subsection
(1) of this definition if the dog is a police animal as defined in Neb. RS 28-
1008.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. A cat, a dog or livestock.
   LIVESTOCK. Includes buffalo, deer, antelope, fowl and any other animal in
any zoo, wildlife park, refuge, wildlife area or nature center intended to be
on exhibit.
   MEDICAL TREATMENT. Treatment administered by a physician or other licensed
health care professional that results in sutures or surgery or treatment for
one or more broken bones.
   OWNER. Any person, firm, corporation, organization, political subdivision or
department possessing, harboring, keeping or having control or custody of a
dog.
   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG.
      (1)   Any dog that when unprovoked:
         (a)   Inflicts an injury on a human being that does not require
medical treatment;
         (b)   Injures a domestic animal; or
         (c)   Chases or approaches a person upon streets, sidewalks or any
public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack.
      (2)   Any specific dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition
to attack when unprovoked, to cause injury or to threaten the safety of humans
or domestic animals.
(Ord. 802, passed 6-7-2011)
§ 6-118 DANGEROUS DOGS; ACTIONS REQUIRED; COSTS; LIMITATIONS ON TRANSPORT;
PERMANENT RELOCATION; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   A dangerous dog that has been declared as such shall be spayed or
neutered and implanted with a microchip identification number by a licensed
veterinarian within 30 days after such declaration. The cost of both procedures
is the responsibility of the owner of the dangerous dog. Written proof of both
procedures and the microchip identification number shall be provided to the
animal control authority after the procedures are completed.
   (B)   No owner of a dangerous dog shall permit the dog to go beyond the
property of the owner unless the dog is restrained securely by a chain or
leash.
   (C)   Except as provided in this section or for a reasonable veterinary
purpose, no owner of a dangerous dog shall transport such dog or permit such
dog to be transported to another county, city or village in this state.
(Ord. 802, passed 6-7-2011)
§ 6-119 DANGEROUS DOGS; CONFINEMENT REQUIRED; WARNING SIGNS.
   (A)   No person, firm, partnership, limited liability company or corporation
shall own, keep or harbor or allow to be in or on any premises occupied by him,
her or it or under his, her or its charge or control any dangerous dog without
such dog being confined so as to protect the public from injury.
   (B)   (1)   While unattended on the owner’s property, a dangerous dog shall
be securely confined, in a humane manner, indoors or in a securely enclosed and
locked pen or structure suitably designed to prevent the entry of young
children and to prevent the dog from escaping. The pen or structure shall have
secure sides and a secure top. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to
the sides, the sides shall be embedded into the ground at a depth of at least
one foot. The pen or structure shall also protect the dog from the elements.
The pen or structure shall be at least ten feet from any property line of the
owner.
      (2)   The owner of a dangerous dog shall post warning signs on the
property where the dog is kept that are clearly visible from all areas of
public access and that inform persons that a dangerous dog is on the property.
Each warning sign shall be no less than ten inches by 12 inches and shall
contain the words warning and dangerous animal in high-contrast lettering at
least three inches high on a black background.
(Ord. 802, passed 6-7-2011)
§ 6-120 DANGEROUS DOGS; CONFISCATION: WHEN; COSTS.
   Any dangerous dog may be immediately confiscated by an animal control
officer if the owner is in violation of §§
6-117 through
6-119. The owner shall be responsible for the reasonable costs incurred by the
animal control authority for the care of a dangerous dog confiscated by an
animal control officer or for the destruction of any dangerous dog if the
action by the animal control authority is pursuant to law and if the owner
violated §§
6-117 through
6-119.
(Ord. 802, passed 6-7-2011)
§ 6-121 DANGEROUS DOGS; ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed to restrict or prohibit any
governing body of the municipality from establishing and enforcing laws or
ordinances at least as stringent as the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 408, passed 3-6-1990)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 54-624
§ 6-122 DOMESTIC OR HYBRID ANIMAL OR LIVESTOCK; POSTEXPOSURE MANAGEMENT.
   Domestic or hybrid animals or livestock known to have been exposed to a
confirmed or suspected rabid animal shall be subjected to postexposure
management as provided in rules and regulations adopted and promulgated by the
State Department of Health and Human Services.
(Neb. RS 71-4407) Penalty, see §
6-501
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 927, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
ARTICLE 2: ANIMALS GENERALLY
Section
   
6-201   Running at large; tethering
   
6-202   Cruelty
   
6-203   Enclosures
   
6-204   Fowls; running at large
   
6-205   Pitting; definitions
   
6-206   Pitting; prohibited
   
6-207   Pitting; spectators prohibited
   
6-208   Abandonment, neglect and cruelty; definitions
   
6-209   Abandonment, neglect and cruelty; law enforcement officer; powers;
immunity
   
6-210   Abandonment, neglect and cruelty; penalty
   
6-211   Fowls, controlled within municipality
§ 6-201 RUNNING AT LARGE; TETHERING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any cow, hog, horse, mule,
sheep, goat, dog, chicken, turkey, goose or other animal except a cat to permit
the animal to run at large at any time on any of the public ways and property
or the property of another in the city or to be tethered or staked out in such
a manner so as to allow the animal to reach or pass into any public way or
property or any property of another.
   (B)   The owner of a cat may permit the cat to run at large within the
corporate limits subject to any restrictions or prohibitions otherwise imposed
by the City Council.
   (C)   Any animal found running at large or tethered or staked out in
violation of this section is a public nuisance and may be impounded or
destroyed as provided in this article.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit anyone to own an
animal in the corporate limits of the city that is prohibited by the City
Council.
Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 17-526 and 17-547
   Fine for permitting collarless dog to run at large, see Neb. RS 54-607
§ 6-202 CRUELTY.
   No person shall cruelly or unnecessarily beat, overwork or insufficiently
shelter or feed any animal within the municipality.
Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1012.01
§ 6-203 ENCLOSURES.
   All pens, cages, sheds, yards or any other area or enclosure for the
confinement or animals not specifically barred within the corporate limits
shall be kept in a clean and orderly manner so as not to become a menace or
nuisance to the neighborhood in which the enclosure is located.
Penalty, see §
6-501
§ 6-204 FOWLS; RUNNING AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow poultry, chickens, turkeys,
geese or any other fowls to run at large within the corporate limits, except in
enclosed places on private property.
Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-547
§ 6-205 PITTING; DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
6-205 through
6-207, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEARBAITING. The pitting of any animal against a bear.
   COCKFIGHTING. The pitting of a fowl against another fowl.
   DOGFIGHTING. The pitting of a dog against another dog.
   PITTING. Bringing animals together in combat.
(Ord. 392, passed 2-7-1989; Ord. 423, passed 1-2-1991)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1004
§ 6-206 PITTING; PROHIBITED.
   No person shall knowingly promote, engage in or be employed at dogfighting,
cockfighting, bearbaiting or pitting an animal against another. Nor shall any
person knowingly receive money for the admission of another person to a place
kept for such purpose. Nor shall any person knowingly own, use, train, sell or
possess an animal for the purpose of animal pitting. Nor shall any person
knowingly permit any act as described in this section to occur on any premises
owned or controlled by him or her.
(Ord. 392, passed 2-7-1989; Ord. 423, passed 1-2-1991) Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1005
§ 6-207 PITTING; SPECTATORS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall knowingly and willingly be present at and witness as a
spectator dogfighting, cockfighting, bearbaiting or the pitting of an animal
against another as prohibited in §
6-206.
(Ord. 392, passed 2-7-1989; Ord. 423, passed 1-2-1991) Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1005
§ 6-208 ABANDONMENT, NEGLECT AND CRUELTY; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of §§
6-208 through
6-210, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ABANDON. To leave any animal in one’s care, whether as owner or
custodian, for any length of time without making effective provision for its
food, water or other care as is reasonably necessary for the animal’s health.
      ANIMAL. Any vertebrate member of the animal kingdom. ANIMAL does not
include an uncaptured wild creature or a livestock animal as defined in this
section.
      BOVINE. A cow, an ox or a bison.
      CRUELLY MISTREAT. To knowingly and intentionally kill, maim, disfigure,
torture, beat, mutilate, burn, scald or otherwise inflict harm upon any animal.
      CRUELLY NEGLECT. To fail to provide any animal in one’s care, whether as
owner or custodian, with food, water or other care as is reasonably necessary
for the animal’s health.
      HUMANE KILLING. The destruction of an animal by a method which causes the
animal a minimum of pain and suffering.
      LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
         (1)   Any member of the State Patrol, any county or deputy sheriff,
any member of the police force of the city or any other city or village, or any
other public official authorized by the city or any other city or village to
enforce state or local animal control laws, rules, regulations or ordinances.
         (2)   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER also includes a special investigator
appointed as a deputy state sheriff as authorized pursuant to Neb. RS 81-201
while acting within the authority of the Director of Agriculture.
      LIVESTOCK ANIMAL. Any bovine, equine, swine, sheep, goats, domesticated
cervine animals, ratite birds or poultry.
      OWNER or CUSTODIAN. Any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring or
knowingly permitting an animal to remain on or about any premises owned or
occupied by such person.
      POLICE ANIMAL. A horse or dog owned or controlled by the state or any
county, city or village for the purpose of assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of his or her official enforcement duties.
(Neb. RS 28-1008)
   (B)   Enforcement powers; immunity.
      (1)   A law enforcement officer who has reason to believe that an animal
has been abandoned or is being cruelly neglected or cruelly mistreated may seek
a warrant authorizing entry upon private property to inspect, care for or
impound the animal.
      (2)   (a)   It shall be the duty of a law enforcement officer who has
reason to believe that an animal has been abandoned or is being cruelly
neglected or cruelly mistreated to make prompt investigation of such violation.
         (b)   A law enforcement officer may, in lieu of making an arrest,
issue a citation to the owner or custodian as prescribed in Neb. RS 29-422
through 29-429.
      (3)   Any law enforcement officer acting under this section shall not be
liable for damage to property if such damage is not the result of the officer’s
negligence.
(Neb. RS 28-1012)
   (C)   Violation. 
      (1)   A person who intentionally, knowingly or recklessly abandons,
cruelly neglects or cruelly mistreats an animal is guilty of an offense.
      (2)   A person commits harassment of a police animal if he or she
knowingly and intentionally teases or harasses a police animal in order to
distract, agitate or harm the police animal for the purpose of preventing such
animal from performing its legitimate official duties.
(Neb. RS 28-1009)
Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Authority to prohibit cruelty to animals, see Neb. RS 17-138
   Serious illness or injury to animal; death of animal; felony, see Neb. RS
28-1008 and 28-1009
   Exemptions, see Neb. RS 28-1013
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 885, passed
3-1-2016, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 6-209 ABANDONMENT, NEGLECT AND CRUELTY; LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; POWERS;
IMMUNITY.
   (A)   Any law enforcement officer who has reason to believe that an animal
has been abandoned or is being cruelly neglected or cruelly mistreated may seek
a warrant authorizing entry upon private property to inspect, care for or
impound the animal.
   (B)   Any law enforcement officer who has reason to believe that an animal
has been abandoned or is being cruelly neglected or cruelly mistreated may
issue a citation to the owner as prescribed by law.
   (C)   Any law enforcement officer acting under this section shall not be
liable for damage to property if such damage is not the result of the officer’s
negligence.
(Ord. 422, passed 1-2-1991)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1012
§ 6-210 ABANDONMENT, NEGLECT AND CRUELTY; PENALTY.
   A person who intentionally, knowingly or recklessly abandons, cruelly
mistreats or cruelly neglects an animal is guilty of an offense.
(Ord. 422, passed 1-2-1991) Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1009
§ 6-211 FOWLS, CONTROLLED WITHIN MUNICIPALITY.
   (A)   Except as permitted by subsection (E) below, it shall be unlawful for
any person, corporation, firm or other entity, in the capacity of owner,
occupant, lessee or mortgagee, or agent thereof, to keep or maintain, within or
without the corporate limits of the city, any chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys,
pheasants, quail, ostriches or any other similar fowl within 300 feet of any
residence, dwelling, business house or commercial structure located within said
corporation limits.
   (B)   The keeping or maintain of such fowl as described in subsection (A)
above shall be considered to be a specific nuisance, in addition to those
identified in §
4-402, and may be abated in accordance with the provisions of §
4-404.
   (C)   In addition to the abatement procedure identified in subsection (B)
above, the Mayor and City Council shall be authorized to maintain an action for
abatement of such activity in the County District Court, against the owner,
occupant, lessee or mortgagee, or agent thereof, who is deemed to be in
violation of subsection (A) above. Such action is authorized under the powers
granted to second class cities pursuant to the provisions of Neb. RS 17-123.
   (D)   Furthermore, any owner, occupant, lessee or mortgagee, or agent
thereof, who shall violate or refuse to comply with the provisions of
subsection (A) above, or the enforcement thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100 for
every offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24
hours of such failure to comply.
   (E)   Notwithstanding the above provisions of this section, the raising of
hen chickens within the municipality may be permitted, subject to compliance
with the following conditions.
      (1)   Any person desiring to keep hen chickens in the city or its zoning
jurisdiction shall obtain a permit from the city prior to acquiring the hen
chickens. Application shall be made to the City Clerk and the fee for the
permit shall be $25, or as determined by Council resolution. The application
shall be in writing on a form to be furnished by the City Clerk for that
purpose.
      (2)   The application shall be made pursuant to the procedures and
requirements that are applicable at the time the person applies for a new
permit, which shall include:
         (a)   Name and residence of the applicant;
         (b)   Location of premises where hen chickens are to be kept;
         (c)   Species of hen chickens to be kept;
         (d)   Statement of the method in which offal, manure and waste
material accumulating from such hen chickens will be sanitarily disposed of;
and
         (e)   An attached diagram or plat of premises, showing dimensions of
premises, the location and dimensions of the enclosure, and the distance from
residence buildings, and property lot line, on the same lot and on adjacent
property.
      (3)   Any applicant for such permit, shall, at least ten days prior to
the action thereon by the City Council, give notice of the pendency of said
application to all owners of property abutting the proposed location of the
proposed covered enclosure or fenced enclosure, and to all owners of residences
within 100 feet of said location, and furnish proof of said notice to the City
Council. The notice required by this section may be served personally or by
mailing.
      (4)   Prior to the issuance of any permit for the keeping of hen
chickens, the City Clerk shall have a proper investigation completed by city
personnel of the facts set forth in the application for the permit and
determine whether said premises conform to the requirements of this chapter and
other ordinances of the city with respect to zoning and building regulations,
sanitation and location of enclosures and shelters. No permit shall be issued
by the City Clerk, after initial approval by the City Council, until proper
facilities shall be provided for the care and protection of the hen chickens to
be cared for on the premises and the location of the premises is deemed to be
proper and suitable for the keeping of such hen chickens and the application
has been approved as to proper zoning.
      (5)   Permits expire and become invalid one year after date of issuance.
A person who wishes to continue keeping hen chickens shall have obtained a new
permit on or before the expiration date of the previous permit. No permit shall
be assignable or transferable either as to permittee, location or species of
animal.
      (6)   A person who keeps or houses hen chickens on his or her property
shall comply with all of the following requirements.
         (a)   No more than six hen chickens may be kept on any one zoning lot.
         (b)   The principal use of the property shall be a single-family
dwelling.
         (c)   No person shall keep hen chickens on a vacant or uninhabited
tract of land.
         (d)   No person shall keep any rooster.
         (e)   No person shall slaughter any hen chickens within view of the
general public.
         (f)   The hen chickens shall be provided with a covered enclosure and
must be kept in the covered enclosure or a fenced enclosure at all times. Hen
chickens shall be secured within a covered enclosure during non-daylight hours.
Such covered enclosure or coop shall contain at least four square feet of floor
area per hen chicken, and the fenced enclosure shall provide at least ten
square feet of open area per hen chicken; no coop shall exceed 120 square feet
of floor area or exceed 12 feet in height.
         (g)   1.   A person shall not keep hen chickens in any location on the
property other than in the rear yard.
            2.   For the purpose of this subsection (E)(6)(g), REAR YARD means
the portion of a lot enclosed by the property’s rear lot line and the side lot
lines to the points where the side lot lines intersect with an imaginary line
established by the rear of the dwelling and extending to the side lot lines.
         (h)   No covered enclosure or fenced enclosure shall be located closer
than ten feet to any property line of an adjacent property.
         (i)   All enclosures for the keeping of hen chickens shall be so
constructed or repaired as to prevent rats, mice or other rodents from being
harbored underneath, within or within the walls of the enclosure. A covered
enclosure or fenced enclosure shall not be located closer than 40 feet to any
residential structure on another person’s property.
            1.   A covered enclosure shall be enclosed on all sides and shall
have a roof and doors. Access doors must be able to be shut and locked at
night. Opening windows and vents must be covered with predator and bird proof
wire of less than one-inch openings.
            2.   The materials used in making a covered enclosure shall be
uniform for each element of the structure such that the walls are made of the
same material, the roof has the same shingles or other covering and any windows
or openings are constructed using the same materials. The use of scrap, waste
board, sheet metal or similar materials is prohibited. Covered enclosures shall
be well maintained.
            3.   Any enclosed chicken pen shall consist of sturdy wire fencing.
The pen must be covered with wire, aviary netting or solid roofing.
         (j)   All feed and other items associated with the keeping of hen
chickens that are likely to attract or to become infested with or infected by
rats, mice or other rodents shall be protected so as to prevent rats, mice or
other rodents from gaining access to or coming into contact with them.
         (k)   Odors from chickens, chicken manure or other chicken related
substances shall not be perceptible beyond the boundaries of the permitted
tract of land.
         (l)   Noise from chickens shall not be loud enough beyond the
boundaries of the permitted tract of land at the property boundaries to disturb
persons of reasonable sensitivity.
         (m)   The permittee shall not allow the permittee’s chickens to roam
off the permitted tract of land. No dog or cat or other domesticated animal
which kills a chicken off the permitted tract of land will, for that reason
alone, not be considered a dangerous or aggressive animal or the city’s
responsibility to enforce its animal control provisions.
   (F)   Any violation of a provision of subsections (E)(1) through (E)(6)
above shall subject the violating party to the penalties identified in
subsections (B), (C) and (D) above, and, in addition, the city may revoke any
permit granted under this section.
   (G)   A person who has been issued a permit shall submit the premises so
licensed, for inspection upon request by any police officer or code enforcement
officer of the municipality.
(Ord. 492, passed 12-6-1994; Ord. 833, passed 2-5-2013) Penalty, see §
6-501
ARTICLE 3: MISCELLANEOUS MISDEMEANORS
Section
   
6-301   Impersonating an officer
   
6-302   Refusing to assist officer
   
6-303   Resisting arrest without the use of a deadly or dangerous weapon
   
6-304   Trespassing
   
6-305   Malicious destruction of property
   
6-306   Larceny
   
6-307   Concealing stolen property
   
6-308   Trash
   
6-309   Drinking on public property; open beverage container
   
6-310   Misrepresentation by minor to obtain alcohol
   
6-311   Prohibited acts involving alcoholic liquor
   
6-312   Bawdy houses
   
6-313   Prostitution generally
   
6-314   Participating in prostitution
   
6-315   Prostitutes
   
6-316   Soliciting alms
   
6-317   Discharge of firearms
   
6-318   Concealed weapons
   
6-319   Slingshots, air guns, bb guns
   
6-320   Firecrackers
   
6-321   Assaults
   
6-322   Provoking assault
   
6-323   Menacing threats
   
6-324   Assault and battery
   
6-325   Disturbing the peace
   
6-326   Disorderly conduct
   
6-327   Malicious mischief
   
6-328   Indecent behavior
   
6-329   Window peeping
   
6-330   Littering
   
6-331   Appliances in yard
   
6-332   Weeds, litter, stagnant water
   
6-333   Diseased or dying trees
   
6-334   Abandoned automobiles
   
6-335   Curfew
   
6-336   Duty of parents, guardian
   
6-337   Camping on public property
   
6-338   False reporting
   
6-339   Shoplifting
   
6-340   Driving under the influence
   
6-340.01   Driving under the influence; person under 21 years of age
   
6-341   Violence on a service dog; interference with a service dog
   
6-342   Junked motor vehicles
   
6-343   Trespassing on city-owned property; exclusions from city-owned property
   
6-344   Trespassing on city-owned property; telephone contact
   
6-345   Trespassing on city-owned property; appeal
   
6-346   Trespassing on city-owned property; Ban and Bar Review Panel
   
6-347   Trespassing on city-owned property; definitions
   
6-348   Public indecency
   
6-349   Gambling
   
6-350   Use of tobacco by persons under the age of 21
   
6-351   Sale of tobacco to persons under the age of 21
   
6-352   Misrepresentation by person under the age of 21 to obtain tobacco
§ 6-301 IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely pretend to be a peace officer
and perform any act in that pretended capacity.
(Neb. RS 28-610) Penalty, see §
6-501
§ 6-302 REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, upon a request by a person known to him
or her to be a peace officer, unreasonably to refuse or fail to aid the peace
officer in:
   (A)   Apprehending any person charged with or convicted of any offense
against any of the laws of this state or city;
   (B)   Securing the offender when apprehended; or
   (C)   Conveying the offender to the jail of the county or this city.
(Neb. RS 28-903) Penalty, see §
6-501
§ 6-303 RESISTING ARREST WITHOUT THE USE OF A DEADLY OR DANGEROUS WEAPON.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the use of a deadly or
dangerous weapon, while intentionally preventing or attempting to prevent a
peace officer, acting under color of his or her official authority, from
effecting an arrest of the actor or another, to:
      (1)   Use or threaten to use physical force or violence against the peace
officer or another;
      (2)   Use any other means which creates a substantial risk of causing
physical injury to the peace officer or another; or
      (3)   Employ means requiring substantial force to overcome resistance to
effecting the arrest.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section if the
peace officer involved was out of uniform and did not identify himself or
herself as a peace officer by showing his or her credentials to the person
whose arrest is attempted.
(Neb. RS 28-904) Penalty, see §
6-501
§ 6-304 TRESPASSING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass upon any private grounds
within the municipality, or to break, cut or injure any tree, shrub, plant,
flower or grass growing thereon, or without the consent of the owner or
occupant to enter upon an improved lot or grounds occupied for residence
purposes and to loiter about the same.
Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-520 through 28-522
§ 6-305 MALICIOUS DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits to
purposely, willfully or maliciously injure in any manner, or destroy any real
or personal property of any description belonging to another.
Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-513 and 28-524
§ 6-306 LARCENY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits to steal any
money, goods or chattels of any kind whatever. Any person who shall steal
property of any kind, whether the same be entirely in money or entirely
property of the value of less than $300 shall be deemed to be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 270, passed 5-15-1979) Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-512 and 28-514
§ 6-307 CONCEALING STOLEN PROPERTY.
   Any person who receives or conceals stolen property, goods or chattels of
any kind with the intent to defraud the owner, or whoever receives or conceals
any money or other accountable receipts and evidences of ownership shall be
deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-517
§ 6-308 TRASH.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously or negligently
place or throw upon the premises of another any filth, garbage, leaves, papers
or other matter to the annoyance of the owner or occupant thereon.
Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-523
§ 6-309 DRINKING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY; OPEN BEVERAGE CONTAINER.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.
         (a)   1.   Beer, ale, porter, stout and other similar fermented
beverages, including sake or similar products, of any name or description,
containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume, brewed or produced from malt,
wholly or in part or from any substitute therefor;
            2.   Wine of not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume; or
            3.   Distilled spirits, which is that substance known as ethyl
alcohol, ethanol or spirits of wine in any form, including all dilutions and
mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
         (b)   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE does not include trace amounts not readily
consumable as a beverage.
      HIGHWAY. A road or street including the entire area within the right-of-
way.
      LIMOUSINE. A luxury vehicle used to provide prearranged passenger
transportation on a dedicated basis at a premium fare that has a seating
capacity of at least five and no more than 14 persons behind the driver with a
physical partition separating the driver seat from the passenger compartment.
LIMOUSINE does not include taxicabs, hotel or airport buses or shuttles or
buses.
      OPEN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTAINER. Except as provided in Neb. RS 53-
123.04(3) and 53-123.11(1)(c), any bottle, can or other receptacle:
         (a)   That contains any amount of alcoholic beverage; and
         (b)   1.   That is open or has a broken seal; or
            2.   The contents of which are partially removed.
      PASSENGER AREA.
         (a)   The area designed to seat the driver and passengers while the
motor vehicle is in operation and any area that is readily accessible to the
driver or a passenger while in their seating positions, including any
compartments in the area.
         (b)   PASSENGER AREA does not include the area behind the last upright
seat of the motor vehicle if the area is not normally occupied by the driver or
a passenger and the motor vehicle is not equipped with a trunk.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is unlawful for any
person in the passenger area of a motor vehicle to possess an open alcoholic
beverage container while the motor vehicle is located in a public parking area
or on any highway in this municipality.
   (C)   Except as provided in §
10-121 or subsection (D) below, it is unlawful for any person to consume an
alcoholic beverage:
      (1)   In a public parking area or on any highway in this municipality; or
      (2)   Inside a motor vehicle while in a public parking area or on any
highway in this municipality.
   (D)   This section does not apply to persons who are passengers of, but not
drivers of, a limousine or bus being used in a charter or special party service
as defined by rules and regulations adopted and promulgated by the state Public
Service Commission and subject to NAC, Chapter 75, article 3. Such passengers
may possess open alcoholic beverage containers and may consume alcoholic
beverages while such limousine or bus is in a public parking area or on any
highway in this municipality if:
      (1)   The driver of the limousine or bus is prohibited from consuming
alcoholic liquor; and
      (2)   Alcoholic liquor is not present in any area that is readily
accessible to the driver while in the driver’s seat, including any compartments
in such area.
(Ord. 637, passed 5-10-2000; Ord. 824, passed 1-3-2012) Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,211.08
§ 6-310 MISREPRESENTATION BY MINOR TO OBTAIN ALCOHOL.
   No minor, as defined by Neb. RS 53-103.23, shall obtain, or attempt to
obtain, alcoholic liquor by misrepresentation of age, or by any other method,
in any tavern or other place where alcoholic liquor is sold.
(Neb. RS 53-180.01) Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Penalty for manufacturing false identification intended for minors, see Neb.
RS 53-180.05
§ 6-311 PROHIBITED ACTS INVOLVING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, the definitions found in Neb. RS 53-
103 shall apply, including, but not limited to, the definitions of the terms
alcoholic liquor, consume, minor, sale and to sell.
   (B)   Except as provided in §
10-122, no minor may sell, dispense, consume or have in her or her possession
or physical control any alcoholic liquor in any tavern or in any other place,
including public streets, alleys, roads or highways, upon property owned by the
state or any subdivision thereof, or inside any vehicle while in or on any
other place, including, but not limited to, the public streets, alleys, roads
or highways or upon property owned by the state or any subdivision thereof,
except that a minor may consume, possess or have physical control of alcoholic
liquor as a part of a bona fide religious rite, ritual or ceremony in his or
her permanent place of residence.
   (C)    It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to
transport, consume or knowingly possessor have under his or her control beer or
other alcoholic liquor in or transported by any motor vehicle.
(Ord. 677, passed 4-2-2002) Penalty, see §
6-501
§ 6-312 BAWDY HOUSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, establish, maintain, own, use
or lease any building, room or other structure for the purpose of lewdness,
assignation or prostitution.
Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-804
§ 6-313 PROSTITUTION GENERALLY.
   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (C) below, any person who performs,
offers or agrees to perform any act of sexual contact or sexual penetration, as
those terms are defined in Neb. RS 28-318, with any person not his or her
spouse, in exchange for money or other thing of value, commits the offense of
prostitution.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that
such person was a trafficking victim as defined in Neb. RS 28-830.
   (C)   If the law enforcement officer determines, after a reasonable
detention for investigative purposes, that a person suspected of or charged
with a violation of subsection (A) above is:
      (1)   A person engaging in those acts as a direct result of being a
trafficking victim as defined in Neb. RS 28-830, such person shall be immune
from prosecution for a prostitution offense; or
      (2)   A person under 18 years of age, such person shall be immune from
prosecution for a prostitution offense under this section and shall be subject
to temporary custody under Neb. RS 43-248 and further disposition under the
State Juvenile Code, being Neb. RS 43-245 et seq. A law enforcement officer who
takes a person under 18 years of age into custody under this section shall
immediately report an allegation of a violation of Neb. RS 28-831 to the
Department of Health and Human Services which shall commence an investigation
within 24 hours under the Child Protection and Family Safety Act, being Neb. RS
28-710 et seq.
(Neb. RS 28-801) Penalty, see §
6-501
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 864, passed
3-3-2015, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 6-314 PARTICIPATING IN PROSTITUTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to become or remain an inmate, guest or
employee in any bawdy house or house of prostitution, or to attend or visit any
such house for the purpose of illicit sexual activity.
Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-802
§ 6-315 PROSTITUTES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any prostitute
or lewd person to visit or frequent his or her room or lodging place at any
time. It shall be unlawful to engage in any manner of prostitution or pimping,
either in a disorderly house, bawdy house or elsewhere. It shall be unlawful
for any lewd person to solicit, invite or permit any person other than his or
her spouse to visit his or her room at any time for the purpose of illicit
sexual activity.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, DISORDERLY HOUSE shall be construed
to be any place kept in such a manner as to disturb, annoy or scandalize the
public generally; any place kept for the purpose of public resort with
drunkards, prostitutes or other idle people; and any place of public resort
where illegal practices are habitually carried on to the corruption of the
public morals or safety.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, own or maintain a
disorderly house as herein defined.
Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-801 through 28-804
§ 6-316 SOLICITING ALMS.
   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to solicit upon the public
streets or in any private residences alms, gifts or contributions for private
benefit unless the person so soliciting shall have first secured a permit from
the Municipal Clerk authorizing him or her to conduct such operations within
the corporate limits.
Penalty, see § 6-501
§ 6-317 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, except an officer of the law in the
discharge of official duty, to fire or discharge any gun, pistol or other
fowling piece within the city, except that nothing in this section shall be
construed to apply to officially sanctioned public celebrations if the persons
so discharging firearms have written permission from the City Council.
Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 17-556
§ 6-318 CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, within the city limits, to carry
a weapon or weapons concealed on or about his or her person, such as a
revolver, pistol, Bowie knife, dirk or knife with a dirk blade attachment,
brass or iron knuckles or any other deadly weapon.
   (B)   The prohibition set forth in subsection (A) above shall not apply to
municipal police, the County Sheriff’s personnel, State Patrol or other law
enforcement professional while on duty and serving within his or her
jurisdiction in the city.
   (C)   The provisions of this section and the prohibitions identified in
subsection (A) above do specifically apply to permit holders under the State
Concealed Handgun Permit Act, being Neb. RS 69-2427 et seq., and a conspicuous
notice indicating that carrying a concealed handgun is prohibited shall be
posted in all public places and facilities within the city.
(Ord. 767, passed 5-1-2007) Penalty, see §
6-501
§ 6-319 SLINGSHOTS, AIR GUNS, BB GUNS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a slingshot, air gun, BB
gun or the like loaded with rocks or other dangerous missiles at any time or
under any circumstances within the city.
Penalty, see §
6-501
§ 6-320 FIRECRACKERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite or cause to be exploded
fireworks or firecrackers of any description whatsoever, except sparklers,
Vesuvius fountains, spray fountains, torches, color fire cones, star and comet
type color aerial shells without explosive charges for the purpose of making a
noise, color wheels, lady fingers, not exceeding seven-eighths inch in length
or one-eighth inch in diameter, and which do not contain more than one half
grain each in weight of explosive material.
Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1244
§ 6-321 ASSAULTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to assault or threaten any other person
or persons. Any person who assaults another person or persons shall be deemed
to be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-411
§ 6-322 PROVOKING ASSAULT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons within the municipality to
intentionally provoke or attempt to provoke an assault upon himself, herself or
another by the uttering of insulting words, cursing and swearing, or to use
slander against any other person. Upon conviction, a fine not to exceed $10
shall be assessed.
Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-412
§ 6-323 MENACING THREATS.
   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of
this municipality to assault or threaten another in a menacing manner or strike
or injure another.
Penalty, see §
6-501
§ 6-324 ASSAULT AND BATTERY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to assault, threaten, strike or injure
any other person or persons. Any person who assaults or batters another person
or persons shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Penalty, see §
6-501 
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-411
§ 6-325 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally to disturb the peace and
quiet of any person, family or neighborhood.
(Neb. RS 28-1322) Penalty, see §
6-501
§ 6-326 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in conduct or behavior which
disturbs the peace and good order of the city by clamor or noise, intoxication,
drunkenness, fighting or using obscene or profane language in the streets or
other public places or otherwise violating the public peace by indecent or
disorderly conduct or lewd or lascivious behavior.
Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Authority to prevent disorderly conduct, see Neb. RS 17-129
   Authority to regulate noise, riots and routs, see Neb. RS 17-556
§ 6-327 MALICIOUS MISCHIEF.
   (A)   A person commits criminal mischief if he or she:
      (1)   Damages property of another intentionally or recklessly;
      (2)   Intentionally tampers with property of another so as to endanger
person or property; or
      (3)   Intentionally or maliciously causes another to suffer pecuniary
loss by deception or threat.
   (B)   Criminal mischief is an offense:
      (1)   If the actor intentionally or maliciously causes pecuniary loss of
$500 or more but less than $5,000; or
      (2)   If the actor intentionally, maliciously or recklessly causes
pecuniary loss in an amount of less than $500 or if his or her action results
in no pecuniary loss.
(Neb. RS 28-519) Penalty, see §
6-501
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 889, passed
3-1-2016, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 6-328 INDECENT BEHAVIOR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons over the age of 14 years to
commit any indecent or immoral act or to appear in any public place in improper
clothing or not decently garbed. It shall be unlawful for any person, or
persons, to sell or convey any indecent and obscene books, pictures or films,
or to take part in any indecent, lascivious or obscene show, play, theatrical
exhibition or other form of entertainment that is shocking to the public
morals. Any person or persons who commit a rude, indecent or immoral act shall
be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-808, 28-809, 28-813.02 and 28-920
§ 6-329 WINDOW PEEPING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon the private premises of
another to look or peep into any window, door or other opening in a building
occupied by any other person.
Penalty, see §
6-501
§ 6-330 LITTERING.
   (A)   Any person who deposits, throws, discards or otherwise disposes of any
litter on any public or private property, or in any waters, commits the offense
of littering unless:
      (1)   Such property is an area designated by law for the disposal of such
material and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to so use
such property; or
      (2)   The litter is placed in a receptacle or container installed on such
property for such purpose.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LITTER. All waste material susceptible of being dropped, deposited,
discarded or otherwise disposed of by any person upon any property in the state
but does not include wastes of primary processes of farming or manufacturing.
      WASTE MATERIAL. Any material appearing in a place or in a context not
associated with that material’s function or origin.
   (C)   Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor
vehicle or watercraft in violation of this section, the operator of such motor
vehicle or watercraft commits the offense of littering.
(Ord. 500, passed 2-7-1995) Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-573 and 28-523
§ 6-331 APPLIANCES IN YARD.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a refrigerator, icebox,
freezer or any other dangerous appliance to be in the open and accessible to
children whether on private or public property unless the person first removes
all doors and makes the same reasonably safe.
Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Authority to prohibit nuisances within zoning jurisdiction, see Neb. RS 18-
1720
§ 6-332 WEEDS, LITTER, STAGNANT WATER.
   (A)   Lots or pieces of ground within the city or within its
extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction shall be drained or filled so as to
prevent stagnant water or any other nuisance accumulating thereon.
   (B)   The owner or occupant of any lot or piece of ground within the city or
within its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction shall keep the lot or piece of
ground and the adjoining streets and alleys free of any growth of 12 inches or
more in height of weeds, grasses or worthless vegetation.
   (C)   The throwing, depositing or accumulation of litter on any lot or piece
of ground within the city or within its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction is
prohibited.
   (D)   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance to permit or maintain any
growth of 12 inches or more in height of weeds, grasses or worthless vegetation
on any lot or piece of ground within the city or within its extraterritorial
zoning jurisdiction or on the adjoining streets or alleys or to litter or cause
litter to be deposited or remain thereon except in proper receptacles.
   (E)   Any owner or occupant of a lot or piece of ground shall, upon
conviction of violating this section, be guilty of an offense.
   (F)   (1)   Notice to abate and remove such nuisance shall be given to each
owner or owner’s duly authorized agent and to the occupant, if any. The city
shall establish the method of notice by ordinance. If notice is given by first-
class mail, such mail shall be conspicuously marked as to its importance.
Within five days after receipt of such notice, the owner or occupant of the lot
or piece of ground may request a hearing with the city to appeal the decision
to abate or remove a nuisance by filing a written appeal with the office of the
City Clerk. A hearing on the appeal shall be held within 14 days after the
filing of the appeal and shall be conducted by an elected or appointed officer
as designated in the ordinance. The hearing officer shall render a decision on
the appeal within five business days after the conclusion of the hearing. If
the appeal fails, the city may have such work done. Within five days after
receipt of such notice, if the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground
does not request a hearing with the city or fails to comply with the order to
abate and remove the nuisance, the city may have such work done.
      (2)   The costs and expenses of any such work shall be paid by the owner.
If unpaid for two months after such work is done, the city may either:
         (a)   Levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot
or piece of ground so benefitted as a special assessment in the same manner as
other special assessments for improvements are levied and assessed; or
         (b)   Recover in a civil action the costs and expenses of the work
upon the lot or piece of ground and the adjoining streets and alleys.
   (G)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LITTER. Includes, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Trash, rubbish, refuse, garbage, paper, rags and ashes;
         (b)   Wood, plaster, cement, brick or stone building rubble;
         (c)   Grass, leaves and worthless vegetation except when used as
ground mulch or in a compost pile;
         (d)   Offal and dead animals; and
         (e)   Any machine or machines, vehicle or vehicles or parts of a
machine or vehicle which have lost their identity, character, utility or
serviceability as such through deterioration, dismantling or the ravages of
time, are inoperative or unable to perform their intended functions, or are
cast off, discarded or thrown away or left as waste, wreckage or junk.
      WEEDS. Include, but are not limited to: bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis),
puncture vine (Tribulus terrestris), leafy spurge (Euphorbia esula), Canada
thistle (Cirsium arvense), perennial peppergrass (Lepidium draba), Russian
knapweed (Centaurea picris), Johnson grass (Sorghum halepense), nodding or musk
thistle, quack grass (Agropyron repens), perennial sow thistle (Sonchus
arvensis), horse nettle (Solanum carolinense), bull thistle (Cirsium
lanceolatum), buckthorn (Rhamnus sp.) (tourn), hemp plant (Cannabis sativa) and
ragweed (Ambrosiaceae).
(Neb. RS 17-563) Penalty, see §
6-501
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 879, passed
3-1-2016, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 6-333 DISEASED OR DYING TREES.
   (Repealed by Ord. 499, passed 2-7-1995)
§ 6-334 ABANDONED AUTOMOBILES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ABANDONED VEHICLE.
         (a)   A motor vehicle is an ABANDONED VEHICLE:
            1.   If left unattended, with no license plates or valid In Transit
stickers issued pursuant to the Motor Vehicle Registration Act, being Neb. RS
60-301 et seq. affixed thereto, for more than six hours on any public property;
            2.   If left unattended for more than 24 hours on any public
property, except a portion thereof on which parking is legally permitted;
            3.   If left unattended for more than 48 hours, after the parking
of such vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of any public property
on which parking is legally permitted;
            4.   If left unattended for more than seven days on private
property if left initially without permission of the owner, or after permission
of the owner is terminated;
            5.   If left for more than 30 days in the custody of a city law
enforcement agency after the agency has sent a letter to the last-registered
owner and lienholder under subsection (D) below; or
            6.   If removed from private property by the city pursuant to a
city ordinance or this code.
         (b)   An all-terrain vehicle or minibike is an ABANDONED VEHICLE:
            1.   If left unattended for more than 24 hours on any public
property, except a portion thereof on which parking is legally permitted;
            2.   If left unattended for more than 48 hours, after the parking
of such vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of any public property
on which parking is legally permitted;
            3.   If left unattended for more than seven days on private
property if left initially without permission of the owner, or after permission
of the owner is terminated;
            4.   If left for more than 30 days in the custody of a city law
enforcement agency after the agency has sent a letter to the last-registered
owner and lienholder under subsection (D) below; or
            5.   If removed from private property by the city pursuant to a
city ordinance or this code.
         (c)   A mobile home is an ABANDONED VEHICLE if left in place on
private property for more than 30 days after a local governmental unit,
pursuant to an ordinance or resolution, has sent a certified letter to each of
the last-registered owners and posted a notice on the mobile home, stating that
the mobile home is subject to sale or auction or vesting of title as set forth
in Neb. RS 60-1903.
         (d)   No motor vehicle subject to forfeiture under Neb. RS 28-431
shall be an ABANDONED VEHICLE under this section.
      MOBILE HOME. A movable or portable dwelling constructed to be towed on
its own chassis, connected to utilities, and designed with or without a
permanent foundation for year-round living. It may consist of one or more units
that can be telescoped when towed and expanded later for additional capacity,
or of two or more units, separately towable but designed to be joined into one
integral unit and shall include a manufactured home as defined in Neb. RS 71-
4603. MOBILE HOME does not include a mobile home or manufactured home for which
an affidavit of affixture has been recorded pursuant to Neb. RS 60-169.
      PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any privately owned property which is not included
within the definition of public property.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley or park
or other state, county or city-owned property.
(Neb. RS 60-1901)
   (B)   If an abandoned vehicle, at the time of abandonment, has no license
plates of the current year or valid In Transit stickers issued pursuant to Neb.
RS 60-376 affixed and is of a wholesale value, taking into consideration the
condition of the vehicle, of $500 or less, title shall immediately vest in the
city. Any certificate of title issued under this subsection (B) to the city
shall be issued at no cost to the city.
(Neb. RS 60-1902)
   (C)   (1)   Except for vehicles governed by subsection (B) above, the city
shall make an inquiry concerning the last-registered owner of such vehicle as
follows:
         (a)   Abandoned vehicle with license plates affixed, to the
jurisdiction which issued such license plates; or
         (b)   Abandoned vehicle with no license plates affixed, to the
Department of Motor Vehicles.
      (2)   The city shall notify the last-registered owner, if any, and any
lienholder, if any, within 15 business days that the vehicle in question has
been determined to be an abandoned vehicle and that, if unclaimed, either:
         (a)   It will be sold or will be offered at public auction after five
days from the date such notice was mailed; or
         (b)   Title will vest in the city 30 days after the date such notice
was mailed.
      (3)   If the agency described in subsections (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) above
also notifies the city that a lien or mortgage exists, such notice shall also
be sent to the lienholder or mortgagee. Any person claiming such vehicle shall
be required to pay the cost of removal and storage of such vehicle.
      (4)   Title to an abandoned vehicle, if unclaimed, shall vest in the
city:
         (a)   Five days after the date the notice is mailed if the vehicle
will be sold or offered at public auction under subsection (C)(2)(a) above;
         (b)   Thirty days after the date the notice is mailed if the city will
retain the vehicle; or
         (c)   If the last-registered owner cannot be ascertained, when notice
of such fact is received.
      (5)   After title to the abandoned vehicle vests pursuant to subsection
(C)(4) above, the city may retain for use, sell or auction the abandoned
vehicle. If the city has determined that the vehicle should be retained for
use, the city shall, at the same time that the notice, if any, is mailed,
publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction an
announcement that the city intends to retain the abandoned vehicle for its use
and that title will vest in the city 30 days after the publication.
(Neb. RS 60-1903)
   (D)   (1)   If a city law enforcement agency has custody of a motor vehicle
for investigatory purposes and has no further need to keep it in custody, it
shall send a certified letter to each of the last-registered owners, if any,
and lienholders, if any, within 15 calendar days stating that the vehicle is in
the custody of the law enforcement agency, that the vehicle is no longer needed
for law enforcement purposes, and that after 30 days the agency will dispose of
the vehicle.
      (2)   This subsection (D) shall not apply to motor vehicles subject to
forfeiture under Neb. RS 28-431.
      (3)   No storage fees shall be assessed against the registered owner of a
motor vehicle held in custody for investigatory purposes under this subsection
(D) unless the registered owner or the person in possession of the vehicle when
it is taken into custody is charged with a felony or misdemeanor related to the
offense for which the law enforcement agency took the vehicle into custody. If
a registered owner or the person in possession of the vehicle when it is taken
into custody is charged with a felony or misdemeanor but is not convicted, the
registered owner shall be entitled to a refund of the storage fees.
(Neb. RS 60-1903.01)
   (E)   (1)   A law enforcement agency is authorized to remove an abandoned or
trespassing vehicle from private property upon the request of the private
property owner on whose property the vehicle is located and upon information
indicating that the vehicle is an abandoned or trespassing vehicle. After
removal, the law enforcement agency with custody of the vehicle shall follow
the procedures in Neb. RS 60-1902 and 60-1903.
      (2)   A law enforcement agency is authorized to contact a private towing
service in order to remove an abandoned or trespassing vehicle from private
property upon the request of the private property owner on whose property the
vehicle is located and upon information indicating that the vehicle is an
abandoned or trespassing vehicle. A vehicle towed away under this subsection
(E) is subject to Neb. RS 52-601.01 through 52-605 and 60-2410 by the private
towing service which towed the vehicle.
      (3)   A private property owner is authorized to remove or cause the
removal of an abandoned or trespassing vehicle from such property and may
contact a private towing service for such removal. A private towing service
that tows the vehicle shall notify, within 24 hours, the designated law
enforcement agency in the jurisdiction from which the vehicle is removed and
provide the registration plate number, the vehicle identification number, if
available, the make, model and color of the vehicle, and the name of the
private towing service and the location, if applicable, where the private
towing service is storing the vehicle. A vehicle towed away under this
subsection (E) is subject to Neb. RS 52-601.01 through 52-605 and 60-2410 by
the private towing service that towed the vehicle.
      (4)   For the purpose of this section, a TRESPASSING VEHICLE is a vehicle
that is parked without permission on private property that is not typically
made available for public parking.
(Neb. RS 60-1903.02)
   (F)   If a state agency caused an abandoned vehicle described in subsections
(A)(a)5. or (A)(b)4. above to be removed from public property in this city, the
state agency shall be entitled to custody of the vehicle. If a state agency
caused an abandoned vehicle described in subsections (A)(a)1., (A)(a)2., (A)
(a)3. or (A)(a)4. or (A)(b)1., (A)(b)2. or (A)(b)3. above to be removed from
public property in this city, the state agency shall deliver the vehicle to the
city which shall have custody.
(Neb. RS 60-1904)
   (G)   Any proceeds from the sale of an abandoned vehicle in the city’s
custody less any expenses incurred by the city shall be held by the city
without interest, for the benefit of the owner or lienholders of such vehicle
for a period of two years. If not claimed within such two-year period, the
proceeds shall be paid into the General Fund of the city.
(Neb. RS 60-1905)
   (H)   Neither the owner, owner’s agent, owner’s employee, lessee, nor
occupant of the premises from which any abandoned vehicle is removed, nor the
city, shall be liable for any loss or damage to such vehicle which occurs
during its removal or while in the possession of the city or its contractual
agent, while in the possession of a private towing service, or as a result of
any subsequent disposition.
(Neb. RS 60-1906)
   (I)   No person shall cause any vehicle to be an abandoned vehicle as
described in subsections (A)(a)1., (A)(a)2., (A)(a)3. or (A)(a)4. or (A)(b)1.,
(A)(b)2. or (A)(b)3. above.
(Neb. RS 60-1907)
   (J)   No person other than one authorized by the city or appropriate state
agency shall destroy, deface or remove any part of a vehicle which is left
unattended on a highway or other public place without license plates affixed or
which is abandoned. Anyone violating this subsection (J) shall be guilty of an
offense.
(Neb. RS 60-1908)
   (K)   The last-registered owner of an abandoned vehicle shall be liable to
the city for the costs of removal and storage of such vehicle.
(Neb. RS 60-1909)
   (L)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of
an offense.
(Neb. RS 60-1911)
Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Motor Vehicle Registration Act, see Neb. RS 60-301
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 922, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 6-335 CURFEW.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to
loiter, wander, stroll, loaf, play or drive any automobile in or upon any of
the streets, roads, alleys, parks or public places, or in any vehicle placed
upon the streets in said city, or in any billiard or pool hall or other place
of public amusement or recreation after the hour of 11:55 p.m. of any day until
5:00 a.m. of the following day unless accompanied by parent, guardian or other
adult person having the care, custody or control of said minor, or if said
minor is engaged in lawful employment; provided, that when a public or school
activity or function that is commonly attended by minors under the age of 18
years terminates after 11:00 p.m., the curfew shall be extended one hour past
such termination.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be penalized in accordance with § 6-501.
(Ord. 290, passed 10-7-1980) Penalty, see §
6-501
§ 6-336 DUTY OF PARENTS, GUARDIAN.
   It shall be unlawful for the parents, guardian or any person having the
care, custody or control of any minor under the age of 18 years to permit such
minor to loiter, wander, stroll, loaf, play or drive any automobile, or to ride
in any automobile in or about any of the places specified in §
6-335 after the hour of 11:55 p.m., of any day, and until 5:00 a.m. of the
following day, unless said minor is accompanied by the parent, guardian or
other persons having the care, custody and control of said minor. Provided,
that when a public activity or function that is commonly attended by minors
under the age of 18 years terminates after 11:00 p.m., the curfew shall be
extended one hour past such termination. Any person violating the provisions of
this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished in accordance
with §
6-501
(Ord. 290, passed 10-7-1980) Penalty, see §
6-501
§ 6-337 CAMPING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a camper, camp
trailer, recreational vehicle, or tent to park or place said device upon public
property, except where camping is authorized by posted sign. The first night
shall be free of charge. The fee for each additional night shall be $15 per
night, with a maximum stay of seven nights within any 30-day period, commencing
on the first day of occupancy. The check-out time shall be 11:00 a.m. All
campers shall register through an online reservation service and shall be
responsible for any service fees. The City Council may impose additional rules
and regulations by resolution, which may be enforced by an order to vacate the
premises and/or an order banning such person from the premises.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate this section, or who shall refuse to
comply with a lawful order to vacate, shall be deemed to be trespassing, and/or
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to a fined of not less than $25 nor
more than $100 for each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been
committed every 24 hours of such failure to comply.
(Ord. 906, passed 11-6-2018; Ord. 978, passed 10-1-2024) Penalty, see §
6-501
§ 6-338 FALSE REPORTING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Furnish material information he or she knows to be false to any
peace officer or other official with the intent to instigate an investigation
of an alleged criminal matter or impede the investigation of an actual criminal
matter;
      (2)   Furnish information he or she knows to be false alleging the
existence of the need for the assistance of an emergency medical service or
out-of-hospital emergency care provider or an emergency in which human life or
property are in jeopardy to any hospital, emergency medical service or other
person or governmental agency;
      (3)   Furnish any information, or cause such information to be furnished
or conveyed by electric, electronic, telephonic or mechanical means, knowing
the same to be false concerning the need for assistance of a Fire Department or
any personnel or equipment of such Department;
      (4)   Furnish any information he or she knows to be false concerning the
location of any explosive in any building or other property to any person; or
      (5)   Furnish material information he or she knows to be false to any
governmental department or agency with the intent to instigate an investigation
or to impede an ongoing investigation and which actually results in causing or
impeding such investigation.
   (B)   A person who violates this section commits the offense of false
reporting.
(Ord. 318, passed 9-7-1982; Ord. 599, passed 8-11-1998) Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-907
§ 6-339 SHOPLIFTING.
   (A)   A person commits the crime of theft by shoplifting when he or she,
with the intent of appropriating merchandise to his or her own use without
paying for the same or to deprive the owner of possession of such property or
its retail value, in whole or in part, does any of the following:
      (1)   Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any
store or retail establishment;
      (2)   Alters the price tag or other price marking on goods or merchandise
of any store or retail establishment;
      (3)   Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or retail
establishment from one container to another;
      (4)   Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of merchandise
with a label or price tag from another item of merchandise; or
      (5)   Causes the cash register or other sales recording device to reflect
less than the retail price of the merchandise.
   (B)   In any prosecution for theft by shoplifting, in order to allow the
owner of owners of shoplifted property the use of such property pending
criminal prosecutions, photographs of the shoplifted property may be accepted
as prima facie evidence as to the identity of the property. Such photograph
shall be accompanied by a written statement containing the following:
      (1)   A description of the property;
      (2)   The name of the owner or owners of the property;
      (3)   The time, date and location where the shoplifting occurred;
      (4)   The time and date the photograph was taken;
      (5)   The name of the photographer; and
      (6)   Verification by the arresting officer.
   (C)   Prior to allowing the use of shoplifted property as provided in this
section, legal counsel for the alleged shoplifter shall have a reasonable
opportunity to inspect and appraise the property and may file a motion for
retention of the property, which motion shall be granted if there is any
reasonable basis for believing that the photographs and accompanying affidavit
may be misleading.
(Ord. 317, passed 9-7-1982)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-514
§ 6-340 DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or be in the actual
physical control of any motor vehicle:
      (1)   While under the influence of alcoholic liquor or of any drug;
      (2)   When such person has a concentration of 0.08 of one gram or more by
weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of his or her blood; or
      (3)   When such person has a concentration of 0.08 of one gram or more by
weight of alcohol per 210 liters of his or her breath.
   (B)   Any person who operates or has in his or her actual physical control a
motor vehicle in this municipality shall be deemed to have given his or her
consent to submit to a chemical test or tests of his or her blood, breath or
urine for purpose of determining the concentration of alcohol or the presence
of drugs in such blood, breath or urine.
   (C)   Any peace officer who has been duly authorized to make arrests for
violations of traffic laws of this state or of ordinances of the municipality
may require any person arrested for any offense arising out of acts alleged to
have been committed while the person was driving or was in actual physical
control of a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic liquor or
drugs to submit to a chemical test or tests of his or her blood, breath or
urine for the purpose of determining the concentration of alcohol or the
presence of drugs in such blood, breath or urine when the officer has
reasonable grounds to believe that such person was driving or was in the actual
physical control of a motor vehicle in the municipality while under the
influence of alcoholic liquor or drugs in violation of subsection (A) above.
   (D)   Any peace officer who has been duly authorized to make arrests for
violation of traffic laws of this state or of ordinances of this municipality
may require any person who operates or has in his or her actual physical
control a motor vehicle in this municipality to submit to a preliminary test of
his or her breath for alcohol concentration if the officer has reasonable
grounds to believe that such person has alcohol in his or her body, has
committed a moving traffic violation or has been involved in a traffic
accident. Any person who refuses to submit to such preliminary breath test or
whose preliminary breath test results indicated an alcohol concentration in
violation of subsection (A) above shall be placed under arrest. Any person who
refuses to submit to such preliminary breath test shall be guilty of an
offense.
   (E)   Any person arrested as provided in this section may, upon the
direction of a peace officer, be required to submit to a chemical test or tests
of his or her blood, breath or urine for a determination of the concentration
of alcohol or the presence of drugs. If the chemical test discloses the
presence of a concentration of alcohol in violation of subsection (A) above, or
if any person refuses to submit to such test or tests required pursuant to this
section, such person shall be subject to the administrative revocation
procedures provided in Neb. RS 60-498.01 through 60-498.04 and shall be guilty
of an offense.
   (F)   Upon the conviction of any person for the violation of this section,
there shall be assessed as part of the court costs the fee charged by any
physician or any agency administering tests pursuant to a permit issued in
accordance with Neb. RS 60-6,201, for the test administered and the analysis
thereof if such test was actually made.
(Ord. 485, passed 5-3-1994; Ord. 676, passed 4-2-2002) Penalty, see § 6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,196(1), 60-6,197(1), 60-6,197(2), 60-
6,197(3), 60-6,197(4) and 60-6,203
§ 6-340.01 DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE; PERSON UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to operate
or be in the actual physical control of any motor vehicle:
      (1)   When such person has a concentration of two-hundredths of one gram
or more by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of his or her blood but less
than the concentration prescribed under Neb. RS 60-6,196(1)(b); or
      (2)   When such person has a concentration of two-hundredths of one gram
or more by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of his or her breath but less than
the concentration prescribed under Neb. RS 60-6,196(1)(c).
   (B)   Any person who operates or has in his or her actual physical control a
motor vehicle in the state shall be deemed to have given his or her consent to
submit to a chemical test or tests of his or her blood or breath for the
purposes of determining the concentration of alcohol in such blood or breath.
   (C)   Any peace officer who has been duly authorized to make arrests for
violations of traffic laws of this state or of ordinances of the municipality
may require any person under 21 years of age to submit to a chemical test or
tests of his or her blood or breath for the purpose of determining the
concentration of alcohol in such blood or breath when the officer has probable
cause to believe that such person was driving or was in actual physical control
of a motor vehicle in the municipality in violation of this section. Such peace
officer may require such person to submit to a preliminary breath test. Any
person who refuses to submit to such preliminary breath test or whose
preliminary breath test results indicate an alcohol concentration in violation
of this section shall be placed under arrest.
   (D)   Any person arrested as provided in this section may, upon the
direction of a peace officer, be required to submit to a chemical test or tests
of his or her blood or breath for a determination of the concentration of
alcohol. If the chemical test discloses the presence of a concentration of
alcohol in violation of this section, or such person refuses to submit to such
test or tests required pursuant to this section shall be guilty of an offense.
   (E)   Upon the conviction of any person for the violation of this section,
there shall be assessed as part of the court costs the fee charged by any
physician or any agency administering tests pursuant to a permit issued in
accordance with Neb. RS 60-6,201, for the test administered and the analysis
thereof if such test was actually made.
(Ord. 611, passed 4-13-1999) Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,211.01, 60-6,211.02 and 60-6,203
§ 6-341 VIOLENCE ON A SERVICE DOG; INTERFERENCE WITH A SERVICE DOG.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of violence on a service dog when he or
she:
      (1)   Intentionally injures, harasses or threatens to injure or harass;
or
      (2)   Attempts to intentionally injure, harass or threaten a dog that he
or she knows or has reason to believe is a dog guide for a blind or visually-
impaired person, a hearing aid dog for a deaf or hearing-impaired person or a
service dog for a physically limited person.
   (B)   A person commits the offense of interference with a service dog when
he or she:
      (1)   Intentionally impedes, interferes or threatens to impede or
interfere; or
      (2)   Attempts to intentionally impede, interfere or threaten to impede
or interfere with a dog that he or she knows or has reason to believe is a dog
guide for a blind or visually-impaired person, a hearing aid dog for a deaf or
hearing-impaired person or a service dog for a physically limited person.
   (C)   Evidence that the defendant initiated or continued conduct toward a
dog as described in subsections (A) or (B) above after being requested to avoid
or discontinue such conduct by the blind, visually-impaired, deaf, hearing-
impaired or physically limited person being served or assisted by the dog shall
create a rebuttable presumption that the conduct of the defendant was initiated
or continued intentionally.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BLIND PERSON. A person with totally impaired vision or with vision, with
or without correction, which is so severely impaired that the primary means of
receiving information is through other sensory input, including, but not
limited to, braille, mechanical reproduction, synthesized speech or readers.
      DEAF PERSON. A person with totally impaired hearing or with hearing, with
or without amplification, which is so severely impaired that the primary means
of receiving spoken language is through other sensory input, including, but not
limited to, lip reading, sign language, finger spelling or reading.
      HEARING-IMPAIRED PERSON. A person who is unable to hear air conduction
thresholds at an average of 40 decibels or greater in the person’s better ear.
      PHYSICALLY LIMITED PERSON. A person having limited ambulatory abilities,
including, but not limited to, having a permanent impairment or condition that
requires the person to use a wheelchair or to walk with difficulty or
insecurity to the extent that the person is insecure or exposed to danger.
      VISUALLY-IMPAIRED PERSON. A person having a visual acuity of 20/200 or
less in the person’s better eye with correction or having a limitation to the
person’s field of vision so that the widest diameter of the visual field
subtends an angular distance not greater than 20 degrees.
(Ord. 598, passed 8-11-1998)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1009.01
§ 6-342 JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES. A motor vehicle on which the engine, wheels or
other parts have been removed, altered, damaged or otherwise so treated or
allowed to deteriorate that the motor vehicle is incapable of being drawn under
its own power. A motor vehicle which has expired license plates or no license
plates affixed thereto shall be presumed to be a JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE;
provided, that such presumption may be rebutted.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Every self-propelled land vehicle, not operated upon
rails, except bicycles, mopeds, self-propelled chairs used by persons who are
disabled and electric personal assistive mobility devices.
      PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any privately owned property which is not included
within the definition of public property.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, park or
other state, county or municipally owned property.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any junked motor vehicle to be parked, left,
stored or be permitted to park or stand on private property in excess of ten
days; provided, however, that the junked motor vehicle shall not be in
violation if the junked motor vehicle shall be enclosed within a building.
   (C)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement
of this section upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100 for
such offense, recoverable with costs. A new violation shall be deemed to have
been committed every 24 hours of such failure to comply.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall prevent a lawful business enterprise,
operating in an appropriate commercial manner, to apply to the City Council for
a variance from this section to use a junked motor vehicle, as defined above,
for a lawful commercial purpose.
(Ord. 644, passed 9-12-2000; Ord. 779, passed 5-6-2008; Ord. 878, passed 3-1-
2016) Penalty, see §
6-501
Statutory reference:
   State definition of motor vehicle, see Neb. RS 60-638
§ 6-343 TRESPASSING ON CITY-OWNED PROPERTY; EXCLUSIONS FROM CITY-OWNED
PROPERTY.
   (A)   A person is subject to immediate ban and bar from a city-owned
building or property, including city parks, if that person is observed to
violate any city ordinance, city policy or state law, or engage in conduct that
places other persons or property in imminent threat of danger or harm. The ban
and bar need not be based upon a criminal charge or conviction. The ban and bar
may be based upon the observations of a police officer or upon the observations
of a city employee in connection with their duties.
   (B)   A person is subject to removal from a city-owned building or property
including city parks, if said person is disrupting or disturbing a city
function, recreational activity or private citizen. Removal may be based upon
observations of any city employee in connection with their duties.
   (C)   The removal issued under this policy shall not be for less than one
business day and not more than five business days.
   (D)   The ban and bar issued under this policy shall be 30 days. If the
person to be banned has been banned at any time within the last two years
before the date of the present ban and bar, the ban and bar shall be for 90
days. If the person to be banned has been banned on two or more occasions
within two years to the date of the present, the ban and bar shall be for 180
days.
   (E)   At any time within the ban and bar period, a person subject to ban and
bar order may apply in writing, to the Mayor, for a temporary waiver from the
effects of the ban and bar order for good cause shown. In the exercising
discretion under this provision, the Mayor shall consider the seriousness of
the violation for which the person has been banned, the particular need of the
person to obtain a waiver and any other criteria the Mayor determines to be
relevant to the determination of whether or not to grant a waiver. The decision
of the Mayor to grant or deny a waiver, in whole or in part, is committed to
the discretion of the Mayor, shall be in writing and is final.
   (F)   All ban and bar orders shall be in writing, state the basis for the
order and include information on the appeal process. The order shall be served
personally or mailed to the person by certified mail if a mailing address is
available.
   (G)   The ban and bar will be recorded and kept on file by the issuing
department during the term of the ban. A copy of the ban and bar notice will be
sent to the Police Department.
   (H)   The ban will remain in effect for the specified period unless it is
modified or rescinded due to an appeal.
   (I)   If a person who received a ban and bar remains or returns to exclude
properties without compliance with subsection (D) above, that person is a
trespasser and may be subject to arrest on criminal trespass charges per Neb.
RS 28-521.
(Ord. 972, passed 9-6-2023)
§ 6-344 TRESPASSING ON CITY-OWNED PROPERTY; TELEPHONE CONTACT.
   For the purposes of Neb. RS 28-1310, the Mayor, Chief of Police and
designees have the authority to issue a ban and bar forbidding persons from
calling specific city telephone numbers. All orders forbidding a person from
calling city telephone numbers must be in writing, state the basis for the
order, include information on the appeal process and be either served
personally or mailed to the person by certified mail if a mailing address is
available.
(Ord. 972, passed 9-6-2023)
§ 6-345 TRESPASSING ON CITY-OWNED PROPERTY; APPEAL.
   (A)   Any ban and bar from city property, and any prohibition against
calling city telephone numbers, may be appealed by filing a notice of appeal
within five business days of receipt of the notice. The notice of appeal shall
be mailed to the City Clerk’s office and will be considered timely only if
postmarked within the five-day period.
   (B)   The City Clerk’s office will arrange a hearing on the issue in front
of an appointed Ban and Bar Review Panel within ten business days of receiving
the request.
   (C)   The Panel shall consider any evidence and argument that the Panel
deems relevant to whether the exclusion or prohibition is consistent with the
policy, Neb. RS 28-1310 or any other applicable law. This may include, but is
not limited to, affidavits, witnesses or declarations from involved persons.
The city shall have the burden to justify the ban and bar by a preponderance of
the evidence.
   (D)   The written decisions of the Panel shall be issued within ten business
days of the hearing and shall affirm, modify or cancel the ban and bar. The
decision is final.
(Ord. 972, passed 9-6-2023)
§ 6-346 TRESPASSING ON CITY-OWNED PROPERTY; BAN AND BAR REVIEW PANEL.
   The Ban and Bar Review Panel will consist of the active City Council members
or their designees.
(Ord. 972, passed 9-6-2023)
§ 6-347 TRESPASSING ON CITY-OWNED PROPERTY; DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
6-343 through
6-346, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BAN or BANNING. Prohibiting individuals from remaining or entering on said
property and prohibiting them from returning to said property for the time
period noted.
   BAR or BARRING. Excluding an individual from said property for the time
period noted.
   REMOVAL or REMOVED. Asking or having an individual immediately leave from
said property for the time period noted.
(Ord. 972, passed 9-6-2023)
§ 6-348 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (A)   A person, 18 years of age or over, commits the offense of public
indecency if such person performs or procures, or assists any other person to
perform, in a public place and where the conduct may reasonably be expected to
be viewed by members of the public:
      (1)   An act of sexual penetration as defined in Neb. RS 28-318;
      (2)   An exposure of the genitals of the body done with intent to affront
or alarm any person; or
      (3)   A lewd fondling or caressing of the body of another person of the
same or opposite sex.
   (B)   It shall not be a violation of this section for an individual to
breast-feed a child in a public place.
(Neb. RS 28-806) Penalty, see §
6-501
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 937, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 6-349 GAMBLING.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the definitions found in Neb. RS 28-
1101 shall be used.
   (B)   A person commits the offense of promoting gambling if he or she
knowingly:
      (1)   Advances or profits from any unlawful gambling activity by:
         (a)   Engaging in bookmaking;
         (b)   Receiving, in connection with any unlawful gambling scheme or
enterprise, any amount of money played in the scheme or enterprise in any one
day; or
         (c)   Betting something of value in an amount of $500 or more with one
or more persons in one day; or
(Neb. RS 28-1102 and 28-1103)
      (2)   Participates in unlawful gambling as a player by betting less than
$500 in any one day.
(Neb. RS 28-1104)
   (C)   (1)   A person commits the offense of possession of a gambling device
if he or she manufactures, sells, transports, places, possesses or conducts or
negotiates any transaction affecting or designed to affect ownership, custody
or use of any gambling device, knowing that it shall be used in the advancement
of unlawful gambling activity.
      (2)   The owner or operator of a retail establishment who is not a
manufacturer, distributor or seller of mechanical amusement devices as defined
under the Mechanical Amusement Device Tax Act, being Neb. RS 77-3301 et seq.,
shall have an affirmative defense to possession of a gambling device described
in subsection (C)(1) above if the device bears an unexpired mechanical
amusement device decal as required by such Act. However, such affirmative
defense may be overcome if the owner or operator had actual knowledge that
operation of the device constituted unlawful gambling activity at any time such
device was operated on the premises of the retail establishment.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subsection (C), any
mechanical game or device classified by the federal government as an illegal
gambling device and requiring a federal Gambling Device Tax Stamp as required
by the Internal Revenue Service in its administration of 26 U.S.C. §§ 4461 and
4462, amended July 1, 1965, by Pub. Law No. 89-44, is hereby declared to be
illegal.
(Neb. RS 28-1107)
   (D)   In any prosecution under this section, it shall be an affirmative
defense that the writing, paper, instrument or article possessed by the
defendant was neither used nor intended to be used in the advancement of an
unlawful gambling activity.
(Neb. RS 28-1108)
   (E)   Proof of possession of any gambling device shall be prima facie
evidence of possession thereof with knowledge of its contents and character.
(Neb. RS 28-1109)
   (F)   It shall be no defense to a prosecution under any provision of this
section relating to gambling that the gambling is conducted outside this city
and is not in violation of the laws of the jurisdiction in which it is
conducted.
(Neb. RS 28-1110)
   (G)   In addition to any other penalty, a sentencing court may order that
any money, securities, negotiable instruments, firearms, conveyances or
electronic communication devices as defined in Neb. RS 28-833 or any equipment,
components, peripherals, software, hardware or accessories related to
electronic communication devices, or any gambling devices be forfeited as a
part of the sentence imposed if it finds by clear and convincing evidence
adduced at a separate hearing in the same prosecution, conducted pursuant to
Neb. RS 28-1601, that any or all such property was derived from, used or
intended to be used to facilitate a violation of this section.
(Neb. RS 28-1111)
   (H)   In any prosecution for an offense defined in this section, when the
defendant’s status as a player constitutes an excusing condition, the fact that
the defendant was a player shall constitute an affirmative defense.
(Neb. RS 28-1112)
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to:
      (1)   Apply to or prohibit wagering on the results of horse races by the
parimutuel or certificate method when conducted by licensees within the
racetrack enclosure at licensed horse race meetings; or
      (2)   Prohibit or punish the conducting or participating in any bingo,
lottery by the sale of pickle cards, lottery, raffle or gift enterprise when
conducted in accordance with the State Bingo Act being Neb. RS 9-201 et seq.,
the State County and City Lottery Act being Neb. RS 9-601 et seq., the State
Lottery and Raffle Act being Neb. RS 9-401 et seq., the State Pickle Card
Lottery Act being Neb. RS 9-301 et seq., the State Small Lottery and Raffle Act
being Neb. RS 9-501 et seq., the State Lottery Act being Neb. RS 9-801 et seq.
or Neb. RS 9-701; or
      (3)   Apply to or prohibit the operation of games of chance, whether
using a gambling device or otherwise, by authorized gaming operators within
licensed racetrack enclosures or the participation or playing of such games of
chance, whether participated in or played using a gambling device or otherwise,
by individuals 21 years of age or older within licensed racetrack enclosures as
provided in the State Racetrack Gaming Act, being Neb. RS 2-1201 et seq.
(Neb. RS 28-1113)
   (J)   In any prosecution under this section in which it is necessary to
prove the occurrence of a sporting event, a published report of its occurrence
in any daily newspaper, magazine or other periodically printed publication of
general circulation shall be admissible in evidence and shall constitute prima
facie evidence of the occurrence of the event.
(Neb. RS 28-1117)
Penalty, see §
6-501
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 938, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 6-350 USE OF TOBACCO BY PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21.
   Whoever, being a person under the age of 21 years, shall smoke cigarettes or
cigars, use electronic nicotine delivery systems or alternative nicotine
products, or use tobacco in any form whatever in this city, shall be guilty of
an offense. Any person charged with a violation of this section may be free
from prosecution if he or she furnishes evidence for the conviction of the
person or persons selling or giving him or her the cigarettes, cigars,
electronic nicotine delivery systems, alternative nicotine products or tobacco.
(Neb. RS 28-1418) Penalty, see §
6-501
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 957, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 6-351 SALE OF TOBACCO TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21.
   (A)   Whoever shall sell, give or furnish in any way any tobacco in any form
whatever, or any cigars, cigarettes or cigarette paper, electronic nicotine
delivery systems or alternative nicotine products, to any person under 21 years
of age is guilty of an offense.
   (B)   (1)   In order to further the public policy of deterring licensees or
other persons from violating subsection (A) above, a person who is at least 15
years of age but under 21 years of age may assist a peace officer in
determining compliance with such subsection if:
         (a)   The parent or legal guardian of the person has given written
consent for the person to participate in such compliance check if such person
is under 19 years of age;
         (b)   The person is an employee, a volunteer or an intern with a state
or local law enforcement agency;
         (c)   The person is acting within the scope of his or her assigned
duties as part of a law enforcement investigation;
         (d)   The person does not use or consume a tobacco product as part of
such duties; and
         (e)   The person is not actively assigned to a diversion program, is
not a party to a pending criminal proceeding or a proceeding pending under the
State Juvenile Code, being Neb. RS 43-245 et seq. and is not on probation.
      (2)   Any person under the age of 21 years acting in accordance with an
under the authority of this subsection (B) shall not be in violation of Neb. RS
28-1427.
(Neb. RS 28-1419) Penalty, see §
6-501
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 956, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 6-352 MISREPRESENTATION BY PERSON UNDER THE AGE OF 21 TO OBTAIN TOBACCO.
   Except as provided in §
6-351(B), any person under the age of 21 years who obtains cigars, tobacco,
cigarettes or cigarette material, electronic nicotine delivery systems or
alternative nicotine products from a licensee hereunder by representing that he
or she is of the age of 21 years or over, is guilty of an offense.
(Neb. RS 28-1427) Penalty, see §
6-501
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 955, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
ARTICLE 4: SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY
Section
   
6-401   Findings and intent
   
6-402   Definitions
   
6-403   Sexual predator residency restrictions; penalties; exceptions
§ 6-401 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   (A)   The state legislature has found that certain sex offenders present a
high risk to commit repeat offenses and has enabled municipalities to restrict
such persons place of residency as provided in the Sexual Predator Residency
Restriction Act, Neb. RS 29-4003 and 29-4013.
   (B)   Sex offenders who prey on children and who are high risks to repeat
such acts present an extreme threat to public safety. The cost of sex offender
victimization to these children and to society at large, while incalculable, is
exorbitant.
   (C)   It is the intent of this article to serve the city’s compelling
interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the city by creating certain areas around locations where children
regularly congregate in concentrated numbers where certain sexual predators
cannot reside.
(Ord. 749, passed 2-7-2006; Ord. 753, passed 7-11-2006)
§ 6-402 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
   CHILD CARE FACILITY. A facility licensed pursuant to the Child Care
Licensing Act, being Neb. RS 71-1908 et seq.
   RESIDE. To sleep, live or dwell at a place, which may include more than one
location, and may be mobile or transitory.
   RESIDENCE. A place where an individual sleeps, lives or dwells, which may
include more than one location, and may be mobile or transitory.
   SCHOOL. A public, private, denominational or parochial school which meets
the requirements for state accreditation or approval.
   SEX OFFENDER. An individual who has been convicted of a crime listed in Neb.
RS 29-4003 and who is required to register as a sex offender pursuant to the
Sex Offender Registration Act, being Neb. RS 29-4001 et seq.
   SEXUAL PREDATOR. An individual who is required to register under the Sex
Offender Registration Act, who has been classified as Level 3 because of a high
risk of recidivism as determined by the State Patrol under Neb. RS 29-4013, and
who has victimized a person 18 years of age or younger.
(Ord. 749, passed 2-7-2006; Ord. 753, passed 7-11-2006)
§ 6-403 SEXUAL PREDATOR RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS; PENALTIES; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Prohibited location of residence. It is unlawful for any sexual
predator to reside within 500 feet from a school or child care facility.
   (B)   Measure of distance. For purposes of determining the minimum distance
separation, the distance shall be measured by following a straight line from
the outer property line of the residence to the nearest outer boundary line of
the school or child care facility.
   (C)   Penalties. A person who violates this article shall be punished as
provided generally in this code.
   (D)   Exceptions. This article shall not apply to a sexual predator who:
      (1)   Resides within a prison or correctional or treatment facility
operated by the state or a political subdivision;
      (2)   Established a residence before July 1, 2006, and has not moved from
that residence; or
      (3)   Established a residence after July 1, 2006, and the school or child
care facility triggering the restriction was established after the initial date
of the sexual predator’s residence at that location.
(Ord. 749, passed 2-7-2006; Ord. 753, passed 7-11-2006) Penalty, see §
6-501
ARTICLE 5: PENAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
6-501   Violations; penalty
§ 6-501 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, or any person’s agent or servant, who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided herein,
shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined in any sum not exceeding $500. A new violation shall be deemed to have
been committed every 24 hours of failure to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the
municipality may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin, abate and remove the
same in the manner provided by law.
      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists,
the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.
(Ord. 642, passed 5-10-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-505, 18-1720 and 18-1722
CHAPTER 7: FIRE REGULATIONS
   Article
      
1.   FIRES
      
2.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
3.   POISONOUS AND FLAMMABLE GASES
      
4.   EXPLOSIVES
      
5.   FIREWORKS
      
6.   PENAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1: FIRES
Section
   
7-101   Preservation of property
   
7-102   Disorderly spectator
   
7-103   Equipment
   
7-104   Interference
   
7-105   Obstruction
   
7-106   Assistance
   
7-107   Driving over hose
   
7-108   Traffic
   
7-109   False alarm
   
7-110   Pedestrians
§ 7-101 PRESERVATION OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   The Fire Chief, or any officer in charge of the Fire Department, shall
have the authority and power to cause the removal of property whenever it shall
become necessary for the preservation of more valuable property, the protection
of human life or to prevent the spreading of fire to adjoining property.
   (B)   The Fire Chief may direct the municipal firefighters to remove any
building, structure or fence for the purpose of checking the progress of any
fire. The Fire Chief shall have the authority to blow up, or cause to be blown
up, with explosives, any building or structure during the progress of a fire
for the purpose of checking the progress of the same.
§ 7-102 DISORDERLY SPECTATOR.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person during the time of a fire and for
a period of 36 hours after its extinguishment to hinder, resist or refuse to
obey the Municipal Fire Chief, or to act in a noisy or disorderly manner.
   (B)   The Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chief shall have the power and
authority during such time to arrest or command any such person to assist them
in the performance of their official duties.
Penalty, see §
7-601
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-908
§ 7-103 EQUIPMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person except the Fire Chief and the members of
the Municipal Fire Department to molest, destroy, handle or in any other way to
interfere with the use and storage of any of the fire trucks and other
apparatus belonging to the municipality.
Penalty, see §
7-601
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-519
§ 7-104 INTERFERENCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to hinder or obstruct the
Municipal Fire Chief or the members of the Fire Department in the performance
of their duty.
Penalty, see §
7-601
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-908
§ 7-105 OBSTRUCTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the use of a fire hydrant or
have or place any material within 15 feet of said hydrant. Any vehicle or
material found to be an obstruction may be immediately removed by the Fire
Chief or any member of the Fire Department at the risk, cost and expense of the
owner or claimant.
Penalty, see §
7-601
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,166
§ 7-106 ASSISTANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, after the command of the Fire
Chief or Assistant Fire Chief, to aid in extinguishing a fire or to assist in
the removal and protection of property.
Penalty, see §
7-601
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-908
§ 7-107 DRIVING OVER HOSE.
   No vehicle shall be driven over unprotected hose of a Fire Department when
laid down on any highway or private road or driveway, in use or to be used at
any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department official
in command.
(Neb. RS 60-6,184) Penalty, see §
7-601
§ 7-108 TRAFFIC.
   Every vehicle already stationary when the fire alarm shall have been sounded
must remain so for a period of five minutes after the sounding of the fire
alarm. No vehicle, except by the specific direction of the Fire Chief or
Assistant Fire Chief, shall follow, approach or park closer than 500 feet to
any fire vehicle, or to any fire hydrant to which a hose is connected. Nothing
herein shall be construed to apply to vehicles carrying doctors, members of the
Fire Department or emergency vehicles.
Penalty, see §
7-601
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,183
§ 7-109 FALSE ALARM.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and without good and
reasonable cause raise any false alarm of fire.
Penalty, see §
7-601
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-907 and 35-520
§ 7-110 PEDESTRIANS.
   It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to enter or remain in any street
after a fire alarm shall have sounded until the fire trucks shall have
completely passed.
Penalty, see §
7-601
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-908
ARTICLE 2: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
   
7-201   Life Safety Code
   
7-202   Fire Code enforcement
   
7-203   Lawful entry
   
7-204   Violation notice
   
7-205   Fire limits defined
   
7-206   Fire limits materials
   
7-207   Permitted repairs
   
7-208   Removal required
   
7-209   Repair required
   
7-210   Fire prohibited
   
7-211   Fires regulated
   
7-212   Merger
   
7-213   Open burning ban; waiver
§ 7-201 LIFE SAFETY CODE.
    Incorporated by reference into this code are the standards recommended by
the National Fire Protection Association, known as the Life Safety Code, 2024
Edition, and all subsequent amendments. Said Code shall have the same force and
effect as if set out verbatim herein. One copy of the Life Safety Code is on
file with the Municipal Clerk and shall be available for public inspection at
any reasonable time.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-132, 19-902, 19-922 and 81-502
§ 7-202 FIRE CODE ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of all municipal officials to enforce the incorporated
Fire Code provisions, and all infractions shall be immediately brought to the
attention of the Fire Chief.
§ 7-203 LAWFUL ENTRY.
   It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or occupant of any building or
structure, except the interiors of private dwellings, to allow the Fire Chief
to inspect, or cause to be inspected, as often as necessary said structure for
the purpose of ascertaining and enumerating all conditions therein that are
likely to cause fire, or any other violations of the provisions of the
municipal ordinances affecting the hazard of fire.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 81-512
§ 7-204 VIOLATION NOTICE.
   It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or occupant of any building or
structure that was lawfully inspected as hereinbefore prescribed, and who
receives written or verbal notice of a violation of any of the provisions of
the municipal ordinances, to correct the condition that violates said ordinance
or ordinances within five days from the date of receipt of such notice.
§ 7-205 FIRE LIMITS DEFINED.
   The following described territory in the municipality shall be and
constitute the fire limits: all additions to the city laid out and previously
located within the corporate boundaries of the city, as well as all places
located within one-half mile outside the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 743, passed 12-6-2005)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-550 and 18-1706
§ 7-206 FIRE LIMITS MATERIALS.
   Within the aforesaid fire limits, no structure shall be built, altered,
moved or enlarged unless such structure will be enclosed with such
incombustible materials as will satisfy the Fire Chief that said structure will
be reasonably fireproof.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-550
§ 7-207 PERMITTED REPAIRS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to repair, alter or add to any
building in the fire limits where the repair is less than 50% of the building
unless the material used will be noncombustible and approved by the Fire Chief.
   (B)   Repairs in the form of patching and other minor repairs shall not
require a permit.
(Ord. 723, passed 4-6-2004; Ord. 744, passed 12-6-2005) Penalty, see §
7-601
§ 7-208 REMOVAL REQUIRED.
   In the event that any wooden or combustible building or structure, or any
noncombustible building that stands within the fire limits, is damaged to the
extent of 50% or more of its value, exclusive of the foundation, it shall not
be repaired or rebuilt but shall be taken down and removed within 120 days from
the date of such fire or other casualty.
(Ord. 724, passed 4-6-2004; Ord. 745, passed 12-6-2005)
§ 7-209 REPAIR REQUIRED.
   In the event that a building within the fire limits becomes damaged to the
extent of less than 50% of its value, exclusive of the foundation, it shall be
the duty of the owner, lessee or occupant to remove or repair said building in
accordance with the provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful for any
person to allow a building to stand in such damaged or decayed condition. Any
such building shall be removed or repaired within 120 days after receiving
notice to do so by the governing body.
(Ord. 746, passed 12-6-2005) Penalty, see §
7-601
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-550
§ 7-210 FIRE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to set out a fire on the pavement, or
near any curb, now built or hereafter to be built, within the municipality.
Penalty, see §
7-601
§ 7-211 FIRES REGULATED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to build or set out certain fires; provided, that
the person building such fires shall have the substance to be burned in a
fireproof trash burner or incinerator with a metal fireproof screen of not more
than one-inch mesh and located at least 20 feet from any building. The
incinerator shall be built in such a way as to not permit the escape of burning
paper or other substance. If any person shall require a fire in the course of
his or her trade as a blacksmith or mechanic, such fire shall be built and
maintained in the manner prescribed by the Fire Chief. Such fires shall be
permitted to be burned on Saturdays only and shall be built after 7:00 a.m. and
completely extinguished by 12:00 p.m., except the aforesaid fires used in the
course of a trade which shall be allowed during such hours as the Fire Chief
shall prescribe. No fire shall be permitted on any day of the week other than
Saturday. It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to, burn or cause to
be burned any garbage, animal matter or vegetable matter.
   (B)   The burning of straw, hay, leaves or brush in the open air is hereby
permitted and allowed; provided, that the person setting out the same request
permission and receive an open burning permit in writing, signed by the local
Fire Chief, on a form provided by the State Fire Marshal; and provided further,
that any such burning shall be done while said fire is attended by the person
setting out the same at all times; and provided further, that said fire shall
be located at least 20 feet from any building.
(Ord. 315, passed 9-7-1982; Ord. 344, passed 1-4-1984; Ord. 443, passed 4-28-
1992) Penalty, see §
7-601
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-549, 17-556 and 81-520.01
§ 7-212 MERGER.
   (A)   The Municipal Fire Department may be merged with the Rural Fire
Protection District. The proceedings for the merger may be initiated by the
presentation to the County Clerk of a petition, signed by 60% or more of the
electors who are owners of any interest in real or personal property assessed
for taxation in the territory to be merged and who are residing within the
boundaries of such territory, stating the desires and purposes of such
petitioners. The petition shall contain a description of the boundaries of the
territory proposed to be merged, and it shall be accompanied by a map or plat
and a deposit for publication costs.
   (B)   The County Clerk shall examine the tax schedules in the office of the
County Assessor and determine and certify whether or not such petition complies
with the requirements of this section and that the persons signing the petition
appear to reside within the boundaries described by such petition. Thereafter,
the County Clerk shall forward such petition, map or plat and certificate to
the Board of Directors of the District and the governing body affected by such
merger.
   (C)   Within 30 days after receiving the petition, map or plat and
certificate of the County Clerk, in accordance with this section, the Board of
Directors and governing body shall transmit the petition, map or plat and
certificate to the proper County Board, accompanied by a report in writing
approving or disapproving the proposal contained in the petition, or approving
such proposal in part and disapproving it in part.
   (D)   The County Clerk shall designate a time and place for a hearing before
a joint meeting of the County Boards of all counties in which the proposed
District is to be situated and shall give notice of such hearing by publication
two weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the county, the last
publication appearing at least seven days prior to said hearing. At the time
and place so fixed, the County Board or Boards shall meet and said hearing
shall be held respecting the merger or location of the boundaries of the
District. Thereupon the County Board shall: determine whether the proposed
District is suited to the general fire protection policy of the county;
determine the boundaries of the proposed District, whether as suggested in the
petition or otherwise; and make a written order of such determination which
shall describe the boundaries of the District and be filed in the office of the
County Clerk.
   (E)   If the report of the Board of Directors and the governing body
required under this section disapproves the proposal, the petition shall be
rejected. If the report is favorable to such proposal, either in whole or in
part, the County Board shall promptly designate a time and place for a hearing
upon the petition and shall give notice of the hearing by publication two weeks
in a newspaper of general circulation within the county, the last publication
appearing at least seven days prior to said hearing.
   (F)   (1)   The County Board shall, at or shortly after the hearing,
determine whether such territory shall be merged and shall fix the boundaries
of the territory to be merged. The determination of the County Board shall be
set forth in a written order which shall describe the boundaries determined
upon and shall be filed in the office of the County Clerk. The County Clerk
shall then fix a time and place for a public meeting of all electors who are
owners of any interest in real or personal property assessed for taxation in
the District who are residing within the boundaries.
      (2)   A Board of Directors shall be elected consisting of five residents
of the District.
   (G)   Such merged District shall operate under the same mill levy limit as
the Rural Fire Protection District.
(Ord. 275, passed 5-15-1979)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 35-506, 35-508, 35-509, 35-511 and 35-530
through 35-536
§ 7-213 OPEN BURNING BAN; WAIVER.
   (A)   There shall be an open burning ban on all bonfires, outdoor rubbish
fires and fires for the purpose of clearing land.
   (B)   The Fire Chief may waive an open burning ban under subsection (A)
above for an area under the municipal Fire Department’s jurisdiction by issuing
an open burning permit to a person requesting permission to conduct open
burning. The permit issued by the Fire Chief to a person desiring to conduct
open burning shall be in writing, signed by the Fire Chief and on a form
provided by the State Fire Marshal.
   (C)   The Fire Chief may waive the open burning ban in the municipal Fire
Department’s jurisdiction when conditions are acceptable to the Chief. Anyone
intending to burn in that jurisdiction when the open burning ban has been
waived shall notify the Fire Chief of his or her intention to burn prior to
starting the burn.
   (D)   The Fire Chief may adopt standards listing the conditions acceptable
for issuing a permit to conduct open burning under subsection (B) above.
   (E)   (1)   The Fire Department may charge a fee not to exceed $10 for each
such permit issued. This fee shall be remitted to the governing body for
inclusion in the general funds allocated to the Fire Department. These funds
shall not reduce the tax requirements for the Fire Department.
      (2)   No such fee shall be collected from any state or political
subdivision to which such a permit is issued to conduct open burning under
subsection (B) above in the course of that state’s or political subdivision’s
official duties.
(Ord. 316, passed 9-7-1982; Ord. 501, passed 2-7-1995; Ord. 825, passed 1-3-
2012)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 81-520.01
ARTICLE 3: POISONOUS AND FLAMMABLE GASES
Section
   
7-301   Poisonous or flammable gases
§ 7-301 POISONOUS OR FLAMMABLE GASES.
   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to store or keep in the
municipality for any period of time any form of poisonous and flammable gas
must first get permission from the governing body. The governing body shall
require the name of the gas, the place of storage and the amount of gas stored.
It shall then be the duty of the governing body to prescribe such rules,
regulations and precautionary actions as it may deem necessary.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-549
ARTICLE 4: EXPLOSIVES
Section
   
7-401   Storage
   
7-402   Storage registration; requirements
   
7-403   Blasting permits
§ 7-401 STORAGE.
   All explosive materials shall be stored in a proper receptacle made of
cement, metal or stone and be closed at all times, except when in actual use.
Such receptacles shall not be located in any room where there are flames or
flammable materials. The area surrounding storage facilities shall be kept
clear of rubbish, brush, dry grass or trees not less than 25 feet in all
directions. Any other combustible materials shall be kept a distance of not
less than 50 feet from outdoor storage facilities.
(Ord. 486, passed 5-3-1994)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-549, 17-556, 28-1229 and 28-1233
§ 7-402 STORAGE REGISTRATION; REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to notifying the Municipal Fire Department, pursuant to Neb. RS
28-1233(3), any person desiring to store or keep for any period of time
explosive materials as defined in Neb. RS 28-1213, shall register such
information with the Municipal Clerk 24 hours prior to such storage. The
transfer of explosive materials to another person within the municipality shall
require the person receiving the explosive materials to register the transfer
and the new location of the explosive materials with the Municipal Clerk. The
transfer of explosive materials to a new location by the owner shall require
registration of the new location with the Municipal Clerk.
(Ord. 486, passed 5-3-1994)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-549, 17-556, 28-1229 and 28-1233
§ 7-403 BLASTING PERMITS.
   In addition to notifying the Municipal Fire Department, pursuant to Neb. RS
28-1233(3), any person desiring to discharge explosive materials within the
municipality shall secure a permit from the governing body and shall discharge
such explosive materials in conformance with the conditions specified in the
permit. In no case shall any person perform blasting operations unless
operating under the direct supervision of a person in possession of a valid
user’s permit issued by the State Patrol.
(Ord. 409, passed 3-6-1990; Ord. 487, passed 5-3-1994)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-549, 17-556, 28-1229 and 28-1233 
ARTICLE 5: FIREWORKS
Section
   
7-501   Definition
   
7-502   Permitted fireworks
§ 7-501 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIREWORKS. Any composition or device designed for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration or detonation and which
meets the definition of common or special fireworks set forth by the United
States Department of Transportation in 49 C.F.R.
(Ord. 393, passed 2-7-1989)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1241
§ 7-502 PERMITTED FIREWORKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite or cause to be exploded
fireworks or firecrackers of any description whatsoever, except sparklers,
Vesuvius fountains, spray fountains, torches, color fire cones, star and comet
type color aerial shells without explosive charges for the purpose of making a
noise, color wheels, lady fingers, not exceeding seven-eighths inch in length
or one-eighth inch in diameter, and which do not contain more than 50
milligrams each in weight of explosive material.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any fireworks to be
used for purpose of public exhibitions or display under authorization of the
governing body or to fireworks furnished for agricultural purposes pursuant to
written authorization from the State Fire Marshal.
(Ord. 394, passed 2-7-1989) Penalty, see §
7-601
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-556, 28-1241, 28-1244 and 28-1245
ARTICLE 6: PENAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
7-601   Violations; penalty
§ 7-601 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, or any person’s agent or servant, who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided herein,
shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined in any sum not exceeding $500. A new violation shall be deemed to have
been committed every 24 hours of failure to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the
municipality may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin, abate and remove the
same in the manner provided by law.
      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists,
the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.
(Ord. 642, passed 5-10-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-505, 18-1720 and 18-1722
CHAPTER 8: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
   Article
      
1.   MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
      
2.   SIDEWALKS
      
3.   STREETS
      
4.   CURB AND GUTTER
      
5.   TREES
      
6.   PENAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1: MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
Section
   
8-101   Definitions
   
8-102   Maintenance and control
   
8-103   Sale and conveyance of real property
   
8-103.01   Sale and conveyance of personal property
   
8-104   Regulation of snow, ice and other encroachments
   
8-105   Permitted use of public street space
   
8-106   Weeds
   
8-107   Special improvement district; assessment and creation procedure
   
8-108   Improvement district; land adjacent
   
8-109   Acquisition of real property
   
8-110   Acquisition of property; appraisal
   
8-111   Acquisition of property; construction; elections, when required
   
8-112   Public works involving architecture or engineering; requirements
   
8-113   Regulation of obstructions
§ 8-101 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SIDEWALK SPACE. The portion of a street between curb lines and adjacent
property lines.
   STREET SUPERINTENDENT. The city official with general charge, direction and
control of streets and sidewalks. If one official is responsible for streets
and another official is responsible for sidewalks, STREET SUPERINTENDENT shall
mean whichever one is appropriate in the context the term is used.
§ 8-102 MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL.
   The City Council shall have the care, supervision and control of all public
highways, bridges, streets, alleys, public squares and commons within the city
and shall cause the same to be kept open and in repair and free from nuisances.
(Neb. RS 17-567)
§ 8-103 SALE AND CONVEYANCE OF REAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (G) below, the power of the city to
convey any real property owned by it, including land used for park purposes and
public squares, except real property used in the operation of public utilities,
shall be exercised by resolution, directing the sale at public auction or by
sealed bid of such property and the manner and terms thereof, except that such
property shall not be sold at public auction or by sealed bid when:
      (1)   Such property is being sold in compliance with the requirements of
federal or state grants or programs;
      (2)   Such property is being conveyed to another public agency; or
      (3)   Such property consists of streets and alleys.
   (B)   The City Council may establish a minimum price for real property at
which bidding shall begin or shall serve as a minimum for a sealed bid.
   (C)   After the passage of the resolution directing the sale, notice of all
proposed sales of property described in subsection (A) above and the terms
thereof shall be published once each week for three consecutive weeks in a
legal newspaper published in or of general circulation in the city.
   (D)   (1)   If within 30 days after the third publication of the notice a
remonstrance against such sale is signed by registered voters of the city equal
in number to 30% of the registered voters of the city voting at the last
regular municipal election held therein and is filed with the City Council,
such property shall not then, nor within one year thereafter, be sold. If the
date for filing the remonstrance falls upon a Saturday, Sunday or legal
holiday, the signatures shall be collected within the 30-day period, but the
filing shall be considered timely if filed or postmarked on or before the next
business day.
      (2)   Upon the receipt of the remonstrance, the City Council, with the
aid and assistance of the Election Commissioner or County Clerk, shall
determine the validity and sufficiency of signatures on the remonstrance. The
City Council shall deliver the remonstrance to the Election Commissioner or
County Clerk by hand carrier, by use of law enforcement officials or by
certified mail, return receipt requested.
      (3)   Upon receipt of the remonstrance, the Election Commissioner or
County Clerk shall issue to the City Council a written receipt that the
remonstrance is in the custody of the Election Commissioner or County Clerk.
The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall compare the signature of each
person signing the remonstrance with the voter registration records to
determine if each signer was a registered voter on or before the date on which
the remonstrance was filed with the City Council. The Election Commissioner or
County Clerk shall also compare the signer’s printed name, street and number or
voting precinct and city or post office address with the voter registration
records to determine whether the signer was a registered voter. The signature
and address shall be presumed to be valid only if the Election Commissioner or
County Clerk determines that the printed name, street and number or voting
precinct and city or post office address matches the registration records and
that the registration was received on or before the date on which the
remonstrance was filed with the City Council. The determinations of the
Election Commissioner or County Clerk may be rebutted by any credible evidence
which the City Council finds sufficient. The express purpose of the comparison
of names and addresses with the voter registration records, in addition to
helping to determine the validity of the remonstrance, the sufficiency of the
remonstrance and the qualifications of the signer, shall be to prevent fraud,
deception and misrepresentation in the remonstrance process.
      (4)   Upon completion of the comparison of names and addresses with the
voter registration records, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall
prepare in writing a certification under seal setting forth the name and
address of each signer found not to be a registered voter and the signature
page number and line number where the name is found, and if the reason for the
invalidity of the signature or address is other than the non-registration of
the signer, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall set forth the
reason for the invalidity of the signature. If the Election Commissioner or
County Clerk determines that a signer has affixed his or her signature more
than once to the remonstrance and that only one person is registered by that
name, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall prepare in writing a
certification under seal setting forth the name of the duplicate signature and
shall count only the earliest dated signature.
      (5)   The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall certify to the City
Council the number of valid signatures necessary to constitute a valid
remonstrance. The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall deliver the
remonstrance and the certifications to the City Council within 40 days after
the receipt of the remonstrance from the City Council. The delivery shall be by
hand carrier, by use of law enforcement officials or by certified mail, return
receipt requested. Not more than 20 signatures on one signature page shall be
counted.
      (6)   The City Council shall, within 30 days after the receipt of the
remonstrance and certifications from the Election Commissioner or County Clerk,
hold a public hearing to review the remonstrance and certifications and receive
testimony regarding them. The City Council shall, following the hearing, vote
on whether or not the remonstrance is valid and shall uphold the remonstrance
if sufficient valid signatures have been received.
   (E)   Real estate now owned or hereafter owned by the city may be conveyed
without consideration to the state for state armory sites or, if acquired for
state armory sites, shall be conveyed strictly in accordance with the
conditions of Neb. RS 18-1001 through 18-1006.
   (F)   Following passage of the resolution directing a sale, publishing of
the notice of the proposed sale and passing of the 30-day right-of-remonstrance
period, the property shall then be sold. Such sale shall be confirmed by
passage of an ordinance stating the name of the purchaser and terms of the
sale.
   (G)   Subsections (A) through (F) above shall not apply to the sale of real
property if the authorizing resolution directs the sale of real property, the
total fair market value of which is less than $5,000. Following passage of the
resolution directing the sale of the property, notice of the sale shall be
posted in three prominent places within the city for a period of not less than
seven days prior to the sale of the property. The notice shall give a general
description of the property offered for sale and state the terms and conditions
of sale. Confirmation of the sale by passage of an ordinance may be required.
(Ord. 717, passed 3-2-2004)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-503 and 17-503.01
§ 8-103.01 SALE AND CONVEYANCE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   The power of the city to convey any personal property owned by it
shall be exercised by resolution directing the sale and the manner and terms
thereof. Following passage of the resolution directing the sale of the
property, notice of the sale shall be posted in three prominent places within
the city for a period of not less than seven days prior to the sale of the
property. If the fair market value of the property is greater than $5,000,
notice of the sale shall also be published once in a legal newspaper published
in or of general circulation in the city at least seven days prior to the sale
of the property. The notice shall give a general description of the property
offered for sale and state the terms and conditions of sale.
   (B)   Personal property may be conveyed notwithstanding the procedure in
subsection (A) above when:
      (1)   Such property is being sold in compliance with the requirements of
federal or state grants or programs; or
      (2)   Such property is being conveyed to another public agency.
(Ord. 717, passed 3-2-2004)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-503.02
§ 8-104 REGULATION OF SNOW, ICE AND OTHER ENCROACHMENTS.
   (A)   The city shall have power to prevent and remove all encroachments,
including snow, ice, mud or other obstructions, into and upon all sidewalks,
streets, avenues, alleys and other city property.
(Neb. RS 17-557)
   (B)   If the abutting property owner refuses or neglects, after five days’
notice by publication or, in place thereof, personal service of such notice, to
remove all encroachments from sidewalks, as provided in subsection (A), the
city through the proper officers may cause such encroachments to be removed,
and the cost of removal shall be paid out of the street fund. The City Council
shall assess the cost of the notice and removal of the encroachment against the
abutting property as a special assessment. The special assessment shall be
known as a special sidewalk assessment and, together with the cost of notice,
shall be levied and collected as a special assessment in addition to the
general revenue taxes and shall be subject to the same penalties as other
special assessments and shall draw interest from the date of the assessment.
Upon payment of the assessment, the assessment shall be credited to the street
fund.
(Neb. RS 17-557.01)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 883, passed
3-1-2016, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 8-105 PERMITTED USE OF PUBLIC STREET SPACE.
   Any person engaged in the erection, construction, reconstruction, wrecking
or repairing of any building, or the construction or repair of a sidewalk along
any street, may occupy the public street space with the building material and
equipment as long as is necessary if such person makes application to and
receives a permit to do so in writing from the Street Superintendent. No permit
shall authorize the occupancy of more than one-third of the roadway of the
public space adjacent to the real estate on which the building or sidewalk is
to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, wrecked or repaired. A suitable
passageway for pedestrians shall be maintained within the public space included
in the permit, which passageway shall be protected and lighted in the manner
required by the Street Superintendent.
Penalty, see §
8-601
§ 8-106 WEEDS.
   (A)   It is hereby the duty of the Street Commissioner or his or her duly
authorized agent to view and inspect the sidewalk space within the corporate
limits for growing weeds during the growing season, and, if rank and noxious
weeds are found growing thereon, he or she shall notify the owner or occupant
thereof, to cut down such weeds as close to the ground as can be practicably
done and keep the weeds cut thereon in like manner during the growing season
for weeds; provided, that any weeds growing in excess of six inches shall be
considered a violation of this section.
   (B)   In the event that the owner of any lot or parcel of land within the
municipality is a nonresident of the municipality or cannot be found therein
the notice may be given to any person having the care, custody or control of
such lot or parcel of land. In the event that there can be found no one within
the municipality to whom notice can be given, it shall be the duty of the
Street Superintendent or his or her agent to post a copy of the notice on the
premises and then to cut or cause the weeds thereon to be cut as therein
provided and report the cost thereof in writing to the governing body.
   (C)   The cost shall then be audited and paid by the municipality and the
amount thereof shall be assessed against the lot or parcel of land as a special
tax thereon and shall be collected as are other taxes of the municipality or
may be recovered by civil suit brought by the municipality against the owner of
the parcel of land appurtenances to be removed. The governing body shall
designate another location as closely as possible where said poles, wires, gas
mains, pipe lines or other appurtenances, may be reset or placed.
   (D)   All poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines or other appurtenances, shall
be reset, placed or erected in such a manner that they will not interfere with
the water system; sewerage system; poles, wires and mains of any public
utility; adjacent buildings; or with travel on the public ways and property.
Whenever possible, all pole lines, wires, gas mains, pipe lines or
appurtenances shall be confined to the alleys of the municipality.
Penalty, see §
8-601
§ 8-107 SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT; ASSESSMENT AND CREATION PROCEDURE.
   The municipality’s governing body may by ordinance create a special
improvement district for the purpose of replacing, reconstructing or repairing
an existing street, alley, water line, sewer line or any other such
improvement. Except as provided in Neb. RS 19-2428 through 19-2431, the
governing body shall have power to assess, to the extent of such benefits, the
costs of such improvements upon the properties found especially benefited
thereby, whether or not such properties were previously assessed for the same
general purpose. In creating such special improvement district, the governing
body shall follow procedures applicable to the creation and assessment of the
same type of improvement district as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. 380, passed 11-3-1987)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1751
§ 8-108 IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT; LAND ADJACENT.
   Supplemental to any existing law on the subject, a municipality may include
land adjacent to such municipality when creating an improvement district, such
as a sewer, paving, water, water extension or sanitary sewer extension
district. The governing body shall have power to assess, to the extent of
special benefits, the costs of such improvements upon the properties found
especially benefited thereby, except as provided in § 8-315.
(Ord. 381, passed 11-3-1987)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2427
§ 8-109 ACQUISITION OF REAL PROPERTY.
   When acquiring an interest in real property by purchase or eminent domain,
the municipality shall do so only after the governing body has authorized the
acquisition by action taken in a public meeting after notice and public
hearing.
(Ord. 502, passed 2-7-1995)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1755
§ 8-110 ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY; APPRAISAL.
   The municipality shall not purchase, lease-purchase or acquire for
consideration real property having an estimated value of $100,000 or more
unless an appraisal of such property has been performed by a certified real
estate appraiser.
(Ord. 503, passed 2-7-1995)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 13-403
§ 8-111 ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY; CONSTRUCTION; ELECTIONS, WHEN REQUIRED.
   (A)   The city is authorized and empowered to purchase, accept by gift or
devise, purchase real estate upon which to erect and erect a building or
buildings for an auditorium, fire station, municipal building or community
house for housing municipal enterprises and social and recreation purposes, and
other public buildings, and maintain, manage and operate the same for the
benefit of the inhabitants of the city.
   (B)   Except as provided in subsection (C) below, before any such purchase
can be made or building erected, the question shall be submitted to the
electors of the city at a general municipal election or at an election duly
called for that purpose, or as set forth in Neb. RS 17-954, and be adopted by a
majority of the electors voting on such question.
   (C)   If the funds to be used to finance the purchase or construction of a
building pursuant to this section are available other than through a bond
issue, then either:
      (1)   Notice of the proposed purchase or construction shall be published
in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and no election shall be
required to approve the purchase or construction unless within 30 days after
the publication of the notice, a remonstrance against the purchase or
construction is signed by registered voters of the city equal in number to 15%
of the registered voters of the city voting at the last regular municipal
election held therein and is filed with the governing body. If the date for
filing the remonstrance falls upon a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the
signatures shall be considered timely if filed or postmarked on or before the
next business day. If a remonstrance with the necessary number of qualified
signatures is timely filed, the question shall be submitted to the voters of
the city at a general municipal election or a special election duly called for
that purpose. If the purchase or construction is not approved, the property
involved shall not then, nor within one year following the election, be
purchased or constructed; or
      (2)   The governing body may proceed without providing the notice and
right of remonstrance required in subsection (C)(1) above if the property can
be purchased below the fair market value as determined by an appraisal, there
is a willing seller and the purchase price is less than $25,000. The purchase
shall be approved by the governing body after notice and public hearing
pursuant to as provided in Neb. RS 18-1755.
(Ord. 532, passed 12-7-1995)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-953 and 17-953.01
§ 8-112 PUBLIC WORKS INVOLVING ARCHITECTURE OR ENGINEERING; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section and Neb. RS 81-3449
and 81-3453, the city shall not engage in the construction of any public works
involving architecture or engineering unless the plans, specifications and
estimates have been prepared and the construction has been observed by an
architect, a professional engineer or a person under the direct supervision of
an architect, professional engineer or those under the direct supervision of an
architect or professional engineer.
      (2)   This subsection (A) shall not apply to any public work in which the
contemplated expenditure for the complete project does not exceed $100,000 or
the adjusted dollar amount set by the Board of Engineers and Architects.
(Neb. RS 81-3445)
   (B)   The provisions of subsection (A) above regulating the practice of
architecture do not apply to the following activities or the other activities
specified in Neb. RS 81-3449:
      (1)   Any alteration, renovation or remodeling of a building if the
alteration, renovation or remodeling does not affect architectural or
engineering safety features of the building;
      (2)   A public service provider who employs a design professional
performing professional services for itself;
      (3)   The practice of any other certified trade or legally recognized
profession;
      (4)   Earthmoving and related work associated with soil and water
conservation practices performed any land owned by the city that is not subject
to a permit from the Department of Natural Resources; and
      (5)   The work of employees and agents of the city performing, in
accordance with other requirements of law, their customary duties in the
administration and enforcement of codes, permit programs and land-use
regulations and their customary duties in utility and public works
construction, operation and maintenance.
(Neb. RS 81-3449)
   (C)   The provisions of subsection (A) above regulating the practice of
engineering do not apply to the following activities, the activities specified
in subsection (B) above or the other activities specified in Neb. RS 81-3453:
      (1)   Those services ordinarily performed by subordinates under direct
supervision of a professional engineer or those commonly designated as
locomotive, stationary, marine operating engineers, power plant operating
engineers or manufacturers who supervise the operation of or operate machinery
or equipment or who supervise construction within their own plant; and
      (2)   The construction of water wells as defined in Neb. RS 46-1212, the
installation of pumps and pumping equipment into water wells, and the
decommissioning of water wells, unless such construction, installation or
decommissioning is required by the city to be designed or supervised by an
engineer or unless legal requirements are imposed upon the city as a part of a
public water supply.
(Neb. RS 81-3453)
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the city is considered a public
service provider if it employs or appoints an architect or a professional
engineer to be in responsible charge of the city’s architectural or engineering
work.
(Neb. RS 81-3423)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 884, passed
3-1-2016, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 8-113 REGULATION OF OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (A)   The city may remove all obstructions from the sidewalks, curbstones,
gutters and crosswalks at the expense of the person placing them there or at
the expense of the city and require and regulate the planting and protection of
shade trees in and along the streets and the trimming and removing of such
trees.
   (B)   The city may regulate the building of bulkheads, cellar and basement
ways, stairways, railways, windows, doorways, awnings, hitching posts and
rails, lampposts, awning posts, all other structures projecting upon or over
and adjoining and all other excavations through and under the sidewalks in the
city.
(Neb. RS 17-555)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 882, passed
3-1-2016, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
ARTICLE 2: SIDEWALKS
Section
   
8-201   Overhanging branches
   
8-202   Kept clean
   
8-203   Maintenance
   
8-204   Repair
   
8-205   Construction at owner’s initiative
   
8-206   Construction and repair at city direction
§ 8-201 OVERHANGING BRANCHES.
   (A)   The owner or occupant of any lot, piece or parcel of ground abutting
or adjacent to any street or sidewalk over which there extend the branches of
trees shall at all times keep the branches or limbs thereof trimmed to the
height of at least eight feet above the surface of the walk and at least 14
feet above the surface of the street or to the heights otherwise specified by
the City Council.
   (B)   Whenever the branches or limbs of any tree extend over streets or
sidewalks contrary to such provisions so as to interfere with the lighting of
the street from street lights or with the convenience of the public using the
street or sidewalk, the city may proceed against the owner or occupant of the
property abutting or adjacent to the street or sidewalk as provided in §
4-404.
Penalty, see §
8-601
§ 8-202 KEPT CLEAN.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lot or lots or
the owner of any vacant lot or lots within the corporate limits to allow snow,
sleet, mud, ice or other substance to accumulate on the sidewalks or to permit
any snow, sleet, ice, mud or other substance to remain upon said sidewalk. All
sidewalks shall be cleaned within ten hours after the cessation of a storm,
unless the storm or fall of snow shall have taken place during the night, in
which case the sidewalk shall be cleaned before 4:00 p.m. after the cessation
of the storm.
   (B)   It is hereby the duty of the Street Commissioner or his or her duly
authorized agent to view and inspect all sidewalks within the corporate limits
to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this article. Notice of any
violations discovered shall be given to the owner or occupant of any lot or
lots upon which snow or other material has not been removed in the allotted
time. Said notice shall require the immediate removal of snow or other
substance from the sidewalk area. In the event that the owner of any lot or
parcel of land within the municipality is a nonresident of the municipality or
cannot be located therein, the notice may be given to any person having the
care, custody or control of such lot or parcel of land. In the event that no
one can be found within the municipality to whom notice can be given, or if
notice is given and disregarded by the owner or occupant, it shall be the duty
of the Street Commissioner or his or her agent to post a copy of the notice on
the premises and then to cause to be removed the snow, mud, sleet, ice or other
substance accumulated on the sidewalk and report the cost of such removal to
the governing body. The cost shall then be audited and paid by the municipality
and the amount thereof shall be assessed against the lot or parcel of land as a
special tax thereon and shall be collected as are other taxes of the
municipality or may be recovered by civil suit brought by the municipality
against the owner of the parcel of land.
(Ord. 362, passed 1-6-1987) Penalty, see §
8-601
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-557
§ 8-203 MAINTENANCE.
   (Repealed by Ord. 733, passed 12-7-2004)
§ 8-204 REPAIR.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council may construct and repair sidewalks, or
cause the construction and repair of sidewalks in such manner as the Mayor and
City Council deems necessary and assess the expense thereof on the property in
front of which such construction or repairs are made, after having given
notice:
      (1)   By publication in one issue of a legal newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality; and
      (2)   By either causing a written notice to be served upon the occupant
in possession of the property involved or to be posted upon such premises ten
days prior to the commencement of such repair or construction.
   (B)   The notice shall:
      (1)   State that the governing body has ordered repair of the sidewalk;
      (2)   Contain the municipality’s estimate of the cost of the repair;
      (3)   Notify the property owner that he or she may, within ten days after
the date of publication of the notice, notify the municipality that he or she
will repair the sidewalk within 30 days after such date of publication; and
      (4)   Notify the property owner that if he or she fails to so notify the
municipality within the ten days or, having so notified the municipality, fails
to repair the sidewalk within the 30 days, the municipality will cause the
sidewalk to be repaired and the expense thereof to be assessed against the
property.
   (C)   (1)   Before the municipality imposes any special assessments for
sidewalk repair, a copy of the notice that is required to be published shall be
mailed to the last known address of all nonresident property owners as shown on
the current tax rolls at the time such notice is first published.
      (2)   The Municipal Clerk shall mail the notice by certified mail with
return receipt requested.
      (3)   For the purpose of this subsection (C), NONRESIDENT PROPERTY OWNER
means any person or corporation whose residence and mailing address as shown on
the current tax rolls is outside the boundaries of the county in which the
property subject to assessment is located and who is a record owner of the
property.
   (D)   All sidewalks shall be repaired in conformity with such plans and
specifications as may be approved by the governing body.
   (E)   Assessments made under this section shall be made and assessed in the
manner provided in Neb. RS 17-524.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-7-2004)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 13-310, 13-312, 13-314 and 17-522
§ 8-205 CONSTRUCTION AT OWNER’S INITIATIVE.
   (A)   Any person desiring to construct, or cause to be constructed, any
sidewalk shall do so only as provided in this section. It shall be unlawful for
any person to construct any sidewalk without first having obtained a permit.
   (B)   The owner shall make application in writing for a permit and file such
application in the office of the City Clerk. The permit shall give a
description of the lot or piece of land along which the sidewalk is to be
constructed. The Street Superintendent shall issue the desired permit unless
good cause appears why the permit should be denied, except that if it is
desired to construct the sidewalk at any other than the regularly prescribed
location, grade or elevation, the Street Superintendent shall submit the
application to the City Council for determination as to whether the permit
should be granted or denied. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct,
or cause to be constructed, such sidewalk at any other location, grade or
elevation than so designated by the city. All sidewalks shall be built and
constructed on the established grade or elevation, and if there is no
established grade, then on the grade or elevation indicated by the Street
Superintendent.
Penalty, see §
8-601
§ 8-206 CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR AT CITY DIRECTION.
   (A)   (1)   The Mayor and City Council may construct and repair sidewalks,
or cause the construction and repair of sidewalks, in such manner as the Mayor
and City Council deem necessary and assess the expense of such construction or
repairs on the property in front of which such construction or repairs are
made, after having given notice:
         (a)   By publication in one issue of a legal newspaper of general
circulation in the city; and
         (b)   By either causing a written notice to be served upon the
occupant in possession of the property involved or to be posted upon such
premises ten days prior to the commencement of such construction or repair.
      (2)   The powers conferred under this section are in addition to those
provided in Neb. RS 17-509 through 17-521 and may be exercised without creating
an improvement district.
      (3)   If the owner of any property abutting any street or avenue or part
thereof fails to construct or repair any sidewalk in front of the owner’s
property within the time and in the manner as directed and requested by the
Mayor and City Council, after having received due notice to do so, the Mayor
and City Council may cause the sidewalk to be constructed or repaired and may
assess the cost of such construction or repairs against the property.
(Neb. RS 17-522)
   (B)   All sidewalks shall be constructed and repaired in conformity with
such plans and specifications as may be approved by the City Council.
   (C)   Assessments made under the provisions of this section shall be made
and assessed in the following manner.
      (1)   Such assessment shall be made by the City Council at a special
meeting, by a resolution, taking into account the benefits derived or injuries
sustained in consequence of such improvements, and the amount charged against
the same, which, with the vote, shall be recorded in the minutes. Notice of the
time of holding such meeting and the purpose for which it is to be held shall
be published in a legal newspaper in or of general circulation in the in the
city at least four weeks before the same shall be held or, in lieu thereof,
personal service may be made upon persons owning or occupying property to be
assessed.
      (2)   All such assessments shall be known as special assessments for
improvements and shall be levied and collected as a separate tax, in addition
to the taxes for general revenue purposes, and shall be placed on the tax roll
for collection, subject to the same penalties and collected in like manner as
other city taxes.
(Neb. RS 17-524)
Statutory reference:
    Authority to improve through sidewalk district, see Neb. RS 19-2417 through
19-2419
ARTICLE 3: STREETS
Section
   
8-301   Names and numbers
   
8-302   Crossings
   
8-303   Opening, widening, improving or vacating
   
8-304   Excavation
   
8-305   Driving stakes
   
8-306   Mixing concrete
   
8-307   Harmful liquids
   
8-308   Guttering and eave spouts
   
8-309   Heavy equipment
   
8-310   Poles, wires and pipe lines
   
8-311   Petition for improvements
   
8-311.01   Improvement districts; objections
   
8-312   Driveway approaches
   
8-313   Vacating public ways; definitions and ascertaining damages
   
8-314   Vacating public ways
   
8-315   Deferral from special assessments
§ 8-301 NAMES AND NUMBERS.
   The City Council may at any time by ordinance rename any street or provide a
name for any new street. Buildings used for residence or business purposes and
located along those streets shall retain those numbers as the City Council may
require. It shall be the duty of the Street Superintendent, upon the erection
of any new building, to assign the proper numbers to the building and give
notice to the owner and occupant of the same.
Penalty, see §
8-601
§ 8-302 CROSSINGS.
   The City Council may order and cause to be constructed, under the
supervision of the Street Superintendent, those street, avenue and alley
crossings as the City Council deems necessary. When a petition for the
construction of any such crossings is filed by an interested resident in the
office of the City Clerk, the City Clerk shall refer the application to the
Street Superintendent, who shall investigate and make a recommendation to the
City Council. Action by the City Council on the application, whether the
application is approved or rejected, shall be considered final.
§ 8-303 OPENING, WIDENING, IMPROVING OR VACATING.
   (A)   (1)   The municipality shall have power to open, widen or otherwise
improve or vacate any street, avenue, alley or lane within the limits of the
municipality and also to create, open and improve any new street, avenue, alley
or lane. All damages sustained by the citizens of the municipality, or by the
owners of the property therein, shall be ascertained in such manner as shall be
provided by ordinance.
      (2)   Whenever any street or alley is vacated, the same shall revert to
the owners of the abutting real estate, one-half on each side thereof and
become a part of such property, unless the city reserves title in the ordinance
vacating such street or alley. If title is retained by the city, such property
may be sold, conveyed, exchanged or leased upon such terms and conditions as
shall be deemed in the best interests of the city.
      (3)   When a portion of a street, avenue, alley or lane is vacated only
on one side of the center thereof, the title to such land shall vest in the
owner of the abutting property and become a part of such property, unless the
city reserves title in the ordinance vacating such street or alley. If title is
retained by the city, such property may be sold, conveyed, exchanged or leased
upon such terms and conditions as shall be deemed in the best interests of the
city.
      (4)   When the city vacates all or any portion of a street, avenue, alley
or lane, the city shall, within 30 days after the effective date of the
vacation, file a certified copy of the vacating ordinance with the Register of
Deeds for the county in which the vacated property is located to be indexed
against all affected lots.
      (5)   The title to the property vacated pursuant to this section shall be
subject to the following:
         (a)   There is reserved to the city the right to maintain, operate,
repair and renew public utilities existing at the time title to the property is
vacated there; and
         (b)   There is reserved to the city, any public utilities and any
cable television systems the right to maintain, repair, renew and operate water
mains, gas mains, pole lines, conduits, electrical transmission lines, sound
and signal transmission lines and other similar services and equipment and
appurtenances, including lateral connections or branch lines, on or below the
surface of the ground that are existing as valid easements at the time title to
the property is vacated for the purposes of serving the general public or the
abutting properties and to enter upon the premises to accomplish such purposes
at any and all reasonable times.
   (B)   The municipality shall have power to create, open, widen or extend any
street, avenue, alley, off-street parking area or other public way, or annul,
vacate or discontinue the same.
(Ord. 671, passed 4-2-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-558 and 17-559
§ 8-304 EXCAVATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make an excavation in any street or
streets for any purpose whatsoever unless a written permit is issued by the
Street Superintendent authorizing those excavations.
Penalty, see §
8-601
§ 8-305 DRIVING STAKES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any peg or stake of any kind
into the pavement in any street or alley without first procuring the written
consent of the Street Superintendent.
Penalty, see §
8-601
§ 8-306 MIXING CONCRETE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to mix any concrete or plastering
material directly on the street pavement for any reason whatsoever.
Penalty, see §
8-601
§ 8-307 HARMFUL LIQUIDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to leak in the gutter
of any street any waste gasoline, kerosene or high lubricating oils, which
damage or act as a solvent upon the streets.
Penalty, see §
8-601
§ 8-308 GUTTERING AND EAVE SPOUTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any dwelling house
or business building within the limits of the city where the dwelling or
building abuts on any sidewalk or street without providing proper guttering and
eave spouts to receive the wastewaters that collect on the sidewalks and
streets. All eave spouts erected on any dwelling house or business building
shall be constructed to drain into the alleys or shall be buried beneath the
sidewalks and drain into the streets where it is found to be impossible to
drain the eave spouts into the alley.
Penalty, see §
8-601
§ 8-309 HEAVY EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to move or operate heavy equipment
across any curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk or crossing on
any unpaved street without first having protected such curb, gutter, bridge,
culvert, sidewalks, crosswalk or crossing with heavy plank sufficient in
strength to warrant against the breaking or damaging of such curb, gutter,
bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk or crossing.
   (B)   Except as provided in Chapter 5, it shall be unlawful to run, drive,
move, operate or convey over or across any paved street a vehicle, machine or
implement with sharp discs or sharp wheels that bear upon the pavement; with
wheels having cutting edges; with wheels having lugs, any protruding parts or
bolts thereon that extend beyond a plain tire so as to cut, mark, mar, indent
or otherwise injure or damage any pavement, gutter or curb, except that where
heavy vehicles, structures and machines move along paved or unpaved streets the
city police are hereby authorized and empowered to choose the route over which
the moving of such vehicles, structures or machines will be permitted and
allowed.
Penalty, see §
8-601
§ 8-310 POLES, WIRES AND PIPE LINES.
   (A)   Poles, wires, conduits, gas mains, pipe lines and other appurtenances
of public service companies shall be located or erected over, upon or under the
streets, alleys and common grounds of the city. Application for location of
such appurtenances shall be made to the City Council in writing. Approval by
the Council shall be issued in writing. Any public service company granted a
right-of-way for the erection and maintenance of poles, wires, conduits, gas
mains, pipe lines or other appurtenances shall at all times erect and locate
their appurtenances at such places and in such manner as shall be designated by
the Council.
   (B)   All poles, wires, conduits, gas mains, pipe lines and other
appurtenances shall be removed or relocated by the companies at their own
expense when requested to do so by the Council. Any such removal or relocation
shall be ordered by resolution of the Council and the City Clerk shall notify
any and all companies affected. The companies shall, within 24 hours after
receiving notice, at their own expense, cause the poles, wires, conduits, gas
mains, pipe lines or other appurtenances to be removed or relocated. The
Council shall designate another location as closely as possible where the
appurtenances may be reset or placed.
   (C)   All poles, wires, conduits, gas mains, pipe lines or other
appurtenances shall be reset, placed or erected in such a manner that they will
not interfere with the water system; the sewerage system; any poles, wires,
conduits, mains, lines or other appurtenances of any public utility; any
adjacent buildings; or travel on the public ways and property. Whenever
possible, all poles, wires, conduits, gas mains, pipe lines and appurtenances
shall be confined to the alleys of the city.
§ 8-311 PETITION FOR IMPROVEMENTS.
   Whenever a petition signed by the owners of record title representing more
than 60% of the front footage of the property directly abutting upon the
street, streets, alley, alleys, public way or the public grounds proposed to be
improved, shall be presented and filed with the Municipal Clerk, petitioning
therefor, the governing body shall by ordinance create a paving, graveling or
other improvement district or districts, and shall cause such work to be done
or such improvement to be made, and shall contract therefor, and shall levy
assessments on the lots and parcels of land abutting on or adjacent to such
street, streets, alley or alleys, especially benefited thereby in such district
in proportion to such benefits, to pay the cost of such improvement. The
governing body shall have the discretion to deny the formation of the proposed
district when the area has not previously been improved with a water system,
sewer system and grading of streets. If the governing body should deny a
requested improvement district formation, it shall state the grounds for such
denial in a written letter to interested parties.
(Ord. 338, passed 11-1-1983)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-510
§ 8-311.01 IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS; OBJECTIONS.
   Whenever the governing body deems it necessary to make any improvements
allowed by statute which are to be funded by a levy of special assessment on
the property especially benefited, the governing body shall by ordinance create
a paving, graveling or other improvement district and, after the passage,
approval and publication or posting of such ordinance, shall publish notice of
the creation of any such district for six days in a legal newspaper of the
municipality, if a daily newspaper, or for two consecutive weeks if it is a
weekly newspaper. If no legal newspaper is published in the municipality, the
publication shall be in a legal newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality. If the owners of the record title representing more than 50% of
the front footage of the property directly abutting on the street or alley to
be improved file with the Municipal Clerk within 20 days after the first
publication of such notice written objections to the creation of such district,
such improvement shall not be made as provided in such ordinance, but such
ordinance shall be repealed. If objections are not filed against the district
in the time and manner prescribed in this section, the governing body shall
immediately cause such work to be done or such improvement to be made, shall
contract for the work or improvement and shall levy assessments on the lots and
parcels of land abutting on or adjacent to such street or alley especially
benefited in such district in proportion to such benefits to pay the cost of
such improvement.
(Ord. 533, passed 12-7-1995)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-511
§ 8-312 DRIVEWAY APPROACHES.
   (A)   The Street Superintendent may require the owner of property served by
a driveway approach constructed or maintained upon the street right-of-way to
repair or replace any such driveway approach which is cracked, broken or
otherwise deteriorated to the extent that it is causing or is likely to cause
damage to or interfere with any street structure, including pavement or
sidewalks.
   (B)   The Municipal Clerk shall give the property owner notice by registered
letter or certified mail, directed to the last known address of such owner or
the agent of such owner, directing the repair or replacement of such driveway
approach. If, within 30 days of mailing such notice, the property owner fails
or neglects to cause such repairs or replacements to be made, the Street
Superintendent may cause such work to be done and assess the cost upon the
property served by such approach.
(Ord. 355, passed 10-1-1985)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1748
§ 8-313 VACATING PUBLIC WAYS; DEFINITIONS AND ASCERTAINING DAMAGES.
   (Repealed by Ord. 672, passed 4-2-2002)
§ 8-314 VACATING PUBLIC WAYS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, SPECIAL DAMAGES shall mean only those
losses or damages or injuries which a property owner suffers that are peculiar
or special or unique to his or her property and which result from the City
Council vacating a street, avenue, alley, lane or similar public way. SPECIAL
DAMAGES shall not mean those losses or damages or injuries that a property
owner suffers that are in common with the rest of the city or public at large,
even though those losses or damages or injuries suffered by the property owner
are greater in degree than the rest of the city or public at large.
   (B)   Whenever the City Council decides that it would be in the best
interests of the city to vacate a street, avenue, alley, lane or similar public
way, the City Council shall comply with the following procedure.
      (1)   Notice. Notice shall be given to all abutting property owners
either by first-class mail to their last known address or if there is no known
address then by publishing the notice in a newspaper that is of general
circulation in the city. The content of the notice shall advise the abutting
property owners that the City Council will consider vacating such street,
avenue, alley, lane or similar public way at its next regular meeting or, if a
special meeting is scheduled for such discussion, then the date, time and place
of such meeting.
      (2)   Consent; waiver. The City Council may have all the abutting
property owners sign a form stating that they consent to the action being taken
by the City Council and waive their right of access. The signing of such form
shall have no effect on claims for special damages by the abutting property
owners but shall create the presumption that the City Council’s action was
proper. If the abutting property owners do not sign the consent/waiver form,
the City Council may still proceed with vacating the street, avenue, alley,
lane or similar public way under the authority granted by Neb. RS 17-558 and
17-559.
      (3)   Ordinance. The City Council shall pass an ordinance that includes
essentially the following provisions:
         (a)   A declaration that the action is expedient for the public good
or in the best interests of the city;
         (b)   A statement that the city will have an easement for maintaining
all utilities; and
         (c)   A method or procedure for ascertaining special damages to
abutting property owners.
   (C)   The Mayor shall appoint three or five or seven disinterested residents
of the city to a special commission to ascertain the amount of special damages
that the abutting property owners are entitled to receive and which resulted
from the City Council vacating the street, avenue, alley, lane or similar
public way. The appointees of the special commission shall be approved by the
City Council. Only special damages shall be awarded to the abutting property
owners.
   (D)   In determining the amount of compensation to award the abutting
property owners as special damages, the commission shall use the following
rule: An abutting property owner is entitled to recover as compensation the
difference between the value of the property immediately before and immediately
after the vacating of such street, avenue, alley, lane or similar public way.
If no difference in value exists, the abutting property owner is entitled to no
compensation.
(Ord. 371, passed 6-1-1987; Ord. 672, passed 4-2-2002)
§ 8-315 DEFERRAL FROM SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   Whenever the governing body of a municipality creates an improvement
district as specified in §
8-108 which includes land adjacent to the municipality which is within an
agricultural use zone and is used exclusively for agricultural use, the owners
of record title of such adjacent land may apply for a deferral from special
assessments. For the purpose of this section, the terms AGRICULTURAL USE and
AGRICULTURAL USE ZONE shall have the meaning specified in Neb. RS 77-1343.
ARTICLE 4: CURB AND GUTTER
Section
   
8-401   Cutting into paving, curb or sidewalk
§ 8-401 CUTTING INTO PAVING, CURB OR SIDEWALK.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut into any paving, curb or
sidewalk for the purpose of constructing a driveway or any other purpose
whatsoever without first having obtained a written permit from the City
Council. Before any person obtains a permit, he or she shall inform the City
Clerk of the place where such cutting is to be done, and it shall be the duty
of the Street Superintendent to inspect the proposed place of entry into the
paving, sidewalk or curb.
   (B)   When cutting into any paving, curb or sidewalk, it shall be the duty
of the party to comply with such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by
the Council or the City Engineer. When the applicant is ready to close the
opening made, he or she shall inform the Street Superintendent, who shall
supervise and inspect the materials used and the work done in closing the
opening.
   (C)   It shall be discretionary with the Council to order the Street
Superintendent, under the supervision and inspection of the City Engineer or
the committee of the Council on the streets and alleys, to do the cutting and
closing of the paving, curb or sidewalk and charge the costs thereof to the
party who obtained the permit. The Council may consent to the cutting and
closing of the paving, curb or sidewalk by the party holding the permit.
   (D)   Before any permit is issued by the Council, the applicant for the
permit shall deposit with the City Treasurer a sum set by resolution of the
Council for all paving, curb or sidewalk to be cut. Such sum shall be set on a
per square foot cost of construction basis. The deposit shall be retained by
the city for the purpose of replacing the paving, curb or sidewalk in the event
the work is done by the city. If the Board elects to require the applicant to
replace the paving, curb or sidewalk, the deposit shall be retained by the city
until the work is completed to the satisfaction of the Street Superintendent or
of the committee of the Council on streets and alleys.
   (E)   In addition to making the deposit, the applicant shall, before any
permit is issued, execute a bond to the city with a good and sufficient surety
to be approved by the Council in a sum set by resolution.
Penalty, see §
8-601
ARTICLE 5: TREES
Section
   
8-501   Planting; distance from curb and sidewalk
   
8-502   Public tree care
   
8-503   Pruning; corner clearance
   
8-504   Removal of stumps
§ 8-501 PLANTING; DISTANCE FROM CURB AND SIDEWALK.
   (Repealed by Ord. 742, passed 11-1-2005)
§ 8-502 PUBLIC TREE CARE.
   (A)   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues,
lanes, squares and public grounds as may be necessary to ensure public safety
or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
   (B)   The city may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part
thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is
injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other
public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other
pest.
(Ord. 626, passed 4-11-2000)
§ 8-503 PRUNING; CORNER CLEARANCE.
   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street right-of-way within the city
shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not severely obstruct the
light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and
so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the sidewalk surface
and 13 feet above the street surface. Said owners shall remove all dead,
diseased or dangerous trees or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a
menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any
tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of
light along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any
traffic control device or sign or sight triangle at intersections.
(Ord. 626, passed 4-11-2000)
§ 8-504 REMOVAL OF STUMPS.
   All tree stumps on city property shall be removed below the surface of the
ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the
ground. Such removal shall be at the expense of the immediate adjacent property
owner.
(Ord. 626, passed 4-11-2000)
ARTICLE 6: PENAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
8-601   Violations; penalty
§ 8-601 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, or any person’s agent or servant, who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided herein,
shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined in any sum not exceeding $500. A new violation shall be deemed to have
been committed every 24 hours of failure to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the
municipality may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin, abate and remove the
same in the manner provided by law.
      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists,
the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.
(Ord. 642, passed 5-10-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-505, 18-1720 and 18-1722
CHAPTER 9: BUILDING REGULATIONS
   Article
      
1.   BUILDING INSPECTOR
      
2.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
3.   BUILDING CODE
      
4.   HOUSING CODE
      
5.   PLUMBING CODE
      
6.   ELECTRICAL CODE
      
7.   VACANT, ABANDONED AND NEGLECTED PROPERTY REGULATIONS
      
8.   PENAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1: BUILDING INSPECTOR
Section
   
9-101   Power and authority
   
9-102   Right of entry
   
9-103   Plans, maps and the like; municipal officials; duty
§ 9-101 POWER AND AUTHORITY.
   The Building Inspector shall be the city official who shall have the duty of
enforcing all city building and housing regulations, if any. He or she shall
inspect all buildings repaired, altered, built or moved in the city as often as
necessary to ensure compliance with all city ordinances. He or she shall have
the power and authority to order, at the direction of the City Council, all
work stopped on any construction, alteration or relocation which violates any
provisions prescribed in any city building and housing regulations. He or she
shall, at the direction of the City Council, issue permission to continue any
construction, alteration or relocation when the City Council is satisfied that
no provision will be violated. If the stop order is an oral one, it shall be
followed by a written stop order within one hour. This written order may be
served by any city police officer. In the event that the city has building and
housing regulations and the Mayor fails to appoint a Building Inspector, the
chief city law enforcement officer shall be the Building Inspector ex officio.
§ 9-102 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow the Building
Inspector entry into any building or structure where the work of construction,
alteration, repair or relocation is taking place, for the purpose of making
official inspections at any reasonable hour.
Penalty, see §
9-701
§ 9-103 PLANS, MAPS AND THE LIKE; MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS; DUTY.
   (Repealed 2005)
ARTICLE 2: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
   
9-201   Building permits; required
   
9-202   Building permits; application, approval, issuance
   
9-203   Building permits; variances not permitted
   
9-204   Building permits; permit limitations, expiration, reissuance, unlawful
initiation or continuance, abatement
   
9-205   Commercial buildings outside fire limits; prohibited, exception
provided
   
9-206   Commercial buildings outside fire limits; expansion, notice to property
owners
   
9-207   Commercial buildings outside fire limits; expansion, when allowed
   
9-208   Building permits; barricades and lights
   
9-209   Building permits; fees for application and permit
   
9-210   Building permits; duplicate to County Assessor
   
9-211   Building permits; violations; penalty
   
9-212   Building demolition; purpose
   
9-213   Building demolition; definition
   
9-214   Building demolition; permit required
   
9-215   Building demolition; safety and registration requirements
   
9-216   Building demolition; liability insurance
   
9-217   Building demolition; application
   
9-218   Building demolition; barricades
   
9-219   Building demolition; utility lines
   
9-220   Building demolition; burning material
   
9-221   Building demolition; completion
   
9-222   Building demolition; stop order
§ 9-201 BUILDING PERMITS; REQUIRED.
   Any person desiring to commence or proceed to erect, construct, enlarge,
repair or relocate any building or other structure, including fences of all
kinds and sidewalks, or cause the same to be done, within the municipality and
up to one mile in all directions of said corporate limits, shall file with the
Municipal Clerk an application for a building permit. The application shall be
in writing on a form to be furnished by the Municipal Clerk for that purpose.
Every such application shall set forth the legal description of the land upon
which the construction or relocation is to take place, the nature of the use or
occupancy, the principal dimensions, the estimated cost, the names of the
owner, architect and contractor, the materials to be used and such other
information as may be requested thereon. The application, plans and
specifications so filed with the Municipal Clerk shall be checked and examined
by the governing body, and, if they are found to be in conformity with the
requirements of Chapter 9 and all other ordinances applicable thereto, the
governing body shall authorize the Municipal Clerk to issue said applicant a
permit upon the payment of the permit fee set by resolution of the governing
body. Nothing herein shall require the issuance of a building permit prior to a
repair of improvements to real estate, which repair does not alter or extend
the outer dimensions of any existing improvement.
(Ord. 399, passed 7-5-1989; Ord. 705, passed 6-3-2003)
§ 9-202 BUILDING PERMITS; APPLICATION, APPROVAL, ISSUANCE.
   Application to erect, construct, enlarge, improve, repair or relocate a
building or other structure located within the corporate limits or the
municipality and up to one mile in all directions of said corporate limits
shall be filed in compliance with §
9-201. Said application shall be in writing, filed with the Municipal Clerk,
addressed to the Mayor and City Council and shall be accompanied by all
documents and information required above in §
9-201. If such application and included information are in conformity with the
provisions of this code, the governing body shall order the issuance of the
requested permit to the applicant.
(Ord. 705, passed 6-3-2003)
§ 9-203 BUILDING PERMITS; VARIANCES NOT PERMITTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a permit to erect, construct,
enlarge, improve, repair or relocate a building or other structure located
within the corporate limits of the municipality, or within one mile in all
directions of said corporate limits, is issued, as provided by this article, to
vary from the plans and specifications submitted to the governing body in the
erection, construction, improvement, relocation or repair authorized, in any
manner so that such erection, construction, improvement, relocation or repair
shall not conform to the provisions of this code.
(Ord. 705, passed 6-3-2003) Penalty, see §
9-211
§ 9-204 BUILDING PERMITS; PERMIT LIMITATIONS, EXPIRATION, REISSUANCE, UNLAWFUL
INITIATION OR CONTINUANCE, ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Any project permitted by a building permit issued by the municipality
shall be completed within 365 days of the date of issuance.
   (B)   All building permits issued by the municipality shall expire 365 days
after the date of issuance. No person shall initiate or continue work on any
project permitted by a building permit which has expired.
   (C)   Any person holding an expired building permit may apply for a new
building permit. If the project permitted by the expired building permit has
been initiated prior to the expiration of any permit, any new permit building
permit shall be issued and approved pursuant to the regulations and ordinances
existing at the time of the issuance of the original permit. If the project
permitted by the expired building permit had not been initiated prior to the
time of its expiration, any new building permit shall be issued and approved
pursuant to the ordinances and regulations existing at the time of the new
application.
   (D)   In case a project for which there is not a valid, unexpired building
permit is initiated or continued, the governing body or law enforcement
officials, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action
or proceedings to prevent such unlawful initiation or continuance of such
project or to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the
occupancy of the premises on which said violation occurred, or to prevent any
illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
(Ord. 705, passed 6-3-2003) Penalty, see §
9-211
§ 9-205 COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS OUTSIDE FIRE LIMITS; PROHIBITED, EXCEPTION
PROVIDED.
   No building shall be erected or constructed in that area of the municipality
outside of the fire limits, as defined in this code, for retail, wholesale,
industrial, manufacturing or other commercial purpose, nor shall any existing
building be used for any such purpose, except when a building permit is allowed
to be issued by the governing body as provided by the provisions of this code.
(Ord. 705, passed 6-3-2003) Penalty, see §
9-211
§ 9-206 COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS OUTSIDE FIRE LIMITS; EXPANSION, NOTICE TO PROPERTY
OWNERS.
   In those portions of said municipality outside the fire limits, the
governing body may authorize commercial structures and uses in the normal
continuance expansion of commercial structures and into additional territory
outside the fire limits, but any applicant for such permit shall, at least ten
days prior to the action thereon by the governing body, give notice of the
pendency of said application to all owners of property abutting the proposed
location of said structure, and to all owners of residences within 100 feet of
said location and furnish proof of said notice to the governing body. The
notice required by this section may be served personally or by mailing.
(Ord. 705, passed 6-3-2003)
§ 9-207 COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS OUTSIDE FIRE LIMITS; EXPANSION, WHEN ALLOWED.
   (A)   The governing body may, at its discretion, authorize construction and
uses of buildings for retail, wholesale, industrial, manufacturing or other
commercial purposes at other locations outside said fire limits when it will be
conducive to the public welfare and where there is first filed with the
Municipal Clerk the written consent of persons owning three-fourths of the
property within 300 feet of said proposed location, together with the written
consent of the persons owning the lots and partial lots within 50 feet of the
premises upon which it is proposed to locate or use said structure for retail,
wholesale, industrial, manufacturing or other commercial purposes.
   (B)   Buildings authorized as provided in this section shall be located at
such points on the real estate and shall have such setback lines as the
governing body may specify.
(Ord. 705, passed 6-3-2003)
§ 9-208 BUILDING PERMITS; BARRICADES AND LIGHTS.
   It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant, lessee or contractor, and any or
all of them during the construction of any building or improvement upon or near
the line of any public street, highway, alley or sidewalk, to have all
excavations or exposures of any kind protected and guarded by suitable guards
or barricades by day, and by red warning lights at night. In case of the
failure, neglect or refusal of said persons, or any of them, to erect such
guards and keep said street, highway or sidewalk well and securely guarded, it
shall be the duty of the City Supervisor, or other designated municipal
employee, to forthwith stop all work upon said buildings and improvements until
said guards are erected and kept in the manner aforesaid.
(Ord. 705, passed 6-3-2003)
§ 9-209 BUILDING PERMITS; FEES FOR APPLICATION AND PERMIT.
   The Municipal Clerk shall, at the time of filing the application for the
issuance of any permit as aforesaid, charge and collect in advance a fee of
$25. Said fee shall be the property of the municipality and shall be paid over
to the Municipal Treasurer for credit to the General Fund of the municipality.
(Ord. 705, passed 6-3-2003; Ord. 722, passed 4-6-2004)
§ 9-210 BUILDING PERMITS; DUPLICATE TO COUNTY ASSESSOR.
   Whenever a building permit is issued for the erection, alteration,
relocation or repair of any building within the corporate limits of the
municipality, and up to one mile in all directions from said corporate limits,
and the improvement is $2,000 or more, a duplicate of such permit shall be
issued to the County Assessor.
(Ord. 705, passed 6-3-2003)
§ 9-211 BUILDING PERMITS; VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   Any person, or any persons, agent or servant, who violates any of the
provisions of §§ 9-201 through 9-210, unless otherwise specifically provided
herein, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined in a sum not less than $100, nor more than $500. A new violation
shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of failure to comply with
the provisions of §§ 9-201 through 9-210.
(Ord. 705, passed 6-3-2003)
§ 9-212 BUILDING DEMOLITION; PURPOSE.
   The purpose of §§
9-212 through
9-222 is to regulate and provide minimum standards for the demolition of
buildings.
(Ord. 968, passed 10-4-2022)
§ 9-213 BUILDING DEMOLITION; DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of §§
9-212 through
9-222, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIONS BY THE MUNICIPALITY. Actions undertaken pursuant to the authority of
either the Mayor or the City Council.
   DEMOLISH. Includes the razing, tearing down or removal of all or part of a
building; the removal of the outer facing of a building but leaving a skeleton
or structural frame; and the removal of an upper story or stories of a
building.
(Ord. 968, passed 10-4-2022)
§ 9-214 BUILDING DEMOLITION; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall demolish or remove a building, or part thereof, without
first having obtained a permit from the municipality.
(Ord. 968, passed 10-4-2022) Penalty, see §
9-701
§ 9-215 BUILDING DEMOLITION; SAFETY AND REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
   All demolition work shall be performed in conformance with Safety
Requirements for Demolition, ANSI A10.6-1969, as published by American National
Standards Institute, Inc. Any commercial contractor performing demolition work
shall be registered with the State Department of Labor.
(Ord. 968, passed 10-4-2022)
§ 9-216 BUILDING DEMOLITION; LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   Whenever any building which is to be demolished has been used or is being
used as a residential building or for any commercial use permitted, the
municipality shall require that the person applying for the demolition permit
file a certificate evidencing liability insurance coverage in the minimum sum
of $1,000,000 as a condition to the granting of the demolition permit. Such
insurance coverage shall include both bodily injury and property damage
liability protection for the property owner, his or her contractor and the
municipality against all claims arising out of the demolition of the building.
The municipality may require a certificate evidencing liability insurance
coverage in excess of the minimum sum stated above, and all certificates of
insurance shall be approved by the City Attorney.
(Ord. 968, passed 10-4-2022)
§ 9-217 BUILDING DEMOLITION; APPLICATION.
   To obtain a demolition permit, the applicant shall first file an application
therefor in writing on a form furnished by the Municipal Clerk. Such
application shall set forth a statement of the facts necessary to fully
describe the building, its use, provide certification to the City Clerk that
the building(s) about to be demolished has been inspected by a certified
asbestos inspector or asbestos-removal contractor and that either no asbestos
hazard exists or that all asbestos has been properly removed and disposed, its
legal description and address. The application shall state the disposal
location for any asbestos materials. Provisions shall be made by the applicant
for the proper abandonment of all utilities as required by this code before a
demolition permit may be issued. The application shall be signed by the person
who will perform the demolition work.
(Ord. 968, passed 10-4-2022)
§ 9-218 BUILDING DEMOLITION; BARRICADES.
   (A)   No person shall perform any demolition work on any building or
structure if, by so doing, he or she endangers persons or property on adjacent
real estate or pedestrians on the street that abuts the property line unless
the persons, property or pedestrians are protected as specified below.
   (B)   Protection shall be provided for pedestrians on all sides of a
building being demolished that borders on a public street or alley by providing
a covered walkway four feet in clear width and seven feet in clear height. Such
walkway shall be covered on top with two-inch (nominal) planking as a minimum
and the sides next to the building shall be covered with plywood or other
materials approved by the municipality. The side of the walkway next to the
street shall have a splash guard at least two feet in height to protect the
pedestrian from splashing caused by passing automobiles. The municipality may
also require a raised subfloor in the walkway. The space within the walkway and
the approaches thereto shall be kept well lighted with artificial lighting
continuously between sunset and sunrise.
   (C)   Any building which is set back more than six feet from the street or
alley property line may, in lieu of the covered walkway, be protected by a
tightly built fence six feet high approved by the municipality. The remainder
of the property shall be enclosed with a fence not less than four feet high.
All material and debris being removed from the premises shall be sufficiently
wetted down to settle any dust caused by its removal.
   (D)   A substantial protective frame and boarding shall be built around and
over every streetlight, utility box, fire or police alarm box, fire hydrant,
catch basin and manhole which may be damaged due to work being performed under
the permit. This protection shall be maintained until such work is complete.
   (E)   The municipality may waive these requirements and/or approve
alternative means of protecting the public.
(Ord. 968, passed 10-4-2022) Penalty, see §
9-701
§ 9-219 BUILDING DEMOLITION; UTILITY LINES.
   Water supply and service pipes must be disconnected and sealed in accordance
with municipal water system regulations. House sewers must be disconnected and
sealed in accordance with the municipal sanitary sewer system regulations.
(Ord. 968, passed 10-4-2022)
§ 9-220 BUILDING DEMOLITION; BURNING MATERIAL.
   No burning of materials during the performance of demolition work shall be
permitted without written authorization of the City Fire Chief.
(Ord. 968, passed 10-4-2022)
§ 9-221 BUILDING DEMOLITION; COMPLETION.
   All demolition work must be completed within 90 days from the date of the
demolition permit. To be considered complete, all materials from the demolished
structure, including, but not limited to, foundation and concrete slabs, must
be removed from the premises. Upon completion of the demolition work, the
applicant shall clean the premises of all remaining debris, fill in the
excavation and grade the area with top soil or other material approved by the
municipality.
(Ord. 968, passed 10-4-2022)
§ 9-222 BUILDING DEMOLITION; STOP ORDER.
   The municipality shall have the authority to stop the demolition or removal
of any building or structure, or part thereof, when the same is being done in a
reckless or careless manner, or in violation of the provisions of this code or
any other ordinances of the city. When such work is stopped by order of the
municipality, it shall not be resumed without further approval of the
municipality. A demolition permit may be revoked by the municipality at any
time upon a violation of the terms thereof or upon a violation of any provision
of this code or any other ordinance of the city.
(Ord. 968, passed 10-4-2022)
ARTICLE 3: BUILDING CODE
Section
   
9-301   Building Code adopted by reference
   
9-302   Zoning regulations; manufactured homes; standards
§ 9-301 BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe
and stable design, methods of construction and uses of materials in buildings
hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, relocated and
converted, the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, is hereby
incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions as though printed
in full herein insofar as said code does not conflict with the statutes of the
state. One copy of the Building Code is on file at the office of the Municipal
Clerk and is available for public inspection at any reasonable time. The
provisions of the Building Code shall be controlling throughout the
municipality and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-1001, 18-132, 19-902, 19-922 and 71-6403
§ 9-302 ZONING REGULATIONS; MANUFACTURED HOMES; STANDARDS.
   These regulations have been transferred to Chapter 11, article 4 as §
11-403.
ARTICLE 4: HOUSING CODE
Section
   
9-401   Housing Code adopted by reference
§ 9-401 HOUSING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe
and stable design, methods of construction and uses of materials in houses
hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, relocated and
converted, the Uniform Standards for Modular Housing Act, being Neb. RS 76-
1461, is hereby incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions
as though printed in full herein, insofar as said Code does not conflict with
the statutes of the state. One copy of the Housing Code is on file at the
office of the Municipal Clerk and is available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. The provisions of the Housing Code shall be controlling
throughout the municipality and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-1001, 18-132, 19-901 and 19-922
ARTICLE 5: PLUMBING CODE
Section
   
9-501   Plumbing Code adopted by reference
   
9-502   Building regulations; prohibition of lead pipes, solder and flux
§ 9-501 PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Uniform Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, published by the International
Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this article as though set out in full herein;
provided, that whenever provisions of the Uniform Plumbing Code shall conflict
with the provisions of the city code or any other city ordinance, the
provisions of the city code or such city ordinance shall govern. Three copies
of the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, are on file in the office of the
Permits and Inspections Department and shall there remain for public use and
inspection.
(Ord. 900, passed 1-9-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 71-6403
§ 9-502 BUILDING REGULATIONS; PROHIBITION OF LEAD PIPES, SOLDER AND FLUX.
   (A)   Any pipe, solders or flux used in the installation or repair of any
residential or nonresidential facility which is connected to the public water
supply system shall be lead free.
   (B)   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LEAD FREE.
         (a)   Solders and flux not more than 0.2% lead; and
         (b)   Pipe and pipe fittings not more than 8% lead.
(Ord. 385, passed 6-7-1988)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 71-5301
ARTICLE 6: ELECTRICAL CODE
Section
   
9-601   Electrical Code adopted by reference
   
9-602   Definitions
   
9-603   Application of article
   
9-604   Electrical Inspector; office created; bond, amount, removal
   
9-605   Electrical Inspector; duties
   
9-606   Electrical Inspector; assistants
   
9-607   Electrical Inspector; record of inspections
   
9-608   Electrical Inspector; records, annual report
   
9-609   Electrician; license; maintenance permits
   
9-610   Electrician; application for license
   
9-611   Electrician; electrician’s bond; conditions
   
9-612   Electrician; original registration fee and renewal fees
   
9-613   Electrical installation; permit; permit fees; electrical inspection
fees; minor repair work
   
9-614   Electrical installation; permit, file plan of installation
   
9-615   Electrical installation; installation approved before use
   
9-616   Electrical inspection; notice of work to be inspected; certificate of
approval
   
9-617   Electrical inspection; reinspection
   
9-618   Electrical inspection; appeal procedure
   
9-619   Electrical inspection; effect, liability
   
9-620   License or permit; revocation, penalty, cumulative
   
9-621   Violation; penalty
§ 9-601 ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   No certification of approval shall be issued by the Electrical Inspector
with respect to any interior building or house wiring, as well as all
connections thereto, inside or outside, unless the electric light, power and
heating installations are in strict conformity with the provisions of the
ordinances of the city and statutes of the state, and unless they are in
conformity with the most approved methods of construction for safety to life
and property. The regulations laid down in the 2023 National Electrical Code,
standard of the National Fire Protection Association for Electrical Wiring and
Apparatus, and all amendments and revisions thereof, adopted by the legislature
of the state and the State Electrical Board, shall be prima facie evidence of
such most approved methods. Three copies of the regulations referred to above
are on file at the office of the City Clerk, and such rules and regulations,
together with subsequent amendments thereto, are hereby approved and adopted by
the Mayor and City Council as a standard of efficiency of the most approved
methods of electrical construction and hereby incorporated and made a part of
this article as though printed in full herein.
(Ord. 240, passed 6-23-1977; Ord. 295, passed 4-7-1981)
§ 9-602 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ELECTRIC APPARATUS. Includes all wires, wiring, materials, machinery,
appliances, equipment, fixtures and apparatus used or designed to be used in
the utilization of electricity when connected with a course of electromotive
force for the purpose of producing light, heat or power.
   ELECTRICIAN. The person licensed under the provisions of this article to
install electric apparatus; provided, that the city shall not be amenable to
the bond and license provisions contained in this article.
   INSTALL, INSTALLED or INSTALLATION. Includes the construction and placing in
position for service and use of any new electric apparatus and the alteration,
modification or repair of existing electric apparatus.
(Ord. 240, passed 6-23-1977)
§ 9-603 APPLICATION OF ARTICLE.
   The provisions of this article shall apply to all installments of electrical
material, fittings, devices, appliances, fixtures and apparatus hereafter
referred to as electrical equipment within all public, commercial, industrial
and residential buildings of over four living units. Required electrical
inspection shall pertain to new construction, building additions and remodeling
work.
(Ord. 240, passed 6-23-1977)
§ 9-604 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; OFFICE CREATED; BOND, AMOUNT, REMOVAL.
   (A)   The office of Electrical Inspector in and for the city is hereby
created. The Utilities Superintendent is hereby designated as ex officio
Electrical Inspector in and for said city until further order of the Council.
   (B)   No person shall serve as Electrical Inspector unless that person shall
have the following minimum qualification:
      (1)   Five years on-the-job wiring experience, including conduit work and
switchboard, motor and motor control wiring;
      (2)   Three years’ experience as above, plus two years’ experience in
electrical construction as contractor, estimator, electrical consulting
engineer or instructor; or
      (3)   Three years’ experience as Electrical Inspector, including
inspection of conduit work, switchboards, motor and motor control wiring.
   (C)   The Electrical Inspector shall file with the Council a bond of a
surety company to be approved by the Council, in the sum of $1,000, conditioned
that he or she will indemnify and keep harmless the city from all liabilities
from accident or damages arising from negligence or carelessness in the
performance of his or her work, or from any inadequate work done in pursuance
of his or her appointment and office, and that he or she will keep all records
of his or her office, as provided herein, which shall be the property of the
city and shall be filed and preserved by the Electrical Inspector in the office
of the Light Department Cashier and which shall be delivered to his or her
successor in office. He or she shall be removed from office for cause only
after a full hearing before the Mayor and Council. It shall be unlawful for the
Electrical Inspector, except as Light Commissioner he or she shall install
electric wiring and devices as agent for the city, to engage in the business of
the installation and maintenance of electric wiring, electric devices and
electrical materials, either directly or indirectly, and he or she shall have
no financial interest in any concern engaged in such business in the city at
any time while holding the office of Electrical Inspector. Any violation of the
provisions of this section by said Electrical Inspector shall be removed for
other just cause. The Electrical Inspector shall possess a certificate of
qualification attesting to his or her competency to enforce the provisions of
this article. This certificate shall be issued by the municipality upon a
showing of the applicant that he or she possesses the necessary qualifications
prescribed herein.
(Ord. 240, passed 6-23-1977; Ord. 243, passed 9-4-1977) Penalty, see §
9-621
§ 9-605 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; DUTIES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Electrical Inspector to enforce the
provisions of this article. He or she shall inspect all electric apparatus
installed within the city. He or she shall notify the owner of the premises on
which any electrical apparatus has been installed or the electrician installing
the same, of any work done contrary to the provisions of this article and of
any defective workmanship or material therein. It shall be the duty of such
owner or electrician, upon being notified of any such defect or failure, to
comply with the provisions of this article, immediately to remedy the same,
and, if not remedied within a reasonable time, the Electrical Inspector, or his
or her deputy, shall disconnect such electric apparatus from the electric
supply; provided, that if such defect is such as to endanger life or property,
then the Electrical Inspector or his or her deputy shall disconnect such
electric apparatus immediately.
   (B)   When any electric apparatus shall have been disconnected from the
electric supply, it shall not again be connected until all defects have been
remedied or until the installation complies strictly with the provisions of
this article.
(Ord. 240, passed 6-23-1977)
§ 9-606 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; ASSISTANTS.
   (A)   The Electrical Inspector, if authorized by the Mayor and Council, is
hereby authorized to delegate any qualified person or persons to assist in the
enforcement of all the provisions of this article; and it shall be unlawful to
interfere with the Electrical Inspector or said qualified person or persons
delegated by him or her while in the performance of his or her duty.
   (B)   Any assistant Electrical Inspector must possess a certificate of
qualification attesting to his or her competency to enforce the provisions of
this article. This certificate shall be issued by the municipality upon a
showing of the applicant that he or she possesses the necessary qualifications
contained and prescribed in §
9-611 herein.
(Ord. 240, passed 6-23-1977; Ord. 243, passed 9-4-1977) Penalty, see §
9-621
§ 9-607 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; RECORD OF INSPECTIONS.
   The Electrical Inspector shall make and keep a record of all inspections,
giving the location, date, name of the electrician, for whom installed and also
a general description of the inspection.
(Ord. 240, passed 6-23-1977)
§ 9-608 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; RECORDS, ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Electrical Inspector shall keep a full and complete record of all work
done, permits issued, examinations made or other official work performed, as
required by this article, and shall annually make a full and detailed report
thereof to the Council at the first regular meeting in April. Said records
shall be the property of the city, shall be so arranged as to afford prompt
information concerning the condition and general arrangement of any electrical
equipment at the time of the Inspector’s last visit and shall be filed in an
orderly manner in the office of the Light Department Cashier.
(Ord. 240, passed 6-23-1977)
§ 9-609 ELECTRICIAN; LICENSE; MAINTENANCE PERMITS.
   No person shall install any electric apparatus within the corporate limits
of said city without first having obtained a license to do so as hereinafter
provided. Any person regularly employed by any person to care for and attend to
the electrical apparatus used in connection with the business of his or her
employer may, upon application to the Electrical Inspector and upon satisfying
said Inspector that he or she is competent and qualified to attend to such
electrical apparatus, be issued a maintenance permit to attend to and care for
said apparatus; provided, that maintenance permits shall not be transferable,
nor shall the receipt of any maintenance permit be entitled to install
electrical apparatus for any person other than his or her employer whose
electrical apparatus he or she attends.
(Ord. 240, passed 6-23-1977)
§ 9-610 ELECTRICIAN; APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Application for a license shall be made to the Electrical Inspector on forms
furnished by him or her. Before such license shall be issued, the applicant
shall satisfy said Inspector that he or she possesses qualifications and
fitness, practical and elementary in character to install electric apparatus.
(Ord. 240, passed 6-23-1977)
§ 9-611 ELECTRICIAN; ELECTRICIAN’S BOND; CONDITIONS.
   Before any electrician’s license shall be issued, by the City Clerk, the
applicant shall execute and file with the City Clerk a bond in the sum of
$5,000, signed by some approved corporate surety company, said bond to be
approved by the Mayor and Council, conditioned that the licensee shall pay such
original registration and renewal fees by way of occupation tax as may be
required, shall leave all streets, sidewalks and pavement in as good condition
as he or she found them and maintain the same to the satisfaction of the
Electrical Inspector for a period of six months next after receiving
certificate of approval, shall indemnify and hold harmless said city, of and
from all accidents, damages, liability, claims, judgments, costs or expenses
caused by any negligence arising from a failure to protect such work, or by any
unfinished, unskillful or inadequate work done in pursuance of his or her
license in wiring said places prepared to receive the electric current and
including the connections and extensions of supply wires; and that such
applicant will be governed by the rules and requirements herein provided or
that may be hereafter prescribed and adopted by said city, adopted or in force
during the period of his or her license with reference to such wiring and
fixing of electric appliances to the satisfaction of the Electrical Inspector
or his or her deputy or agent charged with such duty; and shall pay all fines
imposed upon him or her for any violation thereof. The obligee of said bond
shall be the city, the action may be maintained thereon by anyone injured by a
breach of its conditions. The city hereby recognizes and will honor a State
Class A Journeyman and Class A Master License and nothing herein shall be
construed to mean otherwise.
(Ord. 240, passed 6-23-1977; Ord. 243, passed 9-4-1977)
§ 9-612 ELECTRICIAN; ORIGINAL REGISTRATION FEE AND RENEWAL FEES.
   There shall be an original registration fee of $10 paid to the City Clerk
prior to the issuance of the electrician’s license. For each successive year
after a license is first issued, there shall be a renewal fee charged of $1 per
year. Failure to pay such original registration fee or renewal fee will result
in no license being issued to applicant.
(Ord. 240, passed 6-23-1977)
§ 9-613 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION; PERMIT; PERMIT FEES; ELECTRICAL INSPECTION
FEES; MINOR REPAIR WORK.
   No installation of electric apparatus shall be made without first obtaining
a written permit from the Electrical Inspector, or his or her deputy, to do so.
No permit fee shall be required or shall be paid the Electrical Inspector, or
other city officer or employee empowered to issue said permit. No additional
fee for inspections, as herein provided, shall be demanded by or paid to the
Electrical Inspector for any service performed under this article; provided,
that nothing in this section shall be construed so as to require the securing
of a construction permit for minor repair work, such as repairing flush and
snap switches, replacing fuses, changing lamp sockets and receptacles, taping
bare joints and repairing drop cords. The Electrical Inspector shall be
notified of all electric apparatus to be concealed in sufficient time for his
or her inspection, and no electric apparatus shall be concealed until approval
by the Electrical Inspector, or his or her deputy.
(Ord. 240, passed 6-23-1977)
§ 9-614 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION; PERMIT, FILE PLAN OF INSTALLATION.
   Before issuing a permit for the installation of any electrical apparatus,
the applicant shall submit to the Electrical Inspector a plan thereof, and if
the same complies in all respects with this article, the Electrical Inspector
shall issue a permit for the installation thereof.
(Ord. 240, passed 6-23-1977)
§ 9-615 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION; INSTALLATION APPROVED BEFORE USE.
   Hereinafter all electric apparatus shall be installed strictly in accordance
with the provisions of this article. No electric apparatus shall be used until
inspected by the Electrical Inspector, or his or her deputy, and a certificate
issued by him or her approving the same and permitting its use.
(Ord. 240, passed 6-23-1977)
§ 9-616 ELECTRICAL INSPECTION; NOTICE OF WORK TO BE INSPECTED; CERTIFICATE OF
APPROVAL.
   Upon the completion of the installation of any electric apparatus, the
electrician installing the same shall notify the Electrical Inspector, or his
or her deputy, who shall inspect such electric apparatus and the installation
thereof, and, if all of the provisions of this article have been complied with,
then the Electrical Inspector, or his or her deputy, shall issue a certificate
of approval, which certificate of approval shall certify that such electric
apparatus has been installed in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 9-617 ELECTRICAL INSPECTION; REINSPECTION.
   The Electrical Inspector shall make periodically a thorough reinspection of
all the installation in buildings of all electric wiring, electric devices and
electric material now installed or that may be hereafter installed within the
corporate limits of this city, and when the installation of any such wiring,
devices or material is found to be in dangerous or unsafe condition, the
person, firm or corporation owning, using or operating the same shall be
notified in writing and shall make the necessary repairs or changes required to
place such wiring, devices and material in safe condition and have such work
completed within 15 days, or any longer period specified by the Electrical
Inspector in said notice. The Electrical Inspector is hereby empowered to
disconnect or order the discontinuance of electrical service to such wiring,
devices or materials so found to be defectively installed until the
installation of such wiring, devices or materials have been made safe as
directed by the Electrical Inspector.
(Ord. 240, passed 6-23-1977)
§ 9-618 ELECTRICAL INSPECTION; APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   When the Electrical Inspector condemns all or part of any electrical
installation, the owner may, within five days after receiving written notice
from the Electrical Inspector, file a petition in writing for review of said
action of the Electrical Inspector with the Council, upon receipt of which the
Council shall at once proceed to determine whether said electrical installation
complied with this article and, within three days, shall make a written
decision in accordance with its findings and shall file a copy of said decision
signed by at least a majority of the members of the Council with the City
Clerk.
(Ord. 240, passed 6-23-1977)
§ 9-619 ELECTRICAL INSPECTION; EFFECT, LIABILITY.
   Nothing contained in the preceding sections of this article shall be
construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability to any
party owning, operating, controlling or installing any electric wiring,
electric devices or electric material for damages to person or property caused
by any defect therein nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability
by reason of the inspection authorized therein, or certificate of satisfactory
inspection or approval issued as herein provided.
(Ord. 240, passed 6-23-1977)
§ 9-620 LICENSE OR PERMIT; REVOCATION, PENALTY, CUMULATIVE.
   (A)   Every license and permit granted under the provisions of this article
may be revoked after reasonable notice and hearing by the Mayor and Council
whenever any licensee or holder of any permit fails, neglects or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of this article. This penalty shall be
cumulative and in addition to the penalties prescribed for the violation of the
provisions of this article.
   (B)   When the license of any electrician shall have been revoked by said
Mayor and Council as herein provided, the fact of said revocation shall be made
a matter of record in the proceedings of the Council by the City Clerk. When a
license is revoked, a new license shall not again be granted to the holder
thereof for a period of at least 30 days.
(Ord. 240, passed 6-23-1977)
§ 9-621 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Any person upon whom a duty is placed by the provisions of this article, who
shall fail, neglect or refuse to perform such duty or who shall violate any of
the provisions of this article, for which a penalty is not otherwise
specifically provided, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum not to exceed $100; and each day
that a violation of any section of this article continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such; provided, if the
defendant be a licensed electrician the judgment of conviction may also include
a provision for the revocation of defendant’s license for such time as the
police magistrate shall determine.
(Ord. 240, passed 6-23-1977)
ARTICLE 7: VACANT, ABANDONED AND NEGLECTED PROPERTY REGULATIONS
Section
   
9-701   Registration of vacant property
   
9-702   Regulations, how cited; supplemental; exceptions
   
9-703   Definitions
   
9-704   Vacant and neglected property; nuisance
   
9-705   Exemptions
   
9-706   Program Administrator; inspections; additional rules and regulations
   
9-707   Registration of property; procedure
   
9-708   Registration fees; fines; enforcement; lien; waiver
   
9-709   Violations; penalty
§ 9-701 REGISTRATION OF VACANT PROPERTY.
   The city finds and declares that:
   (A)   Vacant properties have the potential to create a host of problems for
the city, including a propensity to foster criminal activity, create public
health problems and otherwise diminish qualify of life;
   (B)   Vacant properties have the potential to reduce the value of area
properties, increase the risk of property damages through arson and vandalism
and discourage neighborhood stability;
   (C)   Vacant properties represent unrealized economic growth in the city;
   (D)   A vacant property registration ordinance will allow the city to
discourage property vacancy, maintain unoccupied buildings, provide a data base
of vacant properties and their owners and assess fees for the increased public
costs associated with vacant properties;
   (E)   Fees imposed under a vacant properties by helping to finance
additional government services to protect the value and security of such
properties; and
   (F)   Enactment of the vacant property registration ordinance is a proper
exercise of the city’s authority to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of community residents and a valid regulatory scheme.
(Ord. 970, passed 10-4-2022)
§ 9-702 REGULATIONS, HOW CITED; SUPPLEMENTAL; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this article shall be known and may be cited as the
“Vacant, Abandoned and Neglected Property Regulations” and shall be
supplemental and in addition to any other laws of the state or the city.
   (B)   This article shall not apply to property owned by the federal
government, the state or any political subdivision thereof.
(Ord. 970, passed 10-4-2022)
§ 9-703 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED BUILDING. A vacant residential or commercial building the owner of
which cannot be ascertained or is unresponsive to notices or other contact by
the city.
   COMMERCIAL BUILDING. A structure, building or part of a structure or
building designed or intended to be used for the operation of a lawful business
engaging in a commercial enterprise. Examples of COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS include,
but are not limited to, offices, retail spaces, warehouses and factories.
   COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISE. Any business activity relating to or based upon the
production, distribution or consumption of goods or services.
   EVIDENCE OF VACANCY. Any condition or circumstance that on its own or in
combination with other conditions or circumstances would lead a reasonable
person to believe that a structure, building or dwelling is vacant. Such
conditions or circumstances may include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Any unoccupied or empty building or structure on the property;
      (2)   Lack of active utility service accounts;
      (3)   Overgrown or dead vegetation, including grass, shrubbery, weeds and
other plants;
      (4)   An accumulation of abandoned personal property, trash or other
waste or items that constitute a nuisance.
      (5)   Visible deterioration or lack of maintenance of any structure,
building or dwelling on the property;
      (6)   Graffiti or other defacement of any structure, building or dwelling
on the property; or
      (7)   Any other condition or circumstance reasonably indicating that the
property is unoccupied.
   NEGLECTED BUILDING. A structure, building or dwelling wherein one or more of
the following have occurred.
      (1)   Within the last six months, the structure, building or dwelling has
been the subject of two or more notices of violation of the building or
nuisance provisions of this code or the city’s zoning regulations.
      (2)   The structure, building or dwelling has sustained fire, wind, water
or other damage caused by vandals, nature or acts of God and no visible signs
of consistent efforts to repair, rehabilitate, demolish or remove the
structure, building or dwelling are evident within 60 days after the damage
occurred.
      (3)   The structure, building or dwelling has been declared a public
nuisance or an unsafe structure.
   OWNER. The person or persons shown to be the owner or owners of record on
the records of the Register of Deeds.
   PROPERTY. Either a residential building or a commercial building located
within the corporate limits of the city but does not include the property owned
by the federal government, the state or any political subdivision thereof.
   RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. A dwelling, house, condominium, townhouse, mobile home
or an apartment unit or building.
   UNOCCUPIED. The property, structure, building or dwelling is not being used
for a legal use or occupancy.
   VACANT. That a residential or commercial building exhibits evidence of
vacancy. A property is VACANT if any condition or circumstance that on its own,
or in combination with other conditions or circumstances, would lead a
reasonable person to believe that the property is VACANT.
(Ord. 970, passed 10-4-2022)
§ 9-704 VACANT AND NEGLECTED PROPERTY; NUISANCE.
   (A)   The city shall create and maintain a vacant, abandoned and neglected
property registration database. The database shall include, at a minimum:
      (1)   The name, street address, mailing address, telephone number and, if
applicable, the fax number and email address of the property owner and their
agent;
      (2)   The street address, parcel identification number and legal
description of the property;
      (3)   The transfer date of the instrument conveying the property to the
owner; and
      (4)   The date on which the property became vacant, abandoned or
neglected.
   (B)   Vacant, abandoned and neglected buildings shall constitute a public
nuisance and may be abated, repaired, rehabilitated, demolished or removed
pursuant to law.
(Ord. 970, passed 10-4-2022)
§ 9-705 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Vacant property that is advertised in good faith for sale or lease
shall be exempt from the registration and fee requirements found in this
article.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, ADVERTISED IN GOOD FAITH means the
property is actively and continually listed, published or posted for a
reasonable price with a real estate agent or multiple listing service, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city or on an industry-recognized
website.
      (2)   The owner claiming an exemption under this subsection (A) shall
have the burden of proving that the property is advertised in good faith for
sale or lease.
   (B)   A residential building used as a seasonal residence is exempt;
provided, that the building is seasonally occupied.
   (C)   A property damaged by fire, weather, explosion, act of God or
vandalism within six months prior to becoming vacant is exempt from the
requirements. Such damaged properties are no longer exempt after the six-month
period.
   (D)   A property under construction or renovation is exempt to the extent
the construction or renovation is ongoing with measurable progress and in
compliance with all relevant building permits and codes.
   (E)   A residential building where the owner is temporarily absent, but who
has demonstrated his, her or their intent to return is exempt unless it is
subsequently determined the owner does not intend to return.
   (F)   Property which is subject to divorce, probate or estate proceedings is
exempt until the end of the respective proceedings.
(Ord. 970, passed 10-4-2022)
§ 9-706 PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR; INSPECTIONS; ADDITIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall be the Program Administrator for the vacant,
abandoned and neglected property registration database and may delegate
administrative duties and responsibilities to authorized agents or designees as
necessary.
   (B)   The Program Administrator or his or her authorized agent or designee
shall inspect the interior and exterior of the vacant property upon initial
registration and at one-year intervals thereafter for so long as the property
remains on the vacant, abandoned and neglected property registration database.
   (C)   The Program Administrator may adopt and promulgate rules and
regulations to administer and enforce this article.
   (D)   Property shall be removed from the vacant property registration
database when the property is no longer vacant, or the property has been turned
over to the city.
   (E)   Owners have the right to prior notice and to appeal adverse decisions
of the Program Administrator. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail to
the registered owner at the address maintained in the County Assessor’s office
at least ten days prior to such adverse decision.
(Ord. 970, passed 10-4-2022)
§ 9-707 REGISTRATION OF PROPERTY; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Owners of vacant, abandoned or neglected property located within the
city or its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction shall be required to register
such property with the city if the property has been vacant 180 days or longer.
   (B)   The Program Administrator or his or her authorized agent or designee
shall provide the owner with written notice that the Program Administrator has
determined the property is vacant, abandoned or neglected.
   (C)   The notice shall be deemed delivered if properly served on the owner
or his or her agent according to the established procedure for civil actions.
   (D)   If service cannot be made by personal service, residential service,
certified mail service or designated delivery service, then notice shall be
given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or by
conspicuously posting on the property, structure, building or dwelling that is
vacant, abandoned or neglected. Any notice given by publication or posting
shall be deemed delivered seven days after such publication or posting.
   (E)   The owner or his or her agent must register the property or submit a
written appeal of the Program Administrator’s determination to the city within
30 days after delivery of the written notice. If the owner fails to timely
register the property or submit a written appeal, the city shall automatically
register the property, and the owner may be subject to additional
administrative fines or fees.
   (F)   All requests for appeals shall be processed through the city’s
procedures for administrative hearings.
   (G)   An administrative hearing shall be held in front of a hearing board
consisting of the Mayor and two Council members. Notice of the date, time and
place of the hearing shall be provided to the owner at least ten days prior to
the scheduled hearing.
   (H)   Upon initial registration of the property, a copy of the notice shall
be recorded in the records of the Register of Deeds of the county in which the
property is located and indexed against the premises.
   (I)   One hundred eighty days after the initial registration of the property
or 360 days after the property is determined to be vacant, abandoned or
neglected, whichever is sooner, the owner or his or her agent must submit a
plan for occupancy, repair, rehabilitation or demolition of the property and
pay the initial registration fee. Each 180 days thereafter, the owner or his or
her agent must renew the registration, submit an updated plan and pay
supplemental registration fees.
   (J)   Any subsequent owner or owners of any ownership interest in the
property shall assume the obligations of the previous owner or owners and must
register or update the registration of the property within 30 days of any
transfer of ownership interest in the property.
   (K)   Vacant, abandoned or neglected property shall be removed from the
registration database and no longer subject to the requirements of this article
once the owner proves, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the property is
no longer violating any building or zoning laws, rules or regulations.
(Ord. 970, passed 10-4-2022)
§ 9-708 REGISTRATION FEES; FINES; ENFORCEMENT; LIEN; WAIVER.
   (A)   The initial registration fee shall be set by resolution of the City
Council and shall not be more than $250 for a residential building or more than
$1,000 for a commercial building.
   (B)   The supplemental registration fees shall be set by resolution of the
City Council and shall not be more than double the previous fee amount, with a
maximum supplemental registration fee of ten times the initial registration fee
amount.
   (C)   Failure of a property owner to comply with requirement of this article
may be enforced by municipal fines of up to $100 per day of violation.
   (D)   The City Council may impose administrative fines or fees for
violations of this article. Such fines or fees shall be set by resolution of
the City Council and shall be cumulative and in addition to the registration
fees.
   (E)   All fees and fines shall be paid at the time of registration and must
be paid in full prior to the issuance of any city permits. The city may enforce
the collection of vacant property registration fees and any associated
administrative fines or fees by civil action in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (F)   Unpaid vacant property registration fees and unpaid administrative
fines and fees shall become a lien on the applicable property upon the
recording of a notice of such lien in the office of the Register of Deeds of
the county in which the applicable property is located. Any lien created under
this subsection (F) shall be subordinate to all liens on the applicable
property recorded prior to the time the notice of such lien under this
subsection (F) is recorded.
   (G)   Fees, liens and violations of this article shall be waived if the
property owner voluntarily chooses to transfer the vacant or nonconforming
property via deed, free from any property taxes to the city.
(Ord. 970, passed 10-4-2022)
§ 9-709 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this article for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 9-701.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, impair or
obstruct any government agents tasked with executing or enforcing this article
and any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder; to fail to comply with
lawful orders or duties imposed by this article or any rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder; or to provide false, fictitious or misleading
information to the city regarding any property that may reasonably be subject
to this article.
      (2)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall
be guilty of a Class IV misdemeanor.
(Ord. 970, passed 10-4-2022)
ARTICLE 8: PENAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
9-801   Violations; penalty
§ 9-801 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, or any person’s agent or servant, who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided herein,
shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined in any sum not exceeding $500. A new violation shall be deemed to have
been committed every 24 hours of failure to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the
municipality may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin, abate and remove the
same in the manner provided by law.
      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists,
the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.
(Ord. 642, passed 5-10-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-505, 18-1720 and 18-1722
CHAPTER 10: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Article
      
1.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
2.   PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS
      
3.   BUSINESS ENTERPRISES
      
4.   OCCUPATION TAXES
      
5.   TRAILERS
      
6.   CABLE TELEVISION (CATV)
      
7.   GARBAGE COLLECTION
      
8.   SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
      
9.   TOBACCO
      
10.   FRANCHISES
      
11.   PENAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
10-101   Definitions
   
10-102   License required
   
10-103   Location
   
10-104   Access to dwellings
   
10-105   Display of license
   
10-106   Licensee requirements
   
10-107   Liquor application; municipal examination
   
10-108   License renewal; city powers and duties
   
10-109   Licenses; municipal powers and duties
   
10-110   Owner of premises or agent; liability
   
10-111   Licensee; liability for acts of officer, agent or employee
   
10-112   Removal of intoxicated persons from public or quasi-public property
   
10-113   Sale or gift to minor or mentally incompetent person prohibited
   
10-114   Credit sales prohibited
   
10-115   Spiking beer
   
10-116   Original package
   
10-117   Minor’s presence restricted
   
10-118   Hours of sale
   
10-119   Sanitary conditions
   
10-120   Hiring minors
   
10-121   Consumption in public places or places open to the public;
restrictions
   
10-122   Manufacture, sale, delivery and possession; general prohibitions;
exceptions
   
10-123   Liquor applications; retail licensing standards; binding
recommendations
   
10-124   Liquor application; notice; procedure
   
10-125   Catering licenses
   
10-126   Licensed premises; inspection
   
10-127   Citizen complaints
   
10-128   Keg sales; requirements; prohibited acts
§ 10-101 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the definitions found in Neb. RS 53-103.01
through 53-103.51 shall be used.
§ 10-102 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture for sale, sell, keep for
sale or to barter any alcoholic liquors within the municipality unless said
person shall have in full force and effect a license as provided by the State
Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 et seq.
Penalty, see §
10-1101
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 53-102
§ 10-103 LOCATION.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (B) below, no license shall
be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor or for a bottle club
within 150 feet of any church, school, hospital or home for indigent persons or
for veterans and their wives or children. This prohibition does not apply to
any location within such distance of 150 feet:
      (1)   For which a license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail or for a
bottle club has been granted by the State Liquor Control Commission for two
years continuously prior to making of application for license;
      (2)   To hotels offering restaurant service, to regularly organized clubs
or to restaurants, food shops or other places where sale of alcoholic liquor is
not the principal business carried on, if such place of business so exempted
was established for such purposes prior to May 24, 1935; or
      (3)   To a college or university in the state which is subject to Neb. RS
53-177.01.
   (B)   If a proposed location for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor
or for a bottle club is within 150 feet of any church, a license may be issued
if the Commission gives notice to the affected church and holds a hearing as
prescribed in Neb. RS 53-133 if the affected church submits a written request
for a hearing.
(Neb. RS 53-177)
   (C)   No alcoholic liquor shall be sold for consumption on the premises
within 300 feet from the campus of any college or university in the state,
except that this section:
      (1)   Does not prohibit a nonpublic college or university from
contracting with an individual or corporation holding a license to sell
alcoholic liquor at retail for the purpose of selling alcoholic liquor at
retail on the campus of such college or university at events sanctioned by such
college or university but does prohibit the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail
by such licensee on the campus of such nonpublic college or university at
student activities or events; and
      (2)   Does not prohibit sales of alcoholic liquor by a community college
culinary education program pursuant to Neb. RS 53-124.15.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (F) below, the Commission
may waive the 300-foot restriction in subsection (C) above taking into
consideration one or more of the following:
      (1)   The impact of retail sales of alcoholic liquor for consumption on
the premises on the academic mission of the college or university;
      (2)   The impact on students and prospective students if such sales were
permitted on or near campus;
      (3)   The impact on economic development opportunities located within or
in proximity to the campus; and
      (4)   The waiver would likely reduce the number of applications for
special designated licenses requested by the college or university or its
designee.
   (E)   To apply for a waiver under this section, the applicant shall submit a
written application to the Commission. The Commission shall notify the
governing body of the affected college or university when the Commission
receives an application for a waiver. The application shall include:
      (1)   The address of the location for which the waiver is requested;
      (2)   The name and type of business for which the waiver is requested;
and
      (3)   A description of the justification for the waiver explaining how
the proposed location complies with the findings prescribed in subsection (E)
(2) above.
   (F)   The Commission shall not waive the 300-foot restriction in subsection
(C) above without written approval from the governing body of the college or
university or its designee if the physical location of the property which is
the subject of the requested waiver is:
      (1)   Surrounded by property owned by the college or university including
any public or private easement, street or right-of-way adjacent to the property
owned by the college or university; or
      (2)   Adjacent to property on two or more sides owned by the college or
university, including any public or private easement, street or right-of-way
adjacent to the property owned by the college or university.
   (G)   No bottle club shall be operated within 300 feet from the campus of
any college or university in the state.
(Neb. RS 53-177.01)
Penalty, see §
10-1101
Statutory reference:
   State Commission may waive 300-feet requirement, see Neb. RS 53-177.01
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 921, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 10-104 ACCESS TO DWELLINGS.
   Except in the case of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be
manufactured or sold at retail or wholesale upon any premises which have any
access which leads from the premises to any other portion of the same building
or structure used for dwelling or lodging purposes and permitted to be used or
kept accessible for use by the public. This section does not prevent any
connection between the premises and such other portion of the building or
structure which is used only by the licensee, his or her family or personal
guests.
(Neb. RS 53-178) Penalty, see §
10-1101
§ 10-105 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Every licensee under the State Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 et
seq. shall cause his or her license to be framed and hung in plain view in a
conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
(Neb. RS 53-148) Penalty, see §
10-1101
§ 10-106 LICENSEE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No license shall be issued to:
      (1)   A person who is not a resident of this state, except in case of
railroad, airline, boat or special party bus licenses;
      (2)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the
community in which he or she resides;
      (3)   A person who is not a resident of this state and legally able to
work in this state;
      (4)   A person who has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty to a
felony under the laws of this state, any other state or the United States;
      (5)   A person who has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty to any
Class I misdemeanor pursuant Neb. RS Chapter 28, article 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11 or
12, or any similar offense under a prior criminal statute or in another state,
except that any additional requirements imposed by this subsection (A)(5) on
May 18, 1983, shall not prevent any person holding a license on that date from
retaining or renewing that license if the conviction or plea occurred prior to
May 18, 1983;
      (6)   A person whose license issued under the State Liquor Control Act,
being Neb. RS 53-101 et seq. has been revoked for cause;
      (7)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued under the Act would not be eligible for that license upon initial
application;
      (8)   A partnership, unless one of the partners is a resident of this
state and unless all the members of that partnership are otherwise qualified to
obtain a license;
      (9)   A limited liability company, unless one of the members is a
resident of this state and unless all the members of that company are otherwise
qualified to obtain a license;
      (10)   A corporation, if any officer or director of the corporation or
any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 25% of the stock of that
corporation would be ineligible to receive a license under this section for any
reason other than the reasons stated in divisions (A)(1) and (A)(3) above, or
if a manager of a corporate licensee would be ineligible to receive a license
under this section for any reason. This subsection (A)(10) shall not apply to
railroad licenses;
      (11)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or
agent, unless that manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required
of the licensee;
      (12)   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is
sought or does not have a lease or combination of leases on the premises for
the full period for which the license is to be issued;
      (13)   Except as provided in this subsection (A)(13), an applicant whose
spouse is ineligible under this section to receive and hold a liquor license.
Such an applicant shall become eligible for a liquor license only if the State
Liquor Control Commission finds from the evidence that the public interest will
not be infringed upon if the license is granted. It shall be prima facie
evidence that when a spouse is ineligible to receive a liquor license, the
applicant is also ineligible to receive a liquor license. This prima facie
evidence shall be overcome if it is shown to the satisfaction of the
Commission:
         (a)   The licensed business will be the sole property of the
applicant; and
         (b)   The licensed premises will be properly operated.
      (14)   A person seeking a license for premises which do not meet
standards for fire safety as established by the State Fire Marshal;
      (15)   A law enforcement officer, except that this subsection (A)(15)
shall not prohibit a law enforcement officer from holding membership in any
nonprofit organization holding a liquor license or from participating in any
manner in the management or administration of a nonprofit organization; or
      (16)   A person less than 21 years of age.
   (B)   When a trustee is the licensee, the beneficiary or beneficiaries of
the trust shall comply with the requirements of this section, but nothing in
this section shall prohibit any such beneficiary from being a minor or person
who is mentally incompetent.
(Neb. RS 53-125)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 941, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 10-107 LIQUOR APPLICATION; MUNICIPAL EXAMINATION.
   (Repealed by Ord. 631, passed 5-10-2000)
§ 10-108 LICENSE RENEWAL; CITY POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   A retail or bottle club license issued by the State Liquor Control
Commission and outstanding may be automatically renewed by the Commission in
the absence of a written request by the City Council to require the licensee to
submit an application for renewal. Any licensed retail premises located in an
area which is annexed to the city shall file a formal application for a
license, and while the application is pending, the licensee may continue all
license privileges until the original license expires or is canceled or
revoked. If that license expires within 60 days following the annexation date
of the area, the license may be renewed by order of the Commission for not more
than one year.
(Neb. RS 53-135)
   (B)   The City Clerk shall cause to be published in a legal newspaper in or
of general circulation in the city, one time between January 10 and January 30
of each year, individual notice in the form prescribed by law of the right of
automatic renewal of each retail liquor and beer license within the city,
except that notice of the right of automatic renewal of Class C licenses shall
be published between the dates of July 10 and July 30 of each year. If written
protests to the issuance of automatic renewal of a license are filed in the
office of the City Clerk by three or more residents of the city on or before
February 10, or August 10 for Class C licenses, the City Council shall hold a
hearing to determine whether continuation of the license should be allowed.
Upon the conclusion of any hearing required by this section, the Council may
request a licensee to submit an application as provided in Neb. RS 00053-135.
(Neb. RS 53-135.01)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 920, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 10-109 LICENSES; MUNICIPAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The City Council is authorized to regulate by ordinance, not
inconsistent with the State Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 et seq.,
the business of all retail, bottle club, craft brewery and microdistillery
licensees carried on within the corporate limits of the city.
(Neb. RS 53-134.03)
   (B)   During the period of 45 days after the date of receipt by mail or
electronic delivery from the State Liquor Control Commission notice and a copy
of an application for a new license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail, a craft
brewery license or a microdistillery license, the City Council may make and
submit to the Commission recommendations relative to the granting or refusal to
grant the license to the applicant.
(Neb. RS 53-131)
   (C)   The City Council, with respect to licenses within the corporate limits
of the city, has the following powers, functions and duties with respect to
retail, bottle club, craft brewery and microdistillery licenses:
      (1)   To cancel or revoke for cause retail, craft brewery or
microdistillery licenses to sell or dispense alcoholic liquor or bottle club
licenses issued to persons for premises within its jurisdiction, subject to the
right of appeal to the State Liquor Control Commission;
      (2)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcement officer to enter at
any time upon any premises licensed under the State Liquor Control Act, being
Neb. RS 53-101 et seq. to determine whether any provision of the Act, any rule
or regulation adopted and promulgated pursuant to the Act, or any ordinance,
resolution, rule or regulation adopted by the City Council has been or is being
violated, and at that time examine the premises of the licensee in connection
with such determination. Any law enforcement officer who determines that any
provision of the Act, any rule or regulation adopted and promulgated pursuant
to the Act or any ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation adopted by the
local governing body has been or is being violated shall report such violation
in writing to the Executive Director of the Commission:
         (a)   Within 30 days after determining that such violation has
occurred;
         (b)   Within 30 days after the conclusion of an ongoing police
investigation; or
         (c)   Within 30 days after the verdict in a prosecution related to
such an ongoing police investigation if the prosecuting attorney determines
that reporting such violation prior to the verdict would jeopardize such
prosecution, whichever is later;
      (3)   To receive a signed complaint from any citizen within its
jurisdiction that any provision of the Act, any rule or regulation adopted and
promulgated pursuant to the Act or any ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation relating to alcoholic liquor has been or is being violated and to
act upon these complaints in the manner provided in the Act;
      (4)   To receive retail, bottle club, craft brewery and microdistillery
license fees as provided in Neb. RS 53-124 and 53-124.01 and pay the same,
after the license has been delivered to the applicant, to the City Treasurer;
      (5)   To examine or cause to be examined any applicant or any retail,
bottle club, craft brewery or microdistillery licensee upon whom notice of
cancellation or revocation has been served as provided in the Act, to examine
or cause to be examined the books and records of any applicant or licensee,
except as otherwise provided for bottle club licensees under state law, and to
hear testimony and to take proof for its information in the performance of its
duties. For purposes of obtaining any of the information desired, the City
Council may authorize its agent or attorney to act on its behalf;
      (6)   To cancel or revoke on its own motion any license if, upon the same
notice and hearing as provided in § 10-127, it determines that the licensee has
violated any of the provisions of the State Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS
53-101 et seq. or any valid and subsisting ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation duly enacted, adopted and promulgated relating to alcoholic liquor.
The order of cancellation or revocation may be appealed to the Commission
within 30 days after the date of the order by filing a notice of appeal with
the Commission. The Commission shall handle the appeal in the manner provided
for hearing on an application in Neb. RS 53-133;
      (7)   Upon receipt from the Commission of the notice and copy of
application as provided in Neb. RS 53-131, to fix a time and place for a
hearing at which the City Council shall receive evidence, either orally or by
affidavit from the applicant and any other person, bearing upon the propriety
of the issuance of a license. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall
be published in a legal newspaper in or of general circulation in the city, one
time not less than seven and not more than 14 days before the time of the
hearing. The notice shall include, but not be limited to, a statement that all
persons desiring to give evidence before the City Council in support of or in
protest against the issuance of the license may do so at the time of the
hearing. The hearing shall be held not more than 45 days after the date of
receipt of the notice from the Commission, and, after the hearing, the City
Council shall cause to be recorded in the minute record of its proceedings a
resolution recommending either issuance or refusal of the license. The City
Clerk shall mail to the Commission by first-class mail, postage prepaid, a copy
of the resolution which shall state the cost of the published notice, except
that failure to comply with this provision shall not void any license issued by
the Commission. If the Commission refuses to issue such a license, the cost of
publication of notice shall be paid by the Commission from the security for
costs;
      (8)   To review and authorize an application by a retail, bottle club,
craft brewery, farm winery or microdistillery licensee for a temporary
expansion of its licensed premises within the jurisdiction of the local
governing body to an immediately adjacent area owned or leased by the licensee
or to an immediately adjacent street, parking lot or alley, not to exceed 50
days for calendar year 2020 and, for each calendar year thereafter, not to
exceed 15 days per calendar year, as provided in Neb. RS 53-123.12 and 53-129;
and
      (9)   To review and authorize an application by a craft brewery, farm
winery or microdistillery licensee that holds a promotional farmers market
special designated license for a permit to use such promotional farmers market
special designated license to sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, which the
holder is licensed to produce, at a farmers market within the jurisdiction of
the local governing body as provided in Neb. RS 53-124.17. The local governing
body shall electronically notify the Commission within five days after
authorization of any permit pursuant to this subsection (C).
(Neb. RS 53-134)
   (D)   (1)   When the State Liquor Control Commission mails or delivers to
the City Clerk a retail, craft brewery or microdistillery license issued or
renewed by the Commission, the Clerk shall deliver the license to the licensee
upon receipt from the licensee of proof of payment of:
         (a)   The license fee if by the terms of Neb. RS 53-124 the fee is
payable to the City Treasurer;
         (b)   Any fee for publication of notice of hearing before the City
Council upon the application for the license;
         (c)   The fee for publication of notice of renewal, if applicable, as
provided in Neb. RS 53-135.01; and
         (d)   Occupation taxes, if any, imposed by the city, except that Class
J retail licensees shall not be subject to occupation taxes.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any ordinance or charter power to the contrary, the
city shall not impose an occupation tax on the business of any person, firm or
corporation licensed under the State Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101
et seq. and doing business within the corporate limits of the city in any sum
which exceeds two times the amount of the license fee required to be paid under
the Act to obtain that license.
(Neb. RS 53-132)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 940, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 10-110 OWNER OF PREMISES OR AGENT; LIABILITY.
   If the owner of the licensed premises or any person from whom the licensee
derives the right to possession of the premises, or the agent of that owner or
person, knowingly permits the licensee to use the licensed premises in
violation of the terms of the State Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 et
seq. or any city ordinance, that owner, agent or other person shall be deemed
guilty of a violation of the Act or ordinance to the same extent as the
licensee and be subject to the same punishment.
(Neb. RS 53-1,101) Penalty, see § 10-1101
§ 10-111 LICENSEE; LIABILITY FOR ACTS OF OFFICER, AGENT OR EMPLOYEE.
   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any
of the provisions of the State Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 et seq.
or any city ordinance by any officer, director, manager or other agent or
employee of any licensee, if the act is committed or omission is made with the
authorization, knowledge or approval of the licensee, shall be deemed and held
to be the act of the employer or licensee, and the employer or licensee shall
be punishable in the same manner as if the act or omission had been done or
omitted by the licensee personally.
(Neb. RS 53-1,102) Penalty, see § 10-1101
§ 10-112 REMOVAL OF INTOXICATED PERSONS FROM PUBLIC OR QUASI-PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Any law enforcement officer with the power to arrest for traffic
violations may take a person who is intoxicated and in the judgment of the
officer dangerous to himself, herself or others, or who is otherwise
incapacitated, from any public or quasi-public property. An officer removing an
intoxicated person from public or quasi-public property shall make a reasonable
effort to take the intoxicated person to his or her home or to place the person
in any hospital, clinic or mental health substance use treatment center, or
with a medical doctor as may be necessary to preserve life or to prevent
injury. The effort at placement shall be deemed reasonable if the officer
contacts such facilities or doctor which have previously represented a
willingness to accept and treat such individuals and which regularly do accept
such individuals. If these efforts are unsuccessful or are not feasible, the
officer may then place the intoxicated person in civil protective custody,
except that civil protective custody shall be used only as long as is necessary
to preserve life or to prevent injury, and under no circumstances longer than
24 hours.
   (B)   The placement of the person in civil protective custody shall be
recorded at the facility or jail at which he or she is delivered and
communicated to his or her family or next of kin, if they can be located, or to
the person designated by the person taken into civil protective custody.
   (C)   The law enforcement officer who acts in compliance with this section
shall be deemed to be acting in the course of his or her official duty and
shall not be criminally or civilly liable for such actions.
   (D)   The taking of an individual into civil protective custody under this
section shall not be considered an arrest. No entry or other record shall be
made to indicate that the person has been arrested or charged with a crime.
   (E)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MENTAL HEALTH SUBSTANCE USE TREATMENT CENTER. Has the same meaning as in
Neb. RS 71-423.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, park or
other state, county or city-owned property.
      QUASI-PUBLIC PROPERTY. Private or publicly owned property utilized for
proprietary or business uses which invites patronage by the public or which
invites public ingress and egress.
(Neb. RS 53-1,121) Penalty, see § 10-1101
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 930, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 10-113 SALE OR GIFT TO MINOR OR MENTALLY INCOMPETENT PERSON PROHIBITED.
   No person shall sell, furnish, give away, dispose of, exchange or deliver,
or permit the sale, gift or procuring of any alcoholic liquors, to or for any
minor or to any person who is mentally incompetent.
(Ord. 811, passed 1-3-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 53-180
§ 10-114 CREDIT SALES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at retail to any
person on credit, on a passbook, on an order on a store, in exchange for any
goods, wares or merchandise, or in payment for any services rendered, and if
any person extends credit for any such purpose, the debt thereby attempted to
be created shall not be recoverable at law.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the following:
      (1)   Any club holding a Class C license from permitting checks or
statements for alcoholic liquor to be signed by members or bona fide guests of
members and charged to the account of such members or guests in accordance with
the bylaws of such club;
      (2)   Any hotel or restaurant holding a retail license from permitting
checks or statements for liquor to be signed by regular guests residing at such
hotel or eating at such restaurant and charged to the accounts of such guests;
or
      (3)   Any licensed retailer engaged in the sale of wine or distilled
spirits from issuing tasting cards to customers.
(Neb. RS 53-183) Penalty, see § 10-1101
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 865, passed
3-3-2015, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 10-115 SPIKING BEER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons who own, manage or lease any
premises in which the sale of alcoholic beverages is licensed, to serve or
offer for sale any beer to which there has been added any alcohol, or permit
any person or persons to add alcohol to any beer on the licensed premises of
such licensee.
Penalty, see §
10-1101
§ 10-116 ORIGINAL PACKAGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons who own, manage or
lease any premises in which the sale of alcoholic beverages is licensed to have
in their possession for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor contained in casks,
or other containers except in the original package.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the refilling of original
packages of alcoholic liquor for strictly private use and not for resale.
(Ord. 437, passed 2-4-1992) Penalty, see §
10-1101
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 53-184
§ 10-117 MINOR’S PRESENCE RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages or leases an
establishment selling alcoholic beverages at retail to allow any minor under
the age of 18 years of age to frequent or otherwise remain in the establishment
unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian, and
unless the minor remains seated with and under the immediate control of the
parent or legal guardian.
Penalty, see §
10-1101
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 53-134.03
§ 10-118 HOURS OF SALE.
   (A)   No alcoholic liquor, including beer, shall be sold at retail or
dispensed on any day between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. except that
the City Council with respect to area inside the corporate limits of the city
may by ordinance or resolution:
      (1)   Require closing prior to 1:00 a.m. on any day;
      (2)   If adopted by a vote of at least two-thirds of the members of the
City Council, permit retail sale or dispensing of alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises, excluding sales for consumption off the premises,
later than 1:00 a.m. and prior to 2:00 a.m. on any day;
      (3)   If adopted by a vote of at least two-thirds of the members of City
Council, permit retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption off the
premises later than 1:00 a.m. and prior to 2:00 a.m. on any day; or
      (4)   If adopted by a vote of at least two-thirds of the members of City
Council, permit retail sale or dispensing of alcoholic liquor for consumption
on the premises, excluding sales for consumption off
the premises, and permit retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption off
the premises later than 1:00 a.m. and prior to 2:00 a.m. on any day.
   (B)   Except as provided for and allowed by ordinance of the City Council,
no alcoholic liquor, including beer, shall be sold at retail or dispensed
inside the corporate limits of the city between the hours of 6:00 a.m. Sunday
and 1:00 a.m. Monday. This subsection (B) shall not apply after 12:00 p.m. on
Sunday to a licensee which is a nonprofit corporation and the holder of a Class
C license or a Class I license.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful on property licensed to sell alcoholic liquor at
retail to allow alcoholic liquor in open containers to remain or be in
possession or control of any person for purposes of consumption between the
hours of 15 minutes after the closing hour applicable to the licensed premises
and 6:00 a.m. on any day.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit licensed premises from being
open for other business on days and hours during which the sale or dispensing
of alcoholic liquor is prohibited by this section.
(Neb. RS 53-179) Penalty, see §
10-1101
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 860, passed
3-3-2015, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 10-119 SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to open for public use any retail liquor establishment
that is not in a clean and sanitary condition. Toilet facilities shall be
adequate and convenient for customers and patrons. The licensed premises shall
be subject to any health inspections the City Council or the city police may
make or cause to be made. All applications for liquor licenses shall be viewed
in part from the standpoint of the sanitary conditions, and a report concerning
the sanitary conditions shall be made at all hearings concerning the
application for or renewal of a liquor license.
Penalty, see §
10-1101
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate licensed premises, see Neb. RS 53-134.03
   State sanitary rules and regulations authorized, see Neb. RS 53-118
§ 10-120 HIRING MINORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hire a minor regardless of sex under
the age of 19 years to serve or dispense alcoholic liquors, including beer, to
said licensee’s customers.
Penalty, see §
10-1101
§ 10-121 CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES OR PLACES OPEN TO THE PUBLIC;
RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Except when the State Liquor Control Commission has issued a license
as provided in Neb. RS 53-186(2) or as provided in Neb. RS 60-6,211.08, it is
unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquor upon property owned or
controlled by the state or any governmental subdivision thereof unless
authorized by the governing bodies having jurisdiction over such property.
(Neb. RS 53-186)
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person owning, operating, managing or
conducting any bottle club, dance hall, restaurant, café or club or any place
open to the general public to permit or allow any person to consume alcoholic
liquor upon the premises except as permitted by a license issued for such
premises pursuant to the State Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 et seq.
It is unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquor in any dance hall,
restaurant, café or club or any place open to the general public except as
permitted by a license issued for such premises pursuant to the Act. This
subsection (B) does not apply to a retail licensee while lawfully engaged in
the catering of alcoholic beverages or to limousines or buses operated under
Neb. RS 60-6,211.08.
(Neb. RS 53-186.01)
Penalty, see §
10-1101
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 918, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 10-122 MANUFACTURE, SALE, DELIVERY AND POSSESSION; GENERAL PROHIBITIONS;
EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall manufacture, bottle, blend, sell, barter, transport,
deliver, furnish or possess any alcoholic liquor for beverage purposes except
as specifically provided in this article and the State Liquor Control Act,
being Neb. RS 53-101 et seq.
   (B)   Nothing in this article shall prevent:
      (1)   The possession of alcoholic liquor legally obtained as provided in
this article or the Act for the personal use of the possessor and his or her
family or guests;
      (2)   The making of wine, cider or other alcoholic liquor by a person
from fruits, vegetables or grains, or the product thereof, by simple
fermentation and without distillation, if made solely for the use of the maker
and his or her family and guests;
      (3)   Any duly licensed practicing physician or dentist from possessing
or using alcoholic liquor in the strict practice of his or her profession, any
hospital or other institution caring for the sick and diseased persons from
possessing and using alcoholic liquor for the treatment of bona fide patients
of such hospital or other institution, or any drug store employing a licensed
pharmacist from possessing or using alcoholic liquor in the compounding of
prescriptions of licensed physicians;
      (4)   The possession and dispensation of alcoholic liquor by an
authorized representative of any religion on the premises of a place of
worship, for the purpose of conducting any bona fide religious rite, ritual or
ceremony;
      (5)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from carrying alcoholic
liquor from licensed establishments when they are accompanied by a person not a
minor;
      (6)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from handling alcoholic
liquor containers and alcoholic liquor in the course of their employment;
      (7)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from removing and disposing
of alcoholic liquor containers for the convenience of the employer and
customers in the course of their employment; or
      (8)   Persons who are 19 years old or older from serving or selling
alcoholic liquor in the course of their employment.
(Ord. 534, passed 12-7-1995; Ord. 673, passed 4-2-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 53-168.06 
§ 10-123 LIQUOR APPLICATIONS; RETAIL LICENSING STANDARDS; BINDING
RECOMMENDATIONS.
   (A)   Local governing bodies shall only have authority to approve
applications and deny licenses pursuant to the State Liquor Control Act, being
Neb. RS 53-101 et seq.
   (B)   The governing body shall only consider the following licensing
standards and criteria at the hearing and an evaluation of any applicant for a
retail alcoholic liquor license, for the upgrading of a license to sell
alcoholic liquor or for the expansion or change in location of the premises,
and for the purpose of formulating a recommendation from the governing body to
the State Liquor Control Commission in accordance with the State Liquor Control
Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 et seq.:
      (1)   The adequacy of existing law enforcement resources and services in
the area;
      (2)   The recommendation of the Police Department or any other law
enforcement agency;
      (3)   Existing motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic flow in the vicinity
of the proposed licensed premises, potential traffic and parking problems and
the proximity and availability of on-street and off-street parking;
      (4)   Zoning restrictions and the local governing body’s zoning and land-
use policies;
      (5)   Sanitation or sanitary conditions on or about the proposed licensed
premises;
      (6)   The existence of a citizen’s protest and similar evidence in
support of or in opposition to the application;
      (7)   The existing population and projected growth within the
jurisdiction of the local governing body and within the area to be served;
      (8)   The existing liquor licenses, the class of each such license and
the distance and times of travel between establishments that issued such
licenses;
      (9)   Whether the proposed license would be compatible with the
neighborhood or community where the proposed premises are located;
      (10)   Whether the type of business or activity proposed to be operated
or presently operated in conjunction with the proposed license is and will be
consistent with the public interest as declared in Neb. RS 53-101.01;
      (11)   Whether the applicant can ensure that all alcoholic beverages,
including beer and wine, will be handled by persons in accordance with Neb. RS
53-102;
      (12)   Whether the applicant has taken every precaution to protect
against the possibility of shoplifting of alcoholic liquor, which alcoholic
liquor shall be displayed and kept in and sold from an area which is reasonably
secured;
      (13)   Whether the applicant is fit, willing and able to properly provide
the service proposed in conformance with all provisions and requirements of and
rules and regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant to the Act;
      (14)   Whether the applicant has demonstrated that the type of management
and control exercised over the licensed premises will be sufficient to ensure
that the licensee can conform to all the provisions and requirements of and
rules and regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant to the Act;
      (15)   The background information of the applicant established by
information contained in the public records of the Commission and
investigations conducted by law enforcement agencies;
      (16)   Past evidence of discrimination involving the applicant as
evidenced by findings of fact before any administrative board or agency of the
local governing body, any other governmental board or agency of the local
governing body, any other governmental unit or any court of law;
      (17)   Whether the applicant or the applicant’s representatives
suppressed any fact or provided any inaccurate information to the Commission or
local governing body or the employees of the Commission in regard to the
license application or liquor investigations. The applicant shall be required
to cooperate in providing a full disclosure to the investigating agents of the
local governing body;
      (18)   Proximity of and impact on schools, hospitals, libraries, parks
and public institutions;
      (19)   Whether activities proposed to be conducted on the licensed
premises or in adjacent related outdoor areas will create unreasonable noise or
disturbance; and
      (20)   Compliance with state laws, liquor rules and regulations and
municipal ordinances and regulations and whether or not the applicant has ever
forfeited bond to appear in court to answer charges of having committed a
felony or charges of having violated any law or ordinance enacted in the
interest of good morals and decency or has been convicted of violating or has
forfeited bond to appear in court and answer charges for violating any law or
ordinance relating to alcoholic liquor.
   (C)   It shall be the applicant’s duty to produce evidence pertaining to the
designated criteria prescribed in this section. The burden of proof and
persuasion shall be on the party filing the application.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, APPLICANT shall be synonymous with
LICENSEE.
(Ord. 365, passed 6-1-1987; Ord. 411, passed 3-6-1990)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 53-134
§ 10-124 LIQUOR APPLICATION; NOTICE; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Notice.
      (1)   Notice of a hearing held pursuant to Neb. RS 53-134 shall be given
to the applicant by the Municipal Clerk and shall contain the date, time and
location of the hearing.
      (2)   Two or more proceedings which are legally or factually related may
be heard and considered together unless any party thereto makes a showing
sufficient to satisfy the governing body that prejudice would result therefrom.
   (B)   Procedure. Hearings will be informal and conducted by the Municipal
Attorney. The intent is an inquiry into the facts, not an adversarial action.
Each witness may present his or her testimony in narrative fashion or by
question and answer.
      (1)   The governing body or the applicant may order the hearing to be
recorded by the Clerk, at the expense of the applicant(s).
      (2)   (a)   The governing body may admit and give probative effect to
evidence which possesses probative value commonly accepted by reasonably
prudent individuals. The Municipal Attorney may limit testimony where it
appears incompetent, irrelevant or unduly repetitious.
         (b)   If there is opposition to any application and such opposition
desires the opportunity to present arguments and to cross-examine the applicant
and any witnesses in favor of such application, the opposition shall choose a
spokesperson to perform such function who shall notify the Municipal Attorney
of his or her representation prior to the start of the hearing.
      (3)   The order of the proceeding is as follows:
         (a)   Exhibits will be marked in advance by the Clerk and presented to
the Municipal Attorney during the presentation;
         (b)   Presentation of evidence, witnesses and arguments by applicant;
         (c)   Testimony of any other citizens in favor of such proposed
license;
         (d)   Examination of applicant, witnesses or citizens by Municipal
Attorney, governing body or duly appointed agent;
         (e)   Cross-examination of applicant, witnesses or citizens by
spokesperson for opposition, if any;
         (f)   Presentation of evidence and witnesses by opposition;
         (g)   Testimony of any other citizens in opposition to such proposed
license;
         (h)   Presentation of evidence by municipality and law enforcement
personnel;
         (i)   Cross-examination by applicant;
         (j)   Rebuttal evidence by both parties and by municipality
administration and agent; and
         (k)   Summation by applicant and opposition spokesperson, if any.
      (4)   In all cases, the burden of proof and persuasion shall be on the
party filing the application.
      (5)   Any member of the governing body and the Municipal Attorney may
question any witness, call witnesses or request information.
      (6)   All witnesses shall be sworn.
      (7)   The governing body may make further inquiry and investigation
following the hearing.
      (8)   The governing body or the applicant may order the hearing to be
recorded by the Clerk, at the expense of the applicant(s).
(Ord. 363, passed 6-1-1987; Ord. 412, passed 3-6-1990)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 53-134
§ 10-125 CATERING LICENSES.
   (A)   The holder of a license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail issued
under Neb. RS 53-124(5) or a craft brewery license, a microdistillery license
or a farm winery license may obtain an annual catering license by filing an
application and license fee with the State Liquor Control Commission.
   (B)   Upon receipt from the Commission of the notice and a copy of the
application as provided in Neb. RS 53-124.12, the governing body shall process
the application in the same manner as provided in §
10-109.
   (C)   The governing body, with respect to catering licensees within its
corporate limits, may cancel a catering license for cause for the remainder of
the period for which such catering license is issued. Any person whose catering
license is canceled may appeal to the District Court.
   (D)   The governing body may impose an occupation tax on the business of a
catering licensee doing business within the liquor license jurisdiction of the
governing body. The tax may not exceed double the license fee for a catering
license.
(Ord. 438, passed 2-4-1992; Ord. 504, passed 2-7-1995; Ord. 565, passed 6-3-
1997; Ord. 629, passed 5-10-2000; Ord. 675, passed 4-2-2002; Ord. 736, passed
12-7-2004)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 53-124.12
§ 10-126 LICENSED PREMISES; INSPECTION.
   (A)   The City Council shall cause frequent inspection to be made on the
premises of all retail licensees and bottle club licensees. If it is found that
any such licensee is violating any provision of this article, the State Liquor
Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 et seq. or the rules and regulations of the
State Liquor Control Commission, or is failing to observe in good faith the
purposes of this article or the Act, the license may be suspended, canceled or
revoked after the licensee is given an opportunity to be heard in his or her
defense.
   (B)   The City Council may inspect a charter bus providing service under a
certificate of public convenience and necessity granted by the Public Service
Commission when the owner or operator of the charter allows the consumption of
alcoholic liquor in the charter bus by an individual who is 21 years of age or
older so long as the inspection is performed when the bus has stopped for the
purpose of allowing passengers to embark or disembark.
(Neb. RS 53-116.01)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 939, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 10-127 CITIZEN COMPLAINTS.
   Any five residents of the city shall have the right to file a complaint with
the City Council stating that any retail licensee or bottle club licensee
subject to the jurisdiction of the City Council has been or is violating any
provision of the State Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 et seq. or the
rules or regulations issued pursuant to the Act. The complaint shall be in
writing in the form prescribed by the City Council and shall be signed and
sworn to by the parties complaining. The complaint shall state the particular
provision, rule or regulation believed to have been violated and the facts in
detail upon which belief is based. If the City Council is satisfied that the
complaint substantially charges a violation and that from the facts alleged
there is reasonable cause for that belief, it shall set the matter for hearing
within ten days from the date of the filing of the complaint and shall serve
notice upon the licensee of the time and place of the hearing and of the
particular charge in the complaint. The complaint shall in all cases be
disposed of by the City Council within 30 days from the date the complaint was
filed by resolution thereof, which resolution shall be deemed the final order
for purposes of appeal to the State Liquor Control Commission as provided in
Neb. RS 53-1,115.
(Neb. RS 53-134.04)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 919, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 10-128 KEG SALES; REQUIREMENTS; PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   When any person licensed to sell alcoholic liquor at retail sells
alcohol for consumption off the premises in a container with a liquid capacity
of five or more gallons or 18.92 or more liters, the seller shall record the
date of the sale, the keg identification number, the purchaser’s name and
address and the number of the purchaser’s motor vehicle operator’s license,
state identification card or military identification, if the military
identification contains a picture of the purchaser, together with the
purchaser’s signature. This record shall be on a form prescribed by the State
Liquor Control Commission and shall be kept by the licensee at the retail
establishment where the purchase was made for not less than six months. The
records kept pursuant to this section shall be available for inspection by any
law enforcement officer during normal business hours or at any other reasonable
time. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an offense.
(Neb. RS 53-167.02)
   (B)   Any person who unlawfully tampers with, alters or removes the keg
identification number from a container described in subsection (A) above or is
in possession of a container described in subsection (A) above with an altered
or removed keg identification number after the container has been taken from
the licensed premises pursuant to a retail sale and before its return to the
licensed premises or other place where returned kegs are accepted shall be
guilty of an offense.
(Neb. RS 53-167.03) Penalty, see § 10-1101
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 888, passed
3-1-2016, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
ARTICLE 2: PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS
Section
   
10-201   Regulation
   
10-202   Tax
   
10-203   Quarterly report
   
10-204   Incorporated regulation
§ 10-201 REGULATION.
   Games of bingo shall be conducted within the municipality in accordance with
all laws of the municipality and the state if said game of bingo is played for
or involves profit or gain. Any association duly licensed by the state to
conduct the game of bingo shall obtain a written permit from the governing body
before commencing operation of said game. Application shall be made to the
Municipal Clerk for such permit. Said application form shall contain such
information and documents or copies thereof as the governing body deems
necessary to determine whether to grant or reject the application. Upon the
determination that granting the application would be proper, the governing body
shall immediately direct the Municipal Clerk to issue said license to the
applicant upon the payment of an annual permit fee of $10. Said license shall
be subject to revocation at any time for good cause. Any person or persons, so
licensed, shall be subject to any other fees, rules and regulations which the
governing body may designate. All permits so issued will automatically expire
on March 31, following its issuance or renewal. The fee for each renewal unless
otherwise prescribed shall be in the sum of $10. Said fee shall be credited to
the General Fund. The permit shall be on display at any place where a game of
bingo is conducted.
(Ord. 279, passed 5-15-1979)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 9-166
§ 10-202 TAX.
    (Repealed by Ord. 615, passed 4-13-1999)
§ 10-203 QUARTERLY REPORT.
   (Repealed by Ord. 615, passed 4-13-1999)
§ 10-204 INCORPORATED REGULATION.
   All applicable state statutes as they now exist or may hereafter be amended
shall be, and will constitute, a part of this article as if repeated verbatim
herein, and violation of any state statute will be a distinct and separate
offense against the municipality as well as against the state. Violators
thereof shall be separately prosecuted by the municipality for each of such
offenses and, if convicted, shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 9-124 through 9-173
ARTICLE 3: BUSINESS ENTERPRISES
Section
   
10-305   Building moving; regulations
   
10-306   Building moving; deposit
Editor’s note:
   Sections 10-301 through 10-304 were repealed by Ord. 240, passed 6-23-1977.
See
Chapter 9, article 5.
§ 10-305 BUILDING MOVING; REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to move any
building or structure within the city without a written permit to do so.
Application may be made to the City Clerk and shall include the present and
future location of the building to be moved, the proposed route, the equipment
to be used and such other information as the City Council may require. The
application shall be accompanied by a certificate issued by the County
Treasurer to the effect that all the provisions regulating the moving of
buildings have been complied with on the part of the owner of the real estate
upon which the building is presently located.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall refer the application to the City Council or its
designee for approval of the proposed route over which the building is to be
moved. Upon approval, the City Clerk shall issue the permit; provided, that a
good and sufficient corporate surety bond, check or cash in an amount set by
motion of the City Council and conditioned upon moving the building without
doing damage to any private or city property is filed with the City Clerk prior
to the granting of any permit.
   (C)   No moving permit shall be required to move a building that is ten feet
wide or less, and 20 feet long or less, and when in a position to move, 15 feet
high or less.
   (D)   In the event it will be necessary for any licensed building mover to
interfere with the telephone or telegraph poles and wires, or a gas line, the
company or companies owning, using or operating the poles, wires or line shall,
upon proper notice of at least 24 hours, be present and assist by disconnecting
the poles, wires or line relative to the building moving operation. All expense
of the disconnection, removal or related work shall be paid in advance by the
licensee unless the disconnection or work is furnished on different terms as
provided in the company’s franchise.
   (E)   Whenever the moving of any building necessitates interference with a
water main, sewer main, pipes or wire belonging to the city, notice in writing
of the time and route of the building moving operation shall be given to the
various officials in charge of the city utility departments, who shall proceed
in behalf of the city and at the expense of the mover to make such
disconnections and do such work as is necessary.
Penalty, see § 10-1101
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate moving of buildings, see Neb. RS 17-142
§ 10-306 BUILDING MOVING; DEPOSIT.
   At such time as the building moving has been completed, the Building
Inspector or other designated official shall inspect the premises and report to
the City Clerk as to the extent of damages, if any, resulting from the
relocation and whether any city laws have been violated during the operation.
Upon a satisfactory report from the Building Inspector or other designated
official, the City Clerk shall return the corporate surety bond, cash or check
deposited by the applicant. In the event the basement, foundation or portion
thereof is not properly filled, covered or in a clean and sanitary condition,
the City Council may apply the money deposited for the purpose of defraying the
expense of correcting the conditions. If the expense of correcting the
hazardous condition is greater than the amount of the deposit set by the City
Council, the City Council may recover the excess expense by civil suit or
otherwise as prescribed by law.
ARTICLE 4: OCCUPATION TAXES
Section
   
10-401   Amounts
   
10-402   Fire insurance companies
   
10-403   Collection date
   
10-404   Certificates
   
10-405   Failure to pay
   
10-406   Games of chance and/or lotteries
   
10-407   Levies authorized
§ 10-401 AMOUNTS.
   For the purpose of raising revenue an occupation tax is hereby levied on the
following businesses.
Class D1 liquor licensee, obtaining
catering licenses as authorized by state $150
law, per year
Fire insurance companies, per year       $5
Natural gas companies, per year:         2% of the residential gross sales
Retailer of alcoholic liquors, including $250
beer, off-sale and on-sale, per year
Retailer of alcoholic liquors, including $300
beer, off-sale only, per year
Retailer of off-sale beer only, per year $40
Retailer of on-sale beer only, per year  $40
Telephone companies, per year            2% of the base subscription revenue of
                                         residents of the municipality
 
(Ord. 682, passed 4-2-2002)
§ 10-402 FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES.
   For the use, support and maintenance of the Municipal Fire Department, all
revenue realized from the occupation tax on fire insurance companies shall be
appropriated to the Fire Department Fund.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 35-106
§ 10-403 COLLECTION DATE.
   All occupation taxes shall be due, and payable on May 1 of each year, except
in the event that said tax is levied daily, and upon the payment thereof by any
person or persons to the Municipal Clerk, said Clerk shall give a receipt,
properly dated and specifying the person paying said tax and the amount paid;
provided, occupation taxes collected from Class C liquor licensees shall be due
and payable on November 1. The revenue collected shall then be immediately
deposited into the General Fund by the Municipal Treasurer. The Municipal
Treasurer shall keep an accurate account of all revenue turned over to him or
her. All forms and receipts herein mentioned shall be issued in duplicate. One
copy shall then be kept by each party in the transaction.
(Ord. 280, passed 5-15-1979)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 53-124
§ 10-404 CERTIFICATES.
   The receipt issued after the payment of any occupation tax shall be the
occupation tax certificate. The certificate shall specify the amount of the tax
and the name of the person and business that paid the tax. The occupation tax
certificate shall then be displayed in a prominent place or carried in such a
way as to be easily accessible while business is being conducted.
§ 10-405 FAILURE TO PAY.
   If any person, company or corporation fails or neglects to pay the
occupation taxes as provided in this article on the day they become due and
payable, the city shall then proceed by civil suit to collect the amount due.
All delinquent taxes shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per month until
paid.
§ 10-406 GAMES OF CHANCE AND/OR LOTTERIES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who engages in the business of selling, leasing
or delivering possession or custody of gambling devices for consideration to a
person engaged in the occupation of conducting games of chance and/or
lotteries.
      GAMBLING DEVICE. Any and all machines or devices uses by a person engaged
in the occupation of conducting games of chance and/or lotteries.
      GAMES OF CHANCE AND/OR LOTTERIES. The forms of gambling authorized by the
state pursuant to Article III, § 24 of the Constitution of the state.
      PERSON ENGAGED IN THE OCCUPATION OF CONDUCTING GAMES OF CHANCE AND/OR
LOTTERIES. Any person who operates, owns or is the lessee of a place of
business where any game of chance and/or lottery activity is conducted, whether
or not any other type of business is conducted on the premises; or any person
who either directly controls or manages the games of chance and/or lotteries or
owns any machine or device used to engage in the occupation of chance and/or
lotteries but does not sell, lease or deliver possession of custody of such a
device to other persons.
   (B)   Occupation tax. An occupation tax is hereby imposed on each person
engaged in the occupation of conducting games of chance and lottery activities
within the city. Every person conducting games of chance and lottery activities
within the city shall pay the tax in the amount and manner specified in
subsection (C) below.
   (C)   Amount of occupation tax for person engaged in the occupation of
conducting games of chance and lotteries. The occupation tax for each person
engaged in the occupation of conducting games of chance and lottery activities
within the city shall be 5% of the gross receipts received by said person in
each quarter of a calendar year.
   (D)   Amount of occupation tax for distributor. The occupation tax for
engaging in the occupation of distributing gambling devices within the city
shall be 5% of the gross receipts received by a distributor in each quarter of
a calendar year.
   (E)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the
occupation of conducting games of chance and lottery activities without first
obtaining a license to do so.
   (F)   License application. Every person desiring a license required by the
provisions of this section shall make application to the Municipal Clerk.
Accompanying each application shall be:
      (1)   A sworn statement by each designated supervising member that such
member will be responsible for compliance with rules and regulations for each
occasion of games of chance and/or lotteries which he or she supervises; and
      (2)   A sworn statement by the member designated as responsible for the
proper utilization of gross receipts that no commission, fee, rent, seller
profits, compensation, reward or recompense will be paid to any person or
organization not sanctioned by the laws of the state and the city; and that all
profits will be spent for a lawful purpose.
   (G)   Display of license. Every license issued under the provisions of this
subsection (G) shall be conspicuously displayed at the place where the game of
chance and/or lottery activity is conducted at all times during the conduct
thereof.
   (H)   License fee. The license fee for engaging is the occupation of
conducting games of chance and lotteries within the city shall be $10 for each
location wherein such activity is conducted.
   (I)   Exemption. Nonprofit organizations that desire to participate in games
of chance and/or lotteries, that are in compliance with the State Small
Lotteries and Raffles Act, being Neb. RS 9-501 et seq., are exempt from the
provisions of this section.
(Ord. 415, passed 10-2-1990) Penalty, see §
10-1101
§ 10-407 LEVIES AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   The city shall have power to raise revenue by levying and collecting a
license tax on any occupation or business within the limits of the city and
regulate such occupation or business by ordinance. Any occupation tax imposed
pursuant to this section shall make a reasonable classification of businesses,
users of space or kinds of transactions for purposes of imposing such tax,
except that no occupation tax shall be imposed on any transaction which is
subject to tax under Neb. RS 53-160, 66-489, 66-489.02, 66-4,140, 66-4,145, 66-
4,146, 77-2602 or 77-4008 or which is exempt from tax under Neb. RS 77-2704.24.
The occupation tax shall be imposed in the manner provided in Neb. RS 18-1208,
except that Neb. RS 18-1208 does not apply to an occupation tax subject to Neb.
RS 86-704. All such taxes shall be uniform in respect to the classes upon which
they are imposed. All scientific and literary lectures and entertainments shall
be exempt from such taxation, as well as concerts and other musical
entertainments given exclusively by the citizens of the city.
(Neb. RS 17-525)
   (B)   The City Council shall have authority, by ordinance, to impose an
occupation tax of not more than $5 per annum on each fire insurance
corporation, company or association, doing business in the city, for the use,
support and benefit of volunteer fire departments, regularly organized under
the laws of the state regulating the same. The City Clerk shall collect with
diligence the occupation tax so imposed. Upon the receipt of the tax the Clerk
shall pay over the proceeds thereof to the City Treasurer who shall credit the
same to a fund to be known as Special Occupation Tax Fund for benefit of the
volunteer fire department. Upon proper claim filed by the Chief of the Fire
Department and allowed by the City Council, the Treasurer shall pay over the
proceeds of the tax in the fund from time to time for the use of the Fire
Department, as hereinbefore provided.
(Neb. RS 35-106)
   (C)   Notwithstanding any ordinance or charter power to the contrary, the
city shall not impose an occupation tax on the business of any person, firm or
corporation licensed under the State Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101
et seq. and doing business within the corporate limits of the city in any sum
which exceeds two times the amount of the license fee required to be paid under
the Act to obtain such license.
(Neb. RS 53-132)
Statutory reference:
   Occupation taxes generating more than $300,000; imposition or increase;
election required, see Neb. RS 18-1208
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 863, passed
3-3-2015, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
ARTICLE 5: TRAILERS
Section
   
10-501   Trailer coach or trailer; definition
   
10-502   Trailer camp; definition
   
10-503   Trailers; permit required
   
10-504   Trailers; maintenance
   
10-505   Trailers; liability of owner
   
10-506   Trailers; revocation of permit
   
10-507   Trailers; authorized camp
   
10-508   Trailers; alterations and additions
   
10-509   Trailers; permitted exceptions
   
10-510   Trailers; temporary storage
   
10-511   Trailers; prohibited parking
   
10-512   Trailers; prohibited location
§ 10-501 TRAILER COACH OR TRAILER; DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TRAILER COACH or TRAILER. Any vehicle or structure so designed and
constructed in such manner as will permit occupancy thereof as sleeping
quarters for one or more persons, or the conduct of any business or profession,
occupation or trade and so designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels and
used as a conveyance on highways or streets, propelled or drawn by its own or
other power.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-4-1974)
§ 10-502 TRAILER CAMP; DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TRAILER CAMP. Any park, trailer park, trailer court, court, camp site, lot,
parcel or tract of land designed, maintained or intended for the purpose of
supplying a location or accommodations for any trailer coach or trailer coaches
and upon which any trailer coach or trailer coaches are parked and shall
include all buildings used or intended for use as part of the equipment thereof
whether a charge is made for the use of the trailer camp and its facilities or
not.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-4-1974)
§ 10-503 TRAILERS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, operate or alter
any trailer camp within the corporate limits unless he or she holds a valid
permit, in the name of such person for the specific trailer camp. All permits
shall be issued by the City Clerk, upon compliance by the applicant with
provisions of this code relative to trailer camps and upon payment of the
required permit fee.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-4-1974) Penalty, see §
10-1101
§ 10-504 TRAILERS; MAINTENANCE.
   All trailer camps shall be maintained under the management of the owner of
the premises on which the same is located in accordance with all sanitary and
fire protection rules and regulations of the municipality and the state.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-4-1974)
§ 10-505 TRAILERS; LIABILITY OF OWNER.
   The operator of a trailer camp shall be primarily liable for all utility
service bills charged against each trailer house and shall make monthly
remittances to the municipality for such bills.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-4-1974)
§ 10-506 TRAILERS; REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   A permit to establish and maintain a trailer camp may be revoked by the
governing body for cause, at any time, for a violation of the provisions of
this code or of the rules and regulations relating to trailers, or for any
other cause or conduct, reasonably deemed by the governing body as sufficient
cause of revocation of such permit.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-4-1974)
§ 10-507 TRAILERS; AUTHORIZED CAMP.
   (A)   The area of the trailer camp shall be large enough to accommodate the
following: The number of trailers to be accommodated in any trailer camp shall
not exceed the number obtained by dividing the total square foot area of the
trailer camp site by 2,600. Each trailer space shall be clearly defined and
shall be laid out in such a manner that a minimum of 20 feet of space exists
between any two trailers or ten feet between any trailer and any building.
   (B)   No trailers shall be less than five feet from any adjacent property of
the trailer court. Each trailer space shall abut on a driveway with
unobstructed access to a public street. No trailer camp shall be licensed
unless the same is large enough to accommodate a minimum of three trailers. It
shall be illegal to park a trailer coach less than two feet from any street or
highway right-of-way, or so that any part of such trailer will obstruct any
roadway or walkway. Access roads shall be provided to each trailer space. Areas
shall be provided for the parking of motor vehicles, in a number equal to or in
excess of the number of trailer spaces provided.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-4-1974)
§ 10-508 TRAILERS; ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS.
   (A)   No permanent enclosed additions of any kind shall be built onto, nor
become a part of, any trailer. Skirting of trailers is permissible, but such
skirting shall not attach the trailer permanently to the ground, provide a
harborage for rodents or create a fire hazard.
   (B)   The wheels of the trailer shall not be removed, except temporarily
when necessary for repairs, jacks or stabilizers may be placed under the frame
of the trailer to prevent movement on the springs while the trailer is parked
and occupied.
   (C)   All plumbing, electrical and building codes shall be in accordance
with the laws of the municipality regulating such work.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-4-1974)
§ 10-509 TRAILERS; PERMITTED EXCEPTIONS.
   Trailers commonly referred to as “double wide” or any other trailer coach or
coaches having a minimum outside width of 20 feet and containing 800 square
feet or more of living space, when placed upon permanent foundation, with axle,
wheels and towing apparatus removed, on premises owned or leased by the owner
of said trailer coach, when used as a residence or business shall be exempt and
excepted from the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-4-1974)
§ 10-510 TRAILERS; TEMPORARY STORAGE.
   It shall be lawful for any person to store or otherwise keep on any premises
a travel trailer, or camper upon any area; provided, that said trailer or
camper be stored as near as possible to the back of the premises. It further
shall be lawful for any person to keep and maintain a travel trailer or camper
upon any premises to be used for occupancy as dwelling or sleeping space for
any period not to exceed two weeks in duration.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-4-1974)
§ 10-511 TRAILERS; PROHIBITED PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any trailer, camper or converted
bus on any official street or alley within the corporate limits for a period of
time in excess of two hours, and then only between the hours of sunrise and
sunset.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-4-1974) Penalty, see § 10-1101
§ 10-512 TRAILERS; PROHIBITED LOCATION.
   After the effective date hereof, except as otherwise provided, it shall be
unlawful for any person to park a trailer within the corporate limits for
purposes of using said trailers as a dwelling or sleeping place or to conduct
any business except in a designated and approved trailer camp for which a
permit has been issued and is currently valid.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-4-1974) Penalty, see §
10-1101
ARTICLE 6: CABLE TELEVISION (CATV)
Section
   
10-601   Authority
   
10-602   Franchise grant
   
10-603   Rights conferred by franchise
   
10-604   Installation of cable system
   
10-605   Relocation of property
   
10-606   Rates and charges
   
10-607   Indemnification
   
10-608   Payment to city
   
10-609   Franchise termination
   
10-610   Publication costs
   
10-611   Local office or agent
   
10-612   Severability
   
10-613   Resale of system
   
10-614   Programming
   
10-615   Miscellaneous provisions
   
10-616   Repeal
§ 10-601 AUTHORITY.
   This article is passed and approved by the City Council and enacted pursuant
to the laws of the state.
(Ord. 310, passed 6-18-1982)
§ 10-602 FRANCHISE GRANT.
   (A)   The request of Galaxy Cable, Inc., d/b/a/ Galaxy Cablevision, to renew
the cable television franchise granted in Ord. 310, passed June 18, 1982,
thereafter assigned and amended, and to change the expiration date thereof to
June 18, 2023, is hereby granted.
   (B)   Subject to Galaxy and Zito closing the underlying sale of Galaxy’s
cable system in the city, the city hereby consents to the assignment and
transfer of all rights and privileges of the franchise from Galaxy to Zito,
together with all duties and obligations of Galaxy under the franchise and,
upon the transfer from Galaxy to Zito, hereby releases Galaxy from any and all
duties and obligations under the franchise which arise from and after the
effective date and time of the closing of such transfer. The city further
consents to Zito’s collateral assignment of, or grant of a security interest
in, the franchise to its lenders to secure indebtedness or other obligations
that may be incurred by it with respect to the cable television system. Nothing
in this section constitutes any waiver of any rights by the city to approve any
subsequent transfer, assignment or sale of the franchise.
(Ord. 310, passed 6-18-1982; Ord. 766, passed 6-5-2007; Ord. 772, passed 12-4-
2007; Ord. 797, passed 10-5-2010)
§ 10-603 RIGHTS CONFERRED BY FRANCHISE.
   (A)   This article confers upon the grantee the non-exclusive right,
authority, power and franchise to establish, construct, acquire, own, operate
and maintain a cable television system within the city, and to render, furnish
and sell such service to the inhabitants of the city and its environs and to
use and occupy the streets and other public places within the corporate limits
of the city as the same now exists or may hereafter exist for its cable
television system, including the right to enter and construct, erect, locate,
relocate, repair and rebuild, in, on, under, along, over and across the
streets, alleys, avenues, parkways, lanes, bridges, to make use of all land
dedicated or acquired for public use and locations approved by the City
Engineer, and other public places in the city, for all towers, poles, cables,
amplifiers, conduits and other facilities owned, leased or otherwise used by
grantee for the furnishing of cable television service within the city during
the continuance of the franchise hereby granted, and in accordance with the
laws and regulations of the United States of America, the state and ordinances
and regulations of the city.
   (B)   The poles used for the grantee’s distribution system shall be those
erected and maintained by anyone authorized to maintain poles in the streets of
public ways when and where practicable. It is contemplated that reasonable
standard pole attachment agreements will be entered into. The grantee is
specifically granted the right to set its own poles in the event reasonable
joint use is not possible or feasible. In any areas where electric and
telephone utilities are now underground, the grantee will lay its cable
underground.
   (C)   The city reserves the right of reasonable regulation of the erection,
construction or installation of any facilities by the grantee and to reasonably
designate where such facilities are to be placed within the public ways and
places.
§ 10-604 INSTALLATION OF CABLE SYSTEM.
   (A)   The grantee shall have commenced and completed construction and
installation of the cable system facilities authorized in this article by
October 1, 1982. This completion date shall be extended only for causes beyond
the control of grantee.
   (B)   The installation of the cable system shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the National Electric Safety Code of the American Insurance
Association, latest edition, all applicable laws ordinances, rules and
regulations of the FCC, the state and of the city affecting electrical
installations and buildings, now or hereafter in effect.
   (C)   The grantee, subject to the rights of adjoining property owners, at
its expense, shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public places of the city so as to prevent
the branches of such trees from coming into contact with the wires and cables
of grantee, all trimming to be done under the supervision and direction of the
city.
   (D)   The grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily
disconnect, relocate or remove any property of the grantee located upon
streets, rights-of-way and easements of the city, when required by the city
because of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, street
construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers,
drains, water pipes, power lines and tracks or any other type of structure or
improvement by the city, if the grantee fails to do so, the city may cause the
necessary work to be completed and grantee shall pay the city the cost thereof
within ten days after the receipt of an itemized account of such cost.
(Ord. 310, passed 6-18-1982)
§ 10-605 RELOCATION OF PROPERTY.
   The grantee, at the request of any person holding a permit issued by the
city, shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its wires or cables to permit
the moving of building or equipment. The expense of such temporary removal,
raising or lowering shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the
grantee may require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not
less than 48 hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire or cable
change.
(Ord. 310, passed 6-18-1982)
§ 10-606 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   All rates and charges made by the grantee for its services shall be
fair, reasonable, just and uniform, and approved by the City Council, such
approval not to be unreasonably withheld.
   (B)   The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules,
regulations, terms and conditions of its business as shall reasonably be
necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and perform its services
under this franchise and to assure an uninterrupted service to each and all of
its customers.
(Ord. 310, passed 6-18-1982)
§ 10-607 INDEMNIFICATION.
   The grantee agrees to hold and save said city harmless from any and all
liability that may arise out of the construction, maintenance, operation or use
of grantee’s system and works and the providing of such services and to provide
and keep in force adequate liability insurance therefore, to the extent of
bodily injury limits of $500,000 to $500,000 and a property damage limit of
$300,000 to $300,000, naming the city as an additional insured, as its interest
may appear. The grantee shall also provide and maintain insurance under a broad
form automobile policy with $100,000 to $300,000, $100,000 coverage limits and
workers’ compensation insurance with state statutory limits. All insurance
shall be issued by a company authorized to do business in the state and shall
be provided before the grantee, its successors or assigns thereof, shall
commence the construction or other operations mentioned in this section. The
city shall notify the grantee, its representative or employee in the city, if
any, within, ten days after presentation of any demand or claim that may arise,
whether by suit or otherwise, against the city. The grantee shall maintain on
file with the City Clerk at all times a current certificate of insurance. All
insurance policies shall, if possible, provide for not less than 30 days’
notice of cancellation.
(Ord. 310, passed 6-18-1982)
§ 10-608 PAYMENT TO CITY.
   (A)   In consideration of the rights, privileges and franchise hereby
granted, and as compensation to the city for the use of its public ways and
places by the grantee, and to properly regulate the activities of the grantee,
the grantee shall, on or before the last day of January and the last day of
July of each year to which this franchise is effective, pay to the city a sum
equal to 3% of the gross subscriber revenues for basic cable television service
within the then existing corporate limits of the city for the preceding six-
month period ending on the last day of December and the last day of June,
respectively.
   (B)   The books of the grantee shall be open to inspection by the city at
all reasonable times to verify the accuracy of the computation and correctness
of the report which shall accompany payment. The grantee shall keep books and
records pursuant to established practices using generally accepted auditing
procedures.
(Ord. 310, passed 6-18-1982)
§ 10-609 FRANCHISE TERMINATION.
   The city may terminate the franchise and all rights therein granted in the
event the grantee or the successors or assigns thereof shall fail to comply
with any of the terms and conditions of the article. The city may exercise such
right of termination by mailing notice thereof by registered mail to the
grantee, unless within 30 days after such mailing, full compliance with the
terms and provisions of the article has been effected.
(Ord. 310, passed 6-18-1982)
§ 10-610 PUBLICATION COSTS.
   The grantee will pay to the city a sum to cover the publication cost of this
article when presented with the bill by the city.
(Ord. 310, passed 6-18-1982)
§ 10-611 LOCAL OFFICE OR AGENT.
   The grantee shall maintain a local office, agent or means whereby residents
of the city may leave messages, complaints or requests for service or repairs
or adjustments may be received by the grantee at any time during normal
business hours, all without any toll charges to any resident or customer.
(Ord. 310, passed 6-18-1982)
§ 10-612 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is
for any reason held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof. The city declares that it would have passed this
article and each section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase hereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences,
clauses or phrases be declared illegal, invalid or unconstitutional. The
invalidity of any portion of this article shall not abate, reduce or otherwise
affect the consideration or other obligation required of the grantee by the
franchise granted hereunder.
(Ord. 310, passed 6-18-1982)
§ 10-613 RESALE OF SYSTEM.
   In the event the grantee, at some future date, desires to sell the cable
television system, the city shall have the first option to purchase the system
for the price which the prospective buyer is willing to pay for the system. The
grantee shall provide to the city notice of the proposed purchaser, the
proposed purchase price and the proposed closing date of the purchase. Should
the city so desire to purchase the cable television system in accordance with
the proposed purchase agreement by the proposed purchaser from the grantee,
then the city shall so notify the grantee of its election to exercise the
option to purchase within 30 days of the date of receipt of the notice to sell
by the grantee. Purchase of ownership shall be within 90 days of said notice.
(Ord. 310, passed 6-18-1982)
§ 10-614 PROGRAMMING.
   The grantee shall provide its customers in the city with the following,
minimum, programming:
CBN            Christian Broadcast Network
CINEMAS MOVIES Movies
CNN            Cable News Network News 24 Hours a Day
ESN            Entertainment Sports Network
HBO            Home Box Office
KHAS-TV        Hastings, Nebraska (NBC)
KHNE-TV        Hastings, Nebraska (ETV)
KOLN-TV        Lincoln, Nebraska (CBS)
KSND-TV        Superior, Nebraska (ABC)
NICKELODEON    Young Peoples Channel
WGN-TV         Chicago, Illinois (IND)
WTBS-TV        Atlanta, Georgia (IND)
 
(Ord. 310, passed 6-18-1982)
§ 10-615 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   This article is passed and adopted in conformity with the laws of the state,
and, in addition to other provisions herein set out, said grantee shall file
with the city and obtain approval thereof of a proper map showing and
describing the exact location or proposed location of all its facilities within
the city’s streets, alleys and public ways and secure from the proper city
official approval for the location of and erection of, either above or below
ground, facilities so as not to interfere with existing public utility
franchises, excluding hear from the necessity of securing prior approval of the
city if and when said grantee obtains pole attachment agreements with existing
public utilities for the joint use of poles that may be now existing or may be
hereafter erected by such public utility franchise other than by this article.
(Ord. 310, passed 6-18-1982)
§ 10-616 REPEAL.
   All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed as of the effective date of this article, excluding however, any and
all public utility franchises heretofore granted to public utilities, including
public utilities regulated by the appropriate state agency.
(Ord. 310, passed 6-18-1982)
ARTICLE 7: GARBAGE COLLECTION
Section
   
10-701   Definitions
   
10-702   Garbage collection; private business
   
10-703   Deposit; where unlawful
   
10-704   Garbage collection; conveyance
   
10-705   Garbage collection; destruction of property
   
10-706   Garbage collection; insurance
   
10-707   Garbage collection; license revocation
§ 10-701 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the terms GARBAGE and TRASH shall be
defined as defined in §
4-301.
(Ord. 331, passed 7-5-1983)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2106
§ 10-702 GARBAGE COLLECTION; PRIVATE BUSINESS.
   In the event that the Mayor and City Council deem it neither expedient nor
advisable to enter into a contract for the collection of garbage and other
waste material throughout the city, any person may, upon written application to
the City Clerk, if he or she can satisfy the Mayor and Council that he or she
can and will comply with all of the applicable city ordinances, be issued a
written permit to engage in said work. The fee for said permit shall be $10 per
annum, and the issuance of said permit shall entitle the recipient thereof to
haul and collect garbage and other waste materials in the city for one year
after the date of issuance. Said permit may be renewed annually upon the
submitting by the applicant of the permit fee and the approval of the Mayor and
City Council. If at any time the Mayor and City Council enter into a contract
for city-wide collection of garbage and other waste materials, all permits
issued under this section shall immediately expire upon the signing of any
city-wide contract.
(Ord. 331, passed 7-5-1983)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2105 and 19-2106
§ 10-703 DEPOSIT; WHERE UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone, including any person holding a city permit,
to haul and collect garbage and other waste materials, to throw or deposit or
cause to be thrown or deposited any rubbish, waste or garbage on any vacant
lot, public thoroughfare, street, alley or public property or any place
whatsoever except the place provided or designated by the City Health Officer.
(Ord. 331, passed 7-5-1983) Penalty, see §
10-1101
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2106 and 28-523
§ 10-704 GARBAGE COLLECTION; CONVEYANCE.
   No person, including anyone holding a permit from the city to haul and
collect garbage and other waste materials, shall haul or convey any garbage or
waste materials through or upon the streets, alleys or public places of the
city except in some tight wagon box or bed so made and loaded that none of its
contents shall be spilled on or along the public ways or private property. No
person shall haul or convey any garbage or other waste material in any wagon,
truck or other vehicle unless the same be watertight, clean and disinfected
with sufficient frequency so as not to cause offense to the residents of the
city. All such vehicles shall be enclosed.
(Ord. 331, passed 7-5-1983) Penalty, see §
10-1101
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2106
§ 10-705 GARBAGE COLLECTION; DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   No person holding a permit from the city to haul and collect garbage or
other waste material in the city shall haul garbage in a manner that results in
the destruction of public or private property.
(Ord. 331, passed 7-5-1983) Penalty, see §
10-1101
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2105 and 19-2106
§ 10-706 GARBAGE COLLECTION; INSURANCE.
   Prior to securing a permit to haul and collect garbage or other waste
materials, the applicant for a permit shall provide proof of insurance against
which persons suffering personal injury or property damage or both may make
claims.
(Ord. 331, passed 7-5-1983)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2105 and 19-2106
§ 10-707 GARBAGE COLLECTION; LICENSE REVOCATION.
   Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or any section of this
code, at the discretion of the Mayor and City Council, result in the revocation
of a permit to haul and collect garbage and other waste materials. Prior to any
such revocation, the permit holder, after notice, may show cause why such
permit should not be revoked. The burden of proof is on the city to show that a
violation by the permit holder of relevant ordinances has occurred. The
standard of proof is a preponderance of the evidence; provided, that upon
conviction of said permit holder by a court of competent jurisdiction of this
state of a violation of any applicable ordinance, the city is deemed to have
established a prima facie case against the permit holder and it then becomes
incumbent upon his or her to show by preponderance of the evidence that said
violation has not occurred.
(Ord. 331, passed 7-5-1983) Penalty, see §
10-1101
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2105 and 19-2106
ARTICLE 8: SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
Section
   
10-801   Registration required
   
10-802   Fee
   
10-803   Certificate
   
10-804   Exceptions
   
10-805   Revocation
   
10-806   Consent of occupant
   
10-807   Penalty
§ 10-801 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a
canvasser or solicitor, calling at residences without the previous consent of
the occupant for the purpose of soliciting orders, sales, subscriptions or
business of any kind, or seeking for information or donations without first
having registered in the office of the City Clerk.
   (B)   The registrant shall give his or her complete identification, his or
her signature, the name of his or her employer, the nature of the products or
services in which he or she is interested, the name of the manufacturers of
such products, or the organization which he or she is representing, and the
proposed method of operation in the city.
(Ord. 373, passed 5-5-1987) Penalty, see §
10-807
§ 10-802 FEE.
   Each registrant shall pay to the City Clerk a registration fee of $3 for the
period expiring 30 days after the date of said registration.
(Ord. 373, passed 5-5-1987)
§ 10-803 CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   Each applicant who shows evidence of good character and who pays the
fee provided for herein shall be furnished a certificate indicating that he or
she has registered and showing the dates covered by such registration.
   (B)   Each person shall at all times while soliciting or canvassing in the
city carry upon his or her person the registration certificate and the same
shall be exhibited by such registrant whenever he or she is required to do so
by any police officer or by any municipal official.
(Ord. 373, passed 5-5-1987)
§ 10-804 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this article shall not apply to officers or employees of
the city, county, state or federal government, or any subdivision thereof, when
on official business.
(Ord. 373, passed 5-5-1987)
§ 10-805 REVOCATION.
   Any such registration may be revoked by the Mayor or a law enforcement
officer because of any violation by the registrant of this article or of any
other ordinance of the city or of any state or federal law, or whenever the
registrant shall cease to possess the qualifications and character required in
this article for the original registration.
(Ord. 373, passed 5-5-1987)
§ 10-806 CONSENT OF OCCUPANT.
   The practice of going in and upon private residences in the city by
solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors of
merchandise, not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or
owners, occupant or occupants of said private residences, for the purpose of
soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise and/or for the
purpose of disposing of and/or peddling or hawking the same, is declared to be
a nuisance.
(Ord. 373, passed 5-5-1987)
§ 10-807 PENALTY.
   In addition to the penalty provided above of revocation of registration,
anyone convicted of a violation of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and punished in accordance with the provisions of §
4-601.
(Ord. 373, passed 5-5-1987)
ARTICLE 9: TOBACCO
Section
   
10-901   License term; fees
   
10-902   License to sell; issuance
   
10-903   License application
   
10-904   Rights of licensee
   
10-905   Disposition of fees
   
10-906   Transfer of license
   
10-907   Reissuance of revoked and forfeited license
§ 10-901 LICENSE TERM; FEES.
   (A)   The term for which a license shall run shall be from the date of
filing the application and paying the license fee to and including December 31
of the calendar year in which application for the license is made.
   (B)   The license fee for any person, partnership, limited liability company
or corporation selling at retail shall be $10.
   (C)   Any person, partnership, limited liability company or corporation
selling annually in the aggregate more than 150,000 cigars, packages of
cigarettes, electronic nicotine delivery system and packages of tobacco in any
form, at wholesale, shall pay a license fee of $100, and, if such combined
annual sales amount to less than 150,000 cigars, packages of cigarettes,
electronic nicotine delivery system and packages of tobacco, the annual license
fee shall be $15. No wholesaler’s license shall be issued in any year on a less
basis than $100 per annum unless the applicant shall file with the application
a statement duly sworn to by himself or herself, or if applicant is a
partnership, by a member of the firm or, if a limited liability company, by a
member or manager of the company, or if a corporation, by an officer or manager
thereof, that in the past such wholesaler’s combined sales of cigars, packages
of cigarettes, electronic nicotine delivery system and packages of tobacco in
every form have not exceeded in the aggregate 150,000 annually and that such
sales will not exceed such aggregate amount for the current year for which the
license is to issue. Any person swearing falsely in such affidavit shall be
guilty of an offense, and such wholesaler’s license shall be revoked until the
full license fee is paid.
   (D)   If application for license is made after July 1 of any calendar year,
the fee shall be one-half of the fee provided in this section.
(Neb. RS 28-1423) Penalty, see §
10-1101
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 934, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 10-902 LICENSE TO SELL; ISSUANCE.
   Licenses for the sale of cigars, tobacco, electronic nicotine delivery
systems, cigarettes and cigarette material to persons 21 years of age or over
shall be issued to individuals, partnerships, limited liability companies and
corporations by the City Clerk upon application duly made as provided in §
10-903.
(Neb. RS 28-1421)
Statutory reference:
   Licenses required, see Neb. RS 28-1420
   Prohibited sales, see Neb. RS 28-1421
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 953, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 10-903 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Every person, partnership, limited liability company or corporation desiring
a license under Neb. RS 28-1420 through 28-1429 shall file with the City Clerk
a written application stating the name of the person, partnership, limited
liability company or corporation for whom the license is desired and the exact
location of the place of business and shall deposit with the application the
amount of the license fee provided in §
10-901. If the applicant is an individual, the application shall include the
applicant’s social security number.
(Neb. RS 28-1422)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 866, passed
3-3-2015, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 10-904 RIGHTS OF LICENSEE.
   (A)   The license provided for in §§
10-902 and
10-903 shall, when issued, authorize the sale of cigars, tobacco, electronic
nicotine delivery systems, cigarettes and cigarette material by the licensee
and employees, to persons 21 years of age or over, at the place of business
described in the license for the term therein authorized, unless the license is
forfeited as a result of court action as provided in Neb. RS 28-1425.
(Neb. RS 28-1424)
   (B)   If the license is revoked and forfeited pursuant to Neb. RS 28-1425,
all rights under the license shall at once cease and terminate.
(Neb. RS 28-1425)
Statutory reference:
   Sale to person under 21 prohibited; penalties, see Neb. RS 28-1425
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 954, passed
1-5-2021, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 10-905 DISPOSITION OF FEES.
   All money collected as license fees under the provisions of this article
shall be paid over by the City Clerk to the treasurer of the school fund for
the city.
(Neb. RS 28-1426)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 866, passed
3-3-2015, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 10-906 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   In case of the sale of a business where the owner has a license hereunder,
the City Clerk may authorize such license to be transferred to the purchaser.
In case of a change of location by any licensee hereunder, the City Clerk may
transfer such license to the new location.
(Neb. RS 28-1428)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 866, passed
3-3-2015, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
§ 10-907 REISSUANCE OF REVOKED AND FORFEITED LICENSE.
   In the event that the license of a licensee hereunder shall be revoked and
forfeited as provided in Neb. RS 28-1425, no new license shall be issued to
such licensee until the expiration of one year from the date of such revocation
and forfeiture.
(Neb. RS 28-1429)
Editor’s note:
   The city adopted the basic code model for this section in Ord. 866, passed
3-3-2015, and it has been replaced with the 2024 basic code section.
ARTICLE 10: FRANCHISES
Section
   
10-1001   Gas transmission and distribution system
§ 10-1001 GAS TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.
   The city hereby grants to Kinder Morgan, Inc. the right, permission and
authority to construct, maintain and operate a gas transmission and
distribution system in the city. The franchise is adopted herein by reference
as if incorporated in full. A copy of the franchise is on file at the office of
the Municipal Clerk and available for inspection during regular business hours.
(Ord. 721, passed 5-4-2004)
ARTICLE 11: PENAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10-1101   Violations; penalty
§ 10-1101 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, or any person’s agent or servant, who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided herein,
shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined in any sum not exceeding $500. A new violation shall be deemed to have
been committed every 24 hours of failure to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the
municipality may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin, abate and remove the
same in the manner provided by law.
      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists,
the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.
(Ord. 642, passed 5-10-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-505, 18-1720 and 18-1722
CHAPTER 11: MUNICIPAL PLANNING
   Article
      
1.   MUNICIPAL LIMITS
      
2.   ADDITIONS AND PLATS
      
3.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
      
4.   ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      
5.   PENAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1: MUNICIPAL LIMITS
Section
   
11-101   Additions; incorporation into municipality
   
11-102   Original plats
§ 11-101 ADDITIONS; INCORPORATION INTO MUNICIPALITY.
   All additions to the city laid out and previously located within the
corporate boundaries of the city shall remain a part of the city. All additions
laid out adjoining or contiguous to the corporate limits may be included within
the corporate limits and become a part of the city for all purposes whatsoever
at such time as the addition is approved as provided in Neb. RS 19-916. If the
City Council includes the addition within the corporate limits, the inhabitants
of such addition shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges and shall
be subject to all the laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the city.
(Ord. 679, passed 4-2-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-916
§ 11-102 ORIGINAL PLATS.
   Each and all plats, lots, blocks, additions, subdivisions, outlots and
parcels of ground included within the corporate limits of the municipality, and
not vacated of record prior to the enactment of this chapter, including the
original plat of the municipality, are hereby accepted, approved and confirmed
as valid, and each and all of said lots, blocks, additions, subdivisions and
outlots as heretofore platted and recorded in the office of the County Register
of Deeds, and not heretofore vacated, and all other parcels of ground, included
within said corporate limits, are hereby declared to be within said
municipality and an integral part thereof.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. 17-1002, 17-1003 and 18-3301 through 18-3315
ARTICLE 2: ADDITIONS AND PLATS
Section
   
11-201   Subdivisions and additions permitted
   
11-202   Streets and alleys
   
11-203   Survey and plat
   
11-204   Plat; surveyor’s certificate
   
11-205   Dedication
   
11-206   Approval of plat
   
11-207   Recording plat
   
11-208   Additions
§ 11-201 SUBDIVISIONS AND ADDITIONS PERMITTED.
   The proprietors of any land within the corporate limits of the city, or of
any land within the area designated as the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction
pursuant to Neb. RS 17-1002, may lay out such land into lots, blocks, streets,
avenues, alleys and other grounds under the name of                     
Addition to the city and may subdivide, plat or lay out any such land upon
conformance to and compliance with the conditions in this code and state law.
(Ord. 678, passed 4-2-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-916
§ 11-202 STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   Streets and alleys laid out in any addition to the municipality shall be
continuous with and correspond in direction and width to the streets and alleys
of the municipality to which they are an addition.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-3307
§ 11-203 SURVEY AND PLAT.
   (A)   The owner or proprietor of any tract or parcel of land who shall
subdivide the same into two or more parts for the purpose of laying out any
addition to the city or any part thereof, or suburban lots, shall cause a plat
of such subdivision, with references to known or permanent monuments, to be
made, which shall accurately describe all subdivisions of such tract or parcel
of land, numbering the same by progressive numbers, and giving the dimensions
and length and breadth thereof, and the breadth and courses of all streets and
alleys established therein.
   (B)   The map or plat of land within the corporate limits of the city or of
any land within the area designated as the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction
pursuant to Neb. RS 17-1002 shall designate explicitly the land so laid out and
particularly describe the lots, blocks, streets, avenues, alleys and other
grounds belonging to such addition. The lots shall be designated by numbers,
and streets, avenues and other grounds, by names and numbers. Such plat shall
be acknowledged before some other officer authorized to take the
acknowledgments of deeds and shall contain a dedication of the streets, alleys
and public grounds therein to the use and benefit of the public, and have
appended a survey made by some competent surveyor with a certificate attached,
certifying that he or she has accurately surveyed such addition and that the
lots, blocks, streets, avenues, alleys, parks, commons and other grounds are
well and accurately staked off and marked. When such a map or plat is so made
out, acknowledged and certified, and has been approved by the City Council, the
same shall be filed and recorded in the office of the Registrar of Deeds and
County Assessor.
(Ord. 680, passed 4-2-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-3304 and 19-916
§ 11-204 PLAT; SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE.
   (Repealed by Ord. 680, passed 4-2-2002)
§ 11-205 DEDICATION.
   (Repealed by Ord. 680, passed 4-2-2002)
§ 11-206 APPROVAL OF PLAT.
   Before any such map or plat shall have any validity, it must first be
submitted to and be approved and accepted by the governing body of the
municipality; or by its designated agent when the subdivision is of existing
lots and blocks, where all required public improvements have been installed, no
new dedication of public rights-of-way or easements are involved and the
subdivision complies with requirements concerning minimum areas and dimensions
of such lots and blocks. Where the county has both adopted a comprehensive
development plan and is enforcing subdivision regulations, and the proposed
subdivision plat both contemplates public streets or improvements and lies
partially or totally within the extraterritorial subdivision jurisdiction being
exercised by the county, then the County Planning Commission shall be given
four weeks to officially comment on the appropriateness of the design and
improvements proposed in the plat. The review period for the Commission shall
run concurrently with subdivision review activities of the municipality after
the Commission receives all available material for a proposed subdivision plat.
The map or plat must have such acceptance and such acceptance and approval
endorsed thereon; provided, that before any such map or plat shall be
considered, approved or accepted, the owner or proprietor shall pay, or cause
to be paid, all taxes, special taxes and special assessments due thereon, and
shall produce a certificate showing that all such taxes and assessments have
been paid or cancelled.
(Ord. 281, passed 5-15-1979; Ord. 337, passed 11-1-1983)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-1002, 18-3302, 19-902 and 19-916
§ 11-207 RECORDING PLAT.
   (Repealed by Ord. 680, passed 4-2-2002)
§ 11-208 ADDITIONS.
   (Repealed by Ord. 679, passed 4-2-2002)
ARTICLE 3: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
   
11-301   Statutory authorization, findings of fact and purposes
   
11-302   Definitions
   
11-303   Land to which this article applies
   
11-304   Floodplain Administrator
   
11-305   Rules for interpretation of district boundaries
   
11-306   Compliance
   
11-307   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
11-308   Interpretation
   
11-309   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
11-310   Severability
   
11-311   Flood data required
   
11-312   Development permit
   
11-313   Establishment of the floodplain zoning district
   
11-314   Standards for floodplain development
   
11-315   Variance and appeals procedures
   
11-316   Nonconforming use
   
11-317   Enforcement
   
11-318   Amendments
§ 11-301 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSES.
   (A)   Statutory authorization. The legislature of the state has delegated
the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt zoning regulations
designed to protect the public health, safety, general welfare and property of
the people of the state. The legislature, in Neb. RS 31-1001 through 31-1023
(as amended), has further assigned the responsibility to adopt, administer and
enforce floodplain management regulations to the county, city or village with
zoning jurisdiction over the flood-prone area. Therefore, the City Council
ordains as follows:
   (B)   Findings of fact.
      (1)   Flood losses resulting from periodic inundation. The flood hazard
areas of the city are subject to inundation that results in loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare.
      (2)   General causes of the flood losses. These flood losses are caused
by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in
flood heights and velocities as well as the occupancy of flood hazard areas by
uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to others that are inadequately elevated
or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
   (C)   Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize those losses
described in subsection (B) above by applying the provisions of this article
to:
      (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights or
velocities;
      (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities
that service such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of
initial construction;
      (3)   Reduce financial burdens from flood damage borne by the community,
its governmental units, is residents and its businesses by preventing excessive
and unsafe development in areas subject to flooding; and
      (4)   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance from the National Flood Insurance
Program.
   (D)   Adherence to regulations. The regulations of this article are in
compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations as published
in 44 C.F.R. and the State Minimum Standards for Floodplain Management Programs
as published in the 455 NAC, Chapter 1.
(Ord. 964, passed 6-7-2022; Ord. 986, passed 11-4-2025)
§ 11-302 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   0.2% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation to which floodwaters are
expected to rise during a 0.2% annual chance flood.
   0.2% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOODPLAIN. The floodplain that would be inundated by the
0.2% annual chance flood and delineated on the flood insurance rate maps.
   APPURTENANT STRUCTURE. A structure on the same parcel of property as the
principal structure, the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal
structure. Also shall be known as “accessory structure.”
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH zone on a community’s flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual chance of flooding to an
average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation to which floodwaters are expected to
rise during the base flood.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. See definition for “structure.”
   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any property that, if flooded, would result in severe
consequences to public health and safety. CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but are
not limited to: facilities that produce, use or store hazardous materials;
hospitals, nursing homes and housing likely to contain vulnerable populations;
emergency support function facilities like police stations, fire stations,
vehicle and equipment storage facilities and emergency operations centers; and
public and private utility facilities vital to maintaining or restoring normal
services to flooded areas before, during and after a flood.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to: the construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, expansion or alteration of buildings or other structures; the placement
of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities; filling, grading
and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or
materials; or obstructions.
   DRAINWAY. See the definition for “watercourse.”
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is complete before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas.
   FLOOD FRINGE. The area of the floodplain, outside of the floodway, that has
a 1% chance of flood occurrence in any one year.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community on which the
flood insurance study has delineated the special flood hazard area boundaries
and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the
flood insurance rate map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source (see the definition of “flooding”). FLOODPLAIN includes flood fringe and
floodway. FLOODPLAIN and “special flood hazard area” are the same for use by
this article.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities and
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY or REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for purposes of floodplain management. FREEBOARD tends to compensate for the
many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the
height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as
wave action, clogged bridge openings and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided, that such
enclosure is not built or modified so as to render the structure in violation
of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this article.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For floodplain management purposes, structures for which
the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation (including the alteration or relocation of a watercourse
or drainway), channel rectification, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, stored
equipment or material, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill or other
analogous structure or matter which may impede, retard or change the direction
of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris
carried by such water, or that is placed where the natural flow of the water
would carry such structure or matter downstream to the damage or detriment of
either life or property. Dams designed to store or divert water are not
OBSTRUCTIONS if permission for the construction thereof is obtained from the
Department of Natural Resources pursuant to the Safety of Dams and Reservoirs
Act (Neb. RS 46-1601 through 46-1670, as amended).
   OVERLAY DISTRICT. A district in which additional requirements act in
conjunction with the underlying zoning district(s). The original zoning
district designation does not change.
   POST-FIRM STRUCTURE. A building that was constructed or substantially
improved after December 31, 1974 or on or after the community’s initial flood
insurance rate map dated September 30, 2004, whichever is later.
   PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE. A building that was constructed or substantially
improved on or before December 31, 1974 or before the community’s initial flood
insurance rate map dated September 30, 2004, whichever is later.
   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND. That at least 51% of the actual cash value of the
structure is above ground.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION. The base flood elevation (BFE) plus a freeboard
factor as specified in this article.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The date the floodplain development permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. START OF CONSTRUCTION also includes substantial improvement,
and means the date the building permit was issued; provided, that the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The
ACTUAL START means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START
OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other
structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as
well as a manufactured home and a gas or liquid storage tank that is
principally above ground.
   SUBDIVISION. The division or re-division of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damage condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before start of construction of the
improvement. This includes structures which have incurred substantial damage,
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure; provided, that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief to an applicant from the requirements of this
article that allows construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
article where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
   VIOLATION. A failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or
other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in
VIOLATION until such time as that documentation is provided.
   WATERCOURSE. Any depression two feet or more below the surrounding land that
serves to give direction to a current of water at least nine months of the year
and that has a bed and well-defined banks.
(Ord. 964, passed 6-7-2022; Ord. 986, passed 11-4-2025)
§ 11-303 LAND TO WHICH THIS ARTICLE APPLIES.
   This article shall apply to all lands within the jurisdictions of the city
identified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) Panels 31169C0150D,
31169C0163D, 31169C0164D, 31169C0165D, and 31169C0300D dated November 14, 2025,
as Zone A and within the Zoning District established in §
11-313. In all areas covered by this article, no development shall be allowed
except upon the issuance of a floodplain development permit to develop, granted
by the Floodplain Administrator or the governing body under such safeguards and
restrictions as the City Council or the designated representative may
reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of the general welfare,
health of the inhabitants of the community and where specifically noted in §§
11-304,
11-311,
11-312,
11-315,
11-314 and
11-317.
(Ord. 964, passed 6-7-2022; Ord. 986, passed 11-4-2025)
§ 11-304 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Designation of Floodplain Administrator. The Mayor, or his or her
designee, is hereby designated as the community’s local Floodplain
Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator is authorized and directed to
administer, implement and enforce all provisions of this article. If the local
Floodplain Administrator position is unfilled, the community CEO shall assume
the duties and responsibilities herein.
   (B)   Duties of the Floodplain Administrator. Duties of the Floodplain
Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Review, approve or deny all applications for floodplain development
permits;
      (2)   Review all development permit applications to assure that sites are
reasonably safe from flooding and that the permit requirements of this article
have been satisfied;
      (3)   Review applications for proposed development to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
government agencies from which prior approval is required;
      (4)   Review all subdivision proposals and other proposed new
development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, to determine
whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding;
      (5)   Coordinate with the State Department of Natural Resources to obtain
base flood elevation information when applicable and required;
      (6)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Department of Natural
Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit
evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
      (7)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished;
      (8)   Verify, record and maintain record of the actual elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new
or substantially improved structures in the floodplain;
      (9)   Verify, record and maintain record of the actual elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) to which all new or substantially improved
structures have been floodproofed;
      (10)   Verify, record and maintain record of all improved or damaged
structures to ensure compliance with standards in applicable sections. Track
value of improvements and market value with permits. Also, ensure consistent
market value estimations to evaluate against damaged or improved values;
      (11)   Ensure the comprehensive development plan as amended is consistent
with this article; and
      (12)   In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers work done that
does not comply with applicable laws or ordinances, the Floodplain
Administrator shall revoke the permit and work to correct any possible
violation in accordance with this article.
(Ord. 964, passed 6-7-2022; Ord. 986, passed 11-4-2025)
§ 11-305 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   The boundaries of the floodway and the flood fringe overlay districts shall
be determined by scaling distances on the official zoning map of the effective
flood insurance rate map. Where interpretation is needed to the exact location
of the boundaries of the districts as shown on the zoning or other community
map, the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. In
such cases where the interpretation is contested, the City Planning and Zoning
Committee will resolve the dispute. The regulatory flood elevation for the
point in question shall be the governing factor in locating the district
boundary on the land. The person contesting the location of the district
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his or her case to
the City Planning and Zoning Committee and to submit his or her own technical
evidence, if so desired.
(Ord. 964, passed 6-7-2022; Ord. 986, passed 11-4-2025)
§ 11-306 COMPLIANCE.
   Within identified floodplains of this community, no development shall be
located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance
with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. 964, passed 6-7-2022; Ord. 986, passed 11-4-2025)
§ 11-307 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This article does not intend to repeal, abrogate or impair any existent
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article imposes
greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail. All other
ordinances inconsistent with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of
the inconsistency only.
(Ord. 964, passed 6-7-2022; Ord. 986, passed 11-4-2025)
§ 11-308 INTERPRETATION.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article
shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of
any other powers granted by state statutes.
(Ord. 964, passed 6-7-2022; Ord. 986, passed 11-4-2025)
§ 11-309 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific
methods of study. Larger floods may occur, or the flood height may be increased
by human-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings
restricted by debris. This article does not imply that areas outside floodway
and flood fringe district boundaries or land uses permitted within such
districts will be free from flooding or flood damage. This article shall not
create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for
any flood damages that may result from reliance on this article or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 964, passed 6-7-2022; Ord. 986, passed 11-4-2025)
§ 11-310 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, clause, provision or portion of this article is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder
of this article shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. 964, passed 6-7-2022; Ord. 986, passed 11-4-2025)
§ 11-311 FLOOD DATA REQUIRED.
   (A)   All Zone A areas on the FIRM are subject to inundation of the base
flood; however, the base flood elevations are not provided. Zone A areas shall
be subject to all development provisions of this article. If flood insurance
study data is not available, the community shall utilize any base flood
elevation or floodway data currently available from federal, state or other
sources, including from a study commissioned by the applicant pursuant to best
technical practices.
   (B)   Until a floodway has been designated, no development or substantial
improvement may be permitted within the floodplain unless the applicant has
demonstrated that the proposed development or substantial improvement, when
combined with all other existing and reasonably anticipated developments or
substantial improvements, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot at any location as shown in the flood insurance
study or on base flood elevation determinations.
(Ord. 964, passed 6-7-2022; Ord. 986, passed 11-4-2025)
§ 11-312 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   Permit required. A floodplain development permit shall be required
before any development, construction or substantial improvement is undertaken.
No person, firm, corporation, government agency or other entity shall initiate
any floodplain development without first obtaining a floodplain development
permit.
   (B)   Application for permit and demonstration of compliance.
      (1)   To obtain a floodplain development permit, the applicant shall
first file an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose.
Every such application shall:
         (a)   Identify and describe the proposed development and estimated
cost to be covered by the floodplain development permit;
         (b)   Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be
done by lot, block, tract and house and streets address, or similar description
that will readily identify and definitively locate the proposed building or
development;
         (c)   Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed development
is intended;
         (d)   Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed
construction; and
         (e)   Be signed by the permittee and authorized agent who may be
required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.
      (2)   If any proposed development is located entirely or partially within
a floodplain, applicants shall provide all information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
         (a)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage;
         (b)   All utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, water,
electrical and other systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage;
         (c)   Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement;
         (d)   Construction materials are flood resistant;
         (e)   Appropriate practices to minimize flood damage have been
utilized; and
         (f)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, air conditioning, plumbing and
any other service facilities have been designed and located to prevent entry of
floodwaters.
      (3)   For all new and substantially improved structures, an elevation
certificate based upon the finished construction certifying the elevation of
the lowest floor, including basement, and other relevant building components
shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator and be completed by a
licensed surveyor, engineer or architect.
      (4)   When floodproofing is utilized for an applicable structure, a
floodproofing certificate shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator and
be completed by a licensed professional engineer or architect.
      (5)   Any other such information as reasonably may be required by the
Floodplain Administrator shall be provided.
      (6)   Federal regulations in 44 C.F.R. §§ 65.5 and 65.6 allow for changes
to the special flood hazard area through a letter of map revision (LOMR) or a
letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F); provided, that the community
determines that the land and any existing or proposed structures that would be
removed from the floodplain are reasonably safe from flooding. The community
acknowledgment form asserting this is required for LOMR and LOMR-F applications
must be signed by the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator
shall not sign a community acknowledgment form unless all criteria set forth in
the following paragraphs are met.
         (a)   The applicant shall obtain floodplain development permit before
applying for a LOMR or LOMR-F.
         (b)   The applicant shall demonstrate that the property and any
existing or proposed structures will be “reasonably safe from flooding,”
according to the minimum design standards in FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01.
         (c)   All requirements listed in the simplified approach in FEMA
Technical Bulletin 10-01 shall be met and documentation from a registered
professional engineer shall be provided. If all of these requirements are not
met, the applicant must provide documentation in line with the engineered
approach outlined in FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01.
(Ord. 964, passed 6-7-2022; Ord. 986, passed 11-4-2025)
§ 11-313 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FLOODPLAIN ZONING DISTRICT.
   The mapped floodplain areas within the jurisdiction of this article are
hereby established as the floodplain overlay district, as identified in the
Flood Insurance Study Number 31169CV000B dated November 14, 2025, and on
accompanying FIRM panels as established in §
11-303. The floodplain overlay district shall correspond to Flood Zone A.
Within this district, all uses not meeting the standards of this article and
those standards of the underlying zoning district shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 964, passed 6-7-2022; Ord. 986, passed 11-4-2025)
§ 11-314 STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   General provisions.
      (1)   Alteration or relocation of a watercourse.
         (a)   A watercourse or drainway shall not be altered or relocated in
any way that in the event of a base flood or more frequent flood will alter the
flood-carrying characteristics of the watercourse or drainway to the detriment
of upstream, downstream or adjacent locations.
         (b)   No alteration or relocation shall be made until all adjacent
communities that may be affected by such action and the State Department of
Natural Resources have been notified and all applicable permits obtained.
Evidence of such notification shall be submitted to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
      (2)   Encroachments.
         (a)   When proposing to permit any of the following encroachments, the
standards in this subsection (A)(2) shall apply:
            1.   To any development in Zone A without a designated floodway
that will cause a rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation; or
            2.   To the alteration or relocation of a stream.
         (b)   The applicant shall:
            1.   Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action via the
conditional letter of map revision process (as per 44 C.F.R. § 65.12) prior to
the permit for the encroachments; and
            2.   Supply the fully approved package to the Floodplain
Administrator, including any required notifications to potentially affected
property owners.
   (B)   Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
      (1)   Residential structures. In Zone A, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above two feet above the base flood elevation.
      (2)   Nonresidential structures.
         (a)   In Zone A, all new construction and substantial improvements
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above two feet
above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, floodproofed so that below two feet above the base flood elevation:
            1.   The structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water; and
            2.   The structure has structural components with the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
         (b)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the standards of this subsection (B) are satisfied. A floodproofing
certificate shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth
herein.
      (3)   Critical facilities. New construction or substantial improvement of
any critical facility is prohibited in all areas of the floodplain and the 0.2%
annual chance floodplain unless all of the following provisions are met.
         (a)   No feasible alternative site exists for the construction of an
equivalent facility within the corporate or extraterritorial jurisdiction
boundaries of the city.
         (b)   The facility has the lowest floor, including basement, of all
structures elevated to one foot above the 0.2% annual chance flood elevation
or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, floodproofed so
that below one foot above the 0.2% annual chance flood elevation:
            1.   The structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
            2.   The structure has structural components with the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
            3.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the standards of the subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be
provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth herein.
         (c)   If the 0.2% annual chance floodplain is not identified, the
facility shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to three
feet above the base flood elevation or be floodproofed to three feet above the
base flood elevation with the standards in subsection (B)(3)(b) above.
         (d)   The facility has at least one access road connected to land
outside the 0.2% annual chance floodplain that is capable of carrying emergency
support vehicles and the top of the access road is no lower than the 0.2%
annual chance flood elevation.
      (4)   Space below lowest floor. All new construction and substantial
improvements shall not have fully enclosed areas below the base flood
elevation.
      (5)   Appurtenant structures. Structures accessory to a principal
building may have the lowest floor below one foot above base flood elevation
provided that the structure complies with the following requirements.
         (a)   The structure shall not be used for human habitation.
         (b)   The use of the structure must be limited to parking of vehicles
or storage of items readily removable in the event of a flood warning.
         (c)   The floor area shall not exceed 900 square feet.
         (d)   The structure shall have a low damage potential.
         (e)   The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or other lateral movement.
         (f)   The structure shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
            1.   A minimum of two openings having a net area of not less than
one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed space are required.
            2.   The bottom of all openings shall not be higher than one foot
above grade.
            3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided they allow the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
         (g)   No utilities shall be installed in the structure, except
electrical fixtures which must be elevated or floodproofed to one foot above
base flood elevation.
         (h)   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
         (i)   If the structure is converted to another use, it must be brought
into full compliance with the minimum standards governing such use.
      (6)   Manufactured homes.
         (a)   All manufactured homes are required to be placed or
substantially improved within floodplains on sites:
            1.   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
            2.   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
            3.   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or
            4.   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which
a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood,
be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is at or above two feet above the base flood elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
         (b)   Manufactured homes are required to be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within
special flood hazard areas that are not subject to the provisions of subsection
(B)(6)(a) above be elevated so that either:
            1.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above two
feet above the base flood elevation; or
            2.   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers
or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less
than 36 inches in height above grade; and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of subsection (B)
(6)(d) below.
         (c)   New manufactured home parks of five acres or 50 lots, whichever
is less, shall follow the standards of subsection (C)(8) below.
         (d)   All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Manufactured homes must be anchored in accordance
with local building codes or FEMA guidelines. In the event that over-the-top
ties to ground anchors are used, the following specific requirements (or their
equivalent) shall be met.
            1.   Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four
corners of the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at
intermediate locations and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring
one additional tie per side.
            2.   Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the
manufactured home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points and
manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per
side.
            3.   Any additions to the manufactured home shall be similarly
anchored.
      (7)   Existing structures.
         (a)   The provisions of this article do not require any changes or
improvements to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an
improvement is made to a structure in the floodplain, a floodplain development
permit is required and the provisions of subsections (B)(7)(b) and (B)(7)(c)
below shall apply.
         (b)   Any addition, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure where the costs of which would equal or exceed
50% of the pre-improvement market value shall constitute a substantial
improvement and shall fully comply with the provisions of this article.
         (c)   Any addition, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure that will change the compliance requirements of
the building shall require applicable documentation including an elevation
certificate, floodproofing certificate or no rise certification.
   (C)   Design and construction standards.
      (1)   Anchoring. All buildings or structures shall be firmly anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
      (2)   Building materials and utilities.
         (a)   All buildings or structures shall be constructed with materials
and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. All buildings or structures
shall also be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood and
flood-related damages.
         (b)   All buildings or structures shall be constructed with
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
      (3)   Drainage. Within Zones AO and AH, adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes shall be required in order to guide floodwaters around and
away from proposed structures.
      (4)   Water supply and sanitary sewer systems.
         (a)   All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer systems
shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damages to such systems and the infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
         (b)   All new or replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate discharge from the system into floodwaters.
         (c)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and designed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
      (5)   Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical,
telephone and other utilities shall be located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage to such utilities and facilities.
      (6)   Storage of materials.
         (a)   The storage or processing of materials that are in time of
flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive or could be injurious to human, animal
or plant life is prohibited.
         (b)   The storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not
subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or
if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood
warning.
      (7)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles to be placed on sites
within the floodplain shall:
         (a)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which shall mean it
is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site by only quick-
disconnect-type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions; and
         (c)   Meet the permit requirements and the elevation and anchoring
requirements for manufactured homes of this article.
      (8)   Subdivisions. Subdivision proposals and other proposed new
development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall require
assurance that:
         (a)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage;
         (b)   All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems are located, elevated and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damage;
         (c)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards; and
         (d)   Proposals for development (including proposals for manufactured
home parks and subdivisions) of five acres or 50 lots, whichever is less, where
base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported by hydrologic
and hydraulic analyses that determine base flood elevations and floodway
information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer
in a format required by FEMA for conditional letters of map revision and
letters of map revision.
(Ord. 964, passed 6-7-2022; Ord. 986, passed 11-4-2025)
§ 11-315 VARIANCE AND APPEALS PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   The City Planning and Zoning Committee, as established by the city,
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements
of this article.
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Committee shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this article.
      (3)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Planning and Zoning
Committee, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the District Court as
provided in Neb. RS 19-912 and 23-168.04.
      (4)   In evaluating such appeals and requests, the Planning and Zoning
Committee shall consider technical evaluation, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this article, and:
         (a)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         (b)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         (c)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner, future
owners and neighboring properties;
         (d)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         (e)   The necessity of the facility to have a waterfront location,
where applicable;
         (f)   The availability of alternative locations that are not subject
to flooding or erosion damage for the proposed use;
         (g)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         (h)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and the floodplain management program for that area;
         (i)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         (j)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
         (k)   The costs of providing government services during and after
flood conditions including emergency management services and maintenance and
repair of public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical,
water systems, streets and bridges.
   (B)   Conditions for variances.
      (1)   Variances shall only be issued upon a showing of good and
sufficient cause and also upon a determination that failure to grant the
variance would result in an exceptional hardship to the applicant.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued based upon a determination that the
granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued based upon a determination that the
granting of a variance will not result in additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (4)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures,
constructed below the base flood level, providing the provisions in subsections
(B)(5) through (B)(8) below have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
      (5)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an
historic structure on the National Register of Historic Places and the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
      (6)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (7)   The applicant shall be given a written notice over the signature of
a community that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance
up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage and also that such
construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and
property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance
actions as required by this article.
      (8)   All requests for variances and associated actions and documents,
including justification for their issuance, shall be maintained by the
community.
(Ord. 964, passed 6-7-2022; Ord. 986, passed 11-4-2025)
§ 11-316 NONCONFORMING USE.
   (A)   A structure or use of a structure or premises that was lawful before
the passage or amendment of this article, but that is not in conformity with
the provisions of this article, may be continued subject to the following
conditions:
      (1)   If such use is discontinued for 24 consecutive months, any future
use of the building premises shall conform to this article. The Utility
Department shall notify the Floodplain Administrator in writing of instances of
nonconforming uses where utility services have been discontinued for a period
of 24 months.
      (2)   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
   (B)   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50% of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred except that if it
is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this article. This
limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary or safety code or regulations or the cost of
any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic
Places; provided, that the alteration shall not preclude its continued
designation.
(Ord. 964, passed 6-7-2022; Ord. 986, passed 11-4-2025)
§ 11-317 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violations. Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit or the
failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the
provisions of this article shall constitute a violation. A structure or other
development without a floodplain development permit, elevation certificate,
certification by a licensed professional engineer of compliance with these
regulations or other evidence of compliance is presumed to be in violation
until such time as documentation is provided.
   (B)   Notices. When the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
community representative determines, based on reasonable grounds, that there
has been a violation of the provisions of this article, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Include an explanation of the alleged violation;
      (3)   Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any remedial act
required;
      (4)   Be served upon the property owner or their agent as the case may
require; and
      (5)   Contain an outline of remedial actions that, if taken, will bring
the development into compliance with the provisions of this article.
   (C)   Penalties.
      (1)   Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply
with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity that
violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500 and, in addition, shall
pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense.
      (2)   The imposition of such fines or penalties for any violation or
noncompliance with this article shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance
or allow it to continue. All such violations or noncompliant actions shall be
remedied within an established and reasonable time.
      (3)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city or other
appropriate authority from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 964, passed 6-7-2022; Ord. 986, passed 11-4-2025)
§ 11-318 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in this article
may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed or appealed to reflect
any and all changes in federal, state or local regulations; provided, however,
that no such action may be take until after a public hearing in relation
thereto, at which citizens and parties in interest shall have an opportunity to
be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city. At least 14 days shall elapse
between the date of this publication and the public hearing.
   (B)   A copy of such amendments will be provided to the State Department of
Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency for review and
approval before being adopted.
(Ord. 964, passed 6-7-2022; Ord. 986, passed 11-4-2025)
ARTICLE 4: ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
   
11-401   Zoning and subdivision regulations adopted by reference
   
11-402   Zoning map
   
11-403   Manufactured homes; standards
   
11-404   Prohibited uses and structures
§ 11-401 ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   For the purpose of setting minimum standards to promote the public health,
safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the
community of the city and to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety
from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to
prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population;
and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage,
schools, parks and other public improvements, the zoning and subdivision
regulations of the city, presented and prepared by the city are hereby adopted.
The adoption of such zoning and subdivision regulations shall include any
amendments thereto as may be made from time to time. Said zoning and
subdivision regulations, as well as such amendments, are hereby incorporated
herein by reference as if set out in full. One copy of the zoning and
subdivision regulations shall be maintained by the Municipal Clerk at the city
office and available for public inspection during regular office hours.
(Ord. 684, passed 6-4-2002; Ord. 782, passed 8-12-2008; Ord. 974, passed - -
2024)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-132 and 19-922
§ 11-402 ZONING MAP.
   The city and certain properties within and up to one mile in all directions
of its corporate limits are hereby divided into zones or districts, as shown on
the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory material and
documentation is hereby adopted by reference, declared to be a part of the
zoning regulations of the city and further declared to be a part of this
article. The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the
Mayor, attested to by the Municipal Clerk and bearing the seal of the city
under the following words: “This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning
Map of the City of Deshler, Nebraska. The official zoning map of the area
within the corporate limits and the planning jurisdiction area adjacent and one
mile beyond the corporate limits of the City of Deshler, together with all
changes, amendments or additions thereto, shall be maintained in the office of
the Municipal Clerk and available for public inspection during regular office
hours.”
(Ord. 684, passed 6-4-2002)
§ 11-403 MANUFACTURED HOMES; STANDARDS.
   (A)   A manufactured home may be used as a residential structure in any zone
in which residential uses are permitted if such manufactured home bears an
appropriate seal which indicates that it was constructed in accordance with the
standards of the Uniform Standard Code for Manufactured Homes and Recreational
Vehicles, the State Uniform Standards for Modular Housing Units Act, being Neb.
RS 71-1555 et seq. or the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
   (B)   Manufactured homes permitted pursuant to this section shall be located
and installed according to the following standards which are applicable to
site-built, single-family dwellings.
      (1)   The home shall be located and installed on a permanent perimeter
foundation.
      (2)   The home shall be installed with permanent utility connections.
      (3)   The home shall comply with all setback and lot requirements of the
residential zone in which it is located.
      (4)   The home shall comply with the minimum square footage requirements
of the residential zone in which it is located.
   (C)   Manufactured homes shall also meet the following standards.
      (1)   The home shall have no less than 900 square feet of floor area.
      (2)   The home shall have no less than an 18-foot exterior width.
      (3)   The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of two and
one-half inches for each 12 inches of horizontal run.
      (4)   The exterior material shall be of a color, material and scale
comparable with those existing in residential site-built, single-family
construction.
      (5)   The home shall have a nonreflective roof material which is or
simulates asphalt or wood shingles, tile or rock.
      (6)   The home shall have wheels, axles, transporting lights and
removable towing apparatus removed.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to supersede any valid
restrictive covenants of record.
   (E)   For the purpose of this section, MANUFACTURED HOME shall mean:
      (1)   A factory-built structure which is to be used as a place for human
habitation, which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or
other device allowing it to be moved other than to a permanent site, which does
not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles, and
which bears a label certifying that it was built in compliance with National
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, 24 C.F.R. parts 3280 et
seq. promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development; or
      (2)   A modular housing unit, as defined in Neb. RS 71-1557, bearing a
seal in accordance with the State Uniform Standards for Modular Housing Units
Act.
(Ord. 505, passed 2-7-1995; Ord. 614, passed 4-13-1999)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-902
§ 11-404 PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Prohibited uses and structures are as follows:
      (1)   More than one principle dwelling structure per lot, tract or
parcel;
      (2)   Any use which causes or may reasonably be expected to cause
excessive noise, vibration concussion, odor, smoke, dust, dirt or other
particulate matter, toxic or noxious matter, humidity, heat or glare at or
beyond any lot line of the lot on which it is located. For the purpose of this
section, EXCESSIVE is defined as a degree exceeding that generated by uses
permitted in the district in their customary manner or operation, or to a
degree which is disturbing or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare
or convenience;
      (3)   The storage or display of anything other than natural or artificial
landscaping material in any yard between any building and the street; and
      (4)   (a)   Any and all storage containers, including cargo containers,
shall be prohibited in all residential districts within the city zoning
jurisdiction without advance permission for temporary placement and use from
the City Council. Such permission shall not extend beyond 30 days from date of
placement.
         (b)   For the purpose of this subsection (A)(4), CARGO CONTAINER means
any metal box-like object generally designed and built for intermodal freight
transport, meaning that these containers are generally intended to be used
across different modes of transportation.
   (B)   Violations of this section as described in subsection (A) above shall
be considered to be a specific nuisance, in addition to those identified in §
4-402, and may be abated in accordance with the provisions of §
4-404.
   (C)   In addition to the abatement procedure identified in subsection (B)
above, the Mayor and City Council shall be authorized to maintain an action for
abatement of such activity in the County District Court against the owner,
occupant, lessee, mortgagee or agent thereof, who is deemed to be in violation
of subsection (A) above. Such action is authorized under the powers granted to
second class cities pursuant to the provisions of Neb. RS 17-123.
   (D)   Furthermore, any owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or agent thereof,
who shall violate or refuse to comply with the provisions of subsection (A)
above, or the enforcement thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100 for every offense. A
new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of such
failure to comply.
(Ord. 897, passed 8-1-2017) Penalty, see §
11-502
ARTICLE 5: PENAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
11-501   Violation; penalty
   
11-502   Violations; penalty
§ 11-501 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Any person, whether as owner, proprietor or as the agent, attorney or
representative of any owner or proprietor of land who shall plat or subdivide
any tract of land within the corporate limits of the municipality, or adjoining
and contiguous to the same, except as herein authorized, or who shall sell,
transfer, deed or convey, contract or agree to sell, transfer or offer for sale
any lot, or piece of ground in any addition, or subdivision of three or more
parts within said corporate limits, or adjoining, and contiguous thereto,
without having first obtained the acceptance, and approval of the plat or map
thereof by the governing body, and any person who shall violate, or who shall
fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions hereinbefore, as
now existing or as hereafter amended, shall, upon conviction, be fined in any
sum not exceeding $100.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 18-3315
§ 11-502 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, or any person’s agent or servant, who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided herein,
shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined in any sum not exceeding $500. A new violation shall be deemed to have
been committed every 24 hours of failure to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the
municipality may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin, abate and remove the
same in the manner provided by law.
      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists,
the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.
(Ord. 642, passed 5-10-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-505, 18-1720 and 18-1722
CHAPTER 12: WIRELESS FACILITIES
   Article
      
1.   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 1: SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES REGULATIONS
Section
   
12-101   Purpose
   
12-102   Definitions
   
12-103   Deployment in the right-of-way; applicability
   
12-104   Deployment in the right-of-way; agreement for use
   
12-105   Deployment in the right-of-way; administrative review
   
12-106   Deployment in the right-of-way; right-of-way construction and
installation
   
12-107   Deployment in the right-of-way; attachment to and replacement of
decorative poles
   
12-108   Deployment in the right-of-way; general work requirements
   
12-109   Deployment in the right-of-way; location of new facilities
   
12-110   Deployment in the right-of-way; removal, relocation and abandonment
   
12-111   Deployment in the right-of-way; indemnification
   
12-112   Deployment in the right-of-way; insurance
   
12-113   Deployment in the right-of-way; independent technical and legal review
   
12-114   Deployment in the right-of-way; shot clocks
   
12-115   Relief
   
12-116   Other approvals
   
12-117   Laws, rules and regulations
   
12-118   Conflicts
   
12-119   Penalty
§ 12-101 PURPOSE.
   (A)   (1)   The provisions of this article shall be known as the “Small
Wireless Facilities Regulations for the Right-of-Way.”
      (2)   It is the purpose of these provisions to delineate restrictions,
development standards and siting criteria and establish removal procedures in
order to protect the municipality from the uncontrolled siting of wireless
communication facilities in locations that have significant adverse effects and
cause irreparable harm.
   (B)   The legislature found and declared in the Small Wireless Facilities
Deployment Act, being Neb. RS 86-1201 et seq. that:
      (1)   The deployment of small wireless facilities and other next-
generation wireless facilities is a matter of statewide concern and interest
and public policy;
      (2)   Wireless products and services are a significant and continually
growing part of the state’s economy and that encouraging the development of
strong and robust wireless communications networks throughout the state is
necessary to address public need and policy and is integral to the state’s
economic competitiveness;
      (3)   Rapid deployment of small wireless facilities will serve numerous
important statewide goals and public policy, including meeting growing consumer
demand for wireless data, increasing competitive options for communications
services available to the state’s residents, improving the ability of the
state’s residents to communicate with other residents and with their state and
local governments and promoting public safety;
      (4)   Small wireless facilities, including facilities commonly referred
to as small cells and distributed antenna systems, are deployed most
effectively in public rights-of-way;
      (5)   To meet the public need and policy and the key objectives of the
Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act that wireless providers must have
access to the public rights-of-way to densify their networks and provide next-
generation wireless services;
      (6)   Uniform procedures, rates and fees for permit issuance and
deployment of small wireless facilities in public rights-of-way and on
authority infrastructure, including poles, throughout the state that are
reasonable and will encourage the development of robust next-generation
wireless networks for the benefit of residents throughout the state; and
      (7)   The procedures, rates and fees in the Small Wireless Facilities
Deployment Act, together with any taxes, fees or charges imposed under Neb. RS
86-704, are fair and reasonable when viewed from the perspective of the state’s
residents and the state’s interest in having robust, reliable and
technologically advanced wireless networks and reflect a balancing of the
interests of the wireless providers deploying new facilities and the interests
of authorities in receiving fair value by recovering their costs of managing
access to the public rights-of-way and provide for the attachment space on
authority infrastructure and enable the reviewing and processing of
applications for the installation of small wireless facilities within the
rights-of-way.
(Ord. 909, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 12-102 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, being Neb. RS 86-1201 et
seq. (Legislative Bill 184 adopted by the legislature and approved by the
Governor on May 17, 2019).
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in providing wireless services.
   APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform building, fire, safety, electrical, plumbing or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to such codes so long as such amendments are not in conflict with
the Act and to the extent such codes have been adopted by the authority and are
generally applicable in the jurisdiction.
   APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
   APPLICATION. A written request submitted by an applicant to an authority for
a permit to collocate small wireless facilities on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure or for a permit for approval for the installation,
modification or replacement of a utility pole to support the installation of a
small wireless facility.
   AUTHORITY. The state or any agency, county, city, village or other political
subdivision thereof, except as otherwise excluded herein. AUTHORITY does not
include public power suppliers, state courts having jurisdiction over an
authority or an entity that does not have zoning or permit-granting authority.
   AUTHORITY POLE. A utility pole owned, managed or operated by or on behalf of
an authority.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate or
replace small wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support
structure or utility pole. COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION does not include the
installation of a new utility pole or new wireless support structure in the
right-of-way.
   COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. The set of equipment and network components,
including wires, cables and associated facilities, used by a cable operator, as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(5), as such section existed on January 1, 2019, a
telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(51), as such section
existed on January 1, 2019, a provider of information service, as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 153(24), as such section existed on January 1, 2019, or a wireless
services provider, to provide communications services, including cable service,
as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(8), as such section existed on January 1, 2019,
an information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(24), as such section
existed on January 1, 2019, wireless services or other one-way or two-way
communications service.
   COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK. A network used to provide communications service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. A cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522, as
such section existed on January 1, 2019, an information service, as defined in
47 U.S.C. § 153, as such section existed on January 1, 2019, a
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153, as such section
existed on January 1, 2019, or a wireless service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. §
522, a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153, or a
telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153, as such sections
existed on January 1, 2019. COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER includes a wireless
provider.
   DECORATIVE POLE. An authority pole that is specially designed and placed for
aesthetic purposes.
   DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM. A network consisting of transceiver equipment at
a central hub site to support multiple antenna locations throughout the desired
coverage area.
   ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST. As defined in federal regulations.
   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
   FEE. A one-time, nonrecurring charge.
   GOVERNING BODY. The group of elected officials which is able to make
decisions on behalf of the municipality (for example, the City Council).
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. Any prehistoric or historic district, site, building,
structure or object included in, or eligible for inclusion in, the National
Register of Historic Places, in accordance with stipulation VI.D.I.a(i)-(v) of
the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement for Review of Effects on Historic
Properties for Certain Undertakings Approved by the Federal Communications
Commission codified at 47 C.F.R. part 1, Appendix C, as such regulation existed
on January 1, 2019, or designated pursuant to state historic preservation law
if such designation exists at the time of application.
   LAW. Federal, state or local law, statute, common law, code, rule,
regulation, order or ordinance.
   MACRO CELL. An antenna or antennas mounted on a tower, ground-based mast,
rooftops or structures, at a height that provides coverage to the surrounding
area.
   MICROWIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width and 12 inches in height
and with any exterior antenna no longer than eleven inches.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Deshler.
   PERMIT. A written authorization required by an authority to perform an
action, initiate, continue or complete installation of a small wireless
facility on an existing utility pole or attached to an existing wireless
support structure, or to install, modify or replace a utility pole to support
installation of a small wireless facility.
   PERSON. An individual, a corporation, a limited liability company, a
partnership, an association, a trust or any other entity or organization,
including an authority.
   POLE. A legally constructed pole, such as a utility, lighting or similar
pole made of wood, concrete, metal or other material, located or to be located
within the right-of-way.
   PUBLIC POWER SUPPLIER. A public power district or any other governmental
entity providing electric service. PUBLIC POWER SUPPLIER includes a municipal
electric utility or a rural public power supplier.
   RATE. A recurring charge.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below or above a public roadway, highway, street,
sidewalk, alley, dedicated utility easement or similar property, but not
including a freeway, as defined in Neb. RS 39-1302, the National System of
Interstate and Defense Highways or a private easement.
   ROUTINE MAINTENANCE. Inspections, testing or repair that maintain functional
capacity, aesthetic and structural integrity of a small wireless facility and
the associated structure, pole or tower and that does not involve impeding,
damaging or disturbing any portion of the right-of-way.
   RURAL PUBLIC POWER SUPPLIER. A public power district, a public power and
irrigation district, an electric cooperative or an electric membership
association, that does not provide electric service to any city of the
metropolitan class, city of the primary class or city of the first class.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets each of the
following conditions.
      (1)   The facilities:
         (a)   Are mounted on structures 50 feet or less in height, including
the antennas; or
         (b)   Are mounted on structures no more than 10% taller than other
adjacent structures.
      (2)   Each antenna associated with the deployment is no more than three
cubic feet in volume.
      (3)   All other equipment associated with the structure, whether ground-
mounted or pole-mounted, is no more than 28 cubic feet in volume.
      (4)   The facilities do not require antenna structure registration under
47 C.F.R. part 17, as such regulation existed on January 1, 2019.
      (5)   The facilities are not located on tribal lands, as defined in 36
C.F.R. § 800.16(x), as such regulation existed on January 1, 2019.
      (6)   The facilities do not result in human exposure to radio frequency
radiation in excess of the applicable safety standards specified in 47 C.F.R. §
1.1307(b), as such regulation existed on January 1, 2019.
   STATE. The State of Nebraska.
   STEALTH. A design that minimizes the visual impact of wireless communication
facilities by camouflaging, disguising, screening or blending them into the
surrounding environment. Examples of STEALTH design include, but are not
limited to, facilities disguised as trees (monopines), flagpoles, utility and
light poles, bell towers, clock towers, ball field lights and architecturally
screened roof-mounted antennas or flushmounted antennas that are either painted
to match or enclosed in an architecturally applicable box.
   SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE. As defined in federal regulations.
   TECHNICALLY FEASIBLE. That by virtue of engineering or spectrum usage, the
proposed placement for a small wireless facility or its design or site
location, can be implemented without a reduction in the functionality of the
small wireless facility.
   TOWER. Any structure in the right-of-way built for the sole or primary
purpose of supporting a wireless communication facility.
   TOWER HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the base of the tower
structure at grade to the highest point of the structure including the antenna.
A lightning rod, not to exceed ten feet in height, shall not be included within
TOWER HEIGHT.
   TRANSMISSION EQUIPMENT. Equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-
licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not
limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, microwave dishes, coaxial or fiber-
optic cable and backup power supplies. The term includes equipment associated
with wireless communication services, including, but not limited to, private,
broadcast and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services
and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole located in the right-of-way that is used for wireline
communications, lighting, the vertical portion of support structures for
traffic control signals or devices or a similar function, or for the
collocation of small wireless facilities and located in the right-of-way.
UTILITY POLE does not include wireless support structures, any transmission
infrastructure owned or operated by a public power supplier or rural public
power supplier and any distribution or communications infrastructure owned or
operated by a rural public power supplier
   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including
equipment associated with wireless communications and radio transceivers,
antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular power supply and small back-up
battery, regardless of technological configuration. WIRELESS FACILITY includes
small wireless facilities. WIRELESS FACILITY does not include the structure or
improvements on, under or within the equipment, which is collocated, coaxial or
fiber-optic cable that is between wireless structures or utility poles or that
is otherwise not immediately adjacent to, or directly associated with, a
particular antenna or a wireline backhaul facility.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person, including a person authorized
to provide telecommunications service in the state, when acting to build or
install wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities or
wireless support structures, but that is not a wireless services provider.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER or PROVIDER. A wireless services provider or a wireless
infrastructure provider when acting as a co-applicant for a wireless services
provider.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services using licensed or unlicensed spectrum,
including the use of Wi-Fi, whether mobile or at a fixed location, provided to
the public using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A structure such as a guyed or self-supporting
tower, billboard, building or other existing or proposed structure designed to
support or capable of supporting wireless facilities other than a structure
designed solely for the collocation of small wireless facilities. WIRELESS
SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility pole.
   WIRELINE BACKHAUL FACILITY. An above-ground or underground facility used to
transport communications services from a wireless facility to a communications
network.
(Ord. 909, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 12-103 DEPLOYMENT IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY; APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Public power supplier poles. A public power supplier shall not be
required to allow the collocation of small wireless facilities on utility poles
owned, operated or managed by a public power supplier except pursuant to a
negotiated pole attachment agreement containing reasonable and
nondiscriminatory terms and conditions, including, but not limited to,
applicable rates and the permit, operational and safety requirements of the
public power supplier. The municipality is a public power supplier.
   (B)   Annual rate for collocation on public power supplier poles. The annual
pole attachment rate for the collocation of a small wireless facility supported
by or installed on a utility pole owned, operated or managed by a public power
supplier shall be fair, reasonable, nondiscriminatory, cost-based and set by
the board of such public power supplier in accordance with Neb. RS 70-655.
   (C)   Placement. This article only applies to the deployment of small
wireless facilities in the right-of-way with the exception that the application
fees provided in the FCC’s Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order
released September 27, 2018, apply to small wireless facilities in and outside
of the right-of-way.
(Ord. 909, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 12-104 DEPLOYMENT IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY; AGREEMENT FOR USE.
   (A)   Agreement. Prior to installing in the right-of way any small wireless
facility or any pole built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting a
small wireless facility, or any tower, a person shall enter into an agreement
with the municipality expressly authorizing use of the right-of-way for the
small wireless facility, pole or tower proposed to be installed. The agreement
shall provide for the attachment to municipal poles or structures in the right-
of-way in addition to poles or structures owned by unrelated third parties;
provided, that the applicant secures the written consent of the third party for
such attachment.
   (B)   General terms.
      (1)   The term of an agreement shall be for up to (           ) years.
The agreement may be renewed for an additional term of (              ) years
subject to the mutual written agreement of the municipality and provider.
      (2)   The agreement authorizes the provider’s non-exclusive use of the
right-of-way for the sole purpose of installing, maintaining and operating
wireless communication facilities, including any pole built for the sole or
primary purpose of supporting the wireless communication facilities and any
tower, to provide the services expressly authorized in the agreement, subject
to applicable laws, this article and the terms and conditions of the agreement.
The agreement authorizes use only of the right-of-way in which the municipality
has an actual interest. It is not a warranty of title or interest in any right-
of-way and it does not confer on the provider any interest in any particular
location or to a superior or preferred location within the right-of-way.
Nothing herein shall authorize the use of the municipality’s poles, towers,
support structures or other structures outside of the right-of-way. All use of
municipal poles, towers, support structures and other structures in the right-
of-way shall require a separate attachment agreement or be specifically
provided for in the agreement and shall include the payment of fees for such
use.
      (3)   The provider shall, at its sole cost and expense, keep and maintain
its wireless communication facilities, poles, support structures and towers in
the right-of-way in a safe condition, and in good order and repair.
      (4)   In the event of an emergency regarding the provider’s small
wireless facilities, or related poles, support structures or towers, the
provider shall immediately notify the municipality of the nature of the
emergency and planned response to the emergency.
   (C)   Permit required.
      (1)   No person may construct, install or maintain in the right-of-way
any wireless facilities without first receiving a permit from the municipality.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event of an emergency, a wireless
provider or its duly authorized representative may work in the right-of-way
prior to obtaining a permit; provided, that the provider shall contact the
municipality prior to commencing the work and shall apply for a permit as soon
as reasonably possible, but not later than 24 hours after commencing the
emergency work.
      (2)   For the purpose of this subsection (C), EMERGENCY means a
circumstance in which immediate repair to damaged or malfunctioning facilities
is necessary to restore lost service or prevent immediate harm to persons or
property.
   (D)   Permit application requirements.
      (1)   The application shall be submitted by the wireless provider or its
duly authorized representative and shall contain the following:
         (a)   The applicant’s name, address, telephone number and email
address, including emergency contact information for the applicant;
         (b)   The names, addresses, telephone numbers and email addresses of
all consultants, if any, acting on behalf of the applicant or provider with
respect to the filing of the application;
         (c)   A description of the proposed work and wireless communication
facility sufficient to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this
article;
         (d)   If applicable, a copy of the authorization from the owner of the
pole, tower or support structure on or in which the wireless communication
facility will be placed or attached;
         (e)   Detailed construction drawings and photo simulations regarding
the proposed wireless communication facility;
         (f)   To the extent the proposed wireless communication facility
involves collocation on a pole, tower or support structure, a structural report
prepared by a state licensed professional engineer evidencing that the pole,
tower or support structure will support the collocation (or that the pole,
tower or support structure will be modified to meet structural requirements) in
accordance with applicable codes;
         (g)   For any new above-ground wireless communication facilities,
accurate visual depictions or representations, if not included in the
construction drawings or photo simulations; and
         (f)   Any other submission requirements per published municipal
policies or regulations.
      (2)   All applications for small wireless facility installations in the
right-of-way shall be made to the city.
   (E)   Proprietary or confidential information in application. Applications
are public records that may be made publicly available pursuant to the State
Public Records Law, being Neb. RS Chapter 84, Article 7. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the applicant may designate portions of its application materials
that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as
“proprietary” or “confidential” by clearly marking each portion of such
materials accordingly, and the municipality shall treat the information as
proprietary and confidential, subject to the State Public Records Law and the
municipality’s determination that the applicant’s request for confidential or
proprietary treatment of application materials is reasonable and in compliance
with such law. The municipality shall not be required to incur any costs to
protect the application materials from disclosure, other than the
municipality’s routine procedures for complying with the State Public Records
Law, being Neb. RS Chapter 84, Article 7.
   (F)   Routine maintenance and repair. A permit shall not be required for
routine maintenance and repair. The provider or other person performing the
routine maintenance and repair shall obtain any other permits required by
applicable laws and shall notify the municipality in writing at least 48 hours
before performing the routine maintenance and repair.
   (G)   Application fees and bonds. All applications pursuant to this article
shall be accompanied by the requisite fees required by the municipality. Unless
otherwise provided in an agreement or agreed to in writing by the municipality,
a performance or construction bond or other form of surety acceptable to the
municipality equal to at least 100% of the estimated cost of the work within
the right-of-way shall be provided before the applicant commences work.
   (H)   Effect of permit. A permit from the municipality authorizes an
applicant to undertake only the activities in the right-of-way specified in the
application and permit, and in accordance with this article and any conditions
included in the permit. A permit does not authorize attachment to or use of
existing poles, towers, support structures or other structures in the right-of-
way. A permittee or wireless provider must obtain all necessary approvals from
the owner of any pole, tower, support structure or other structure prior to any
attachment or use. A permit does not create a property right for the applicant.
The applicant shall not interfere with other uses or users of the right-of-way.
   (I)   Duration. Any permit for construction issued under this article shall
be valid for a period of one year; provided, that the one-year period may be
extended for up to an additional one year upon approval by the governing body
or its designee upon the written request of the applicant (made prior to the
end of the initial one-year period) if the failure to complete construction is
as a result of circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the applicant.
   (J)   Multiple sites. An applicant may submit not more than ten sites in a
consolidated application for small wireless facilities; provided, that the
proposed wireless communication facilities are to be deployed on the same type
of structure using similar equipment within the municipality.
(Ord. 909, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 12-105 DEPLOYMENT IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY; ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   (A)   Approval process. Small wireless facilities in the right-of-way may be
approved through administrative review if the following requirements are met:
      (1)   A complete application is submitted, all fees are paid and a permit
is obtained by the applicant or provider;
      (2)   Each new, modified or replacement pole, tower or structure
installed in the right-of-way shall not exceed the height limits of the
respective zoning district. If a height limit is exceeded, then either a
conditional use permit or special use permit is required; and
      (3)   The applicant complies with all of the other requirements of this
article.
   (B)   Design standards.
      (1)   Subject to subsection (A)(2) above, all poles and small wireless
facilities may be approved through administrative review if the following
design standards and recommended design guidelines (if adopted) are met by the
applicant:
         (a)   Height, shape, design and color for poles and related equipment;
         (b)   Number, location and styles of poles that may be installed or
used;
         (c)   Aesthetic approach for different types of poles and related
equipment;
         (d)   Construction approach per wireless communication facility,
including powering and metering;
         (e)   Structural integrity;
         (f)   Setbacks for poles and ground-mounted equipment;
         (g)   Ground-mounted equipment for small wireless facilities may be
used only to house equipment in support of the operation of the facilities;
         (h)   Lighting, marking and noise requirements;
         (i)   Fencing/landscaping/screening/signage requirements;
         (j)   Collocation analysis;
         (k)   Use of decorative poles, where necessary; and
         (l)   A written report will be prepared, signed and sealed by a state
licensed professional engineer or a qualified employee of the applicant, which
assesses whether the proposed small wireless facility demonstrates compliance
with the radio frequency (“RF”) emissions limits established by the FCC. The
qualified employee of the applicant shall submit his or her qualifications with
the report.
      (2)   The governing body may approve by resolution additional recommended
design guidelines. Further changes to those recommended design guidelines are
subject to the discretion of the municipality.
(Ord. 909, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 12-106 DEPLOYMENT IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY; RIGHT-OF-WAY CONSTRUCTION AND
INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Lighting. Towers may not be artificially lighted, unless required by
public safety, the FAA or applicable municipal regulation.
   (B)   State or federal requirements. All towers and antennas must meet
current standards and regulations of the FAA, FCC and any other agency of the
local, state or federal government with authority to regulate towers and
antennas.
   (C)   Building codes. To ensure the structural integrity of poles and
towers, the owner of a pole or tower shall ensure that the pole or tower is
maintained in compliance with industry standards and applicable state and local
building code standards.
   (D)   Public notice. For the purpose of this article, any application for a
small wireless facility or pole, variance, exception or appeal of a request for
a permit requires public notice to all adjoining property owners and all owners
of surrounding properties as may be required by the municipality.
   (E)   Equipment cabinets. The equipment cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes and zoning requirements.
   (F)   Site plan. A site plan is required. A scaled site plan shall clearly
indicate the location, type, height and width of the proposed pole, on-site
land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning, adjacent roadways, photo
simulations, a depiction of all proposed transmission equipment, proposed means
of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings or renderings of
the proposed pole and any other structures, topography, utility runs and other
information deemed necessary to assess compliance with this article.
   (G)   Inventory of existing sites. Not more than one time per year, each
applicant owning a macro cell tower shall provide to the municipality an
inventory of the wireless provider’s existing towers, antennas or sites
approved for towers or antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the
municipality or within one mile of the border thereof, including specific
information about the location and tower height. The municipality may share
such information with other applicants applying for administrative review or
other permits under this article or other organizations seeking to locate
antennas within the jurisdiction of the municipality; provided, however, that
the municipality is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing
or warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
   (H)   Color. To the extent feasible, the antennas shall be placed and
colored to blend into the architectural detail and coloring of the host
structure. Towers and antennas shall be painted a color that best allows them
to blend into the surroundings. The use of grays, blues, greens, dark bronze,
browns or other site-specific colors may be appropriate; however, each case
shall be evaluated individually.
   (I)   Signs. No facilities may bear any signage other than that required by
law or expressly permitted or required by the municipality.
   (J)   Visual impact. All small wireless facilities in residential districts,
historic and downtown districts shall be sited and designed with stealth
features to minimize adverse visual impacts on surrounding properties and the
traveling public to the greatest extent reasonably possible, consistent with
the proper functioning of the wireless communication facilities. Such wireless
communication facilities and equipment enclosures shall be integrated through
location and design to blend in with the existing characteristics of the site.
Stealth and concealment techniques must be appropriate given the proposed
location, design, visual environment and nearby uses, structures and natural
features. Such wireless communication facilities shall also be designed to
either resemble the surrounding landscape and other natural features where
located in proximity to natural surroundings, or be compatible with the built
environment, or be consistent with other uses and improvements permitted in the
relevant zone.
   (K)   Obstruction. Any new pole or support structure or equipment associated
with small wireless facilities shall not obstruct access to:
      (1)   Any existing above-ground or underground right-of-way user
facilities or public facilities;
      (2)   Any public infrastructure for traffic control, street light or
public transportation purposes, including, without limitation, any vehicular
traffic sign or signal or pedestrian traffic sign or signal;
      (3)   Any public transportation street furniture or other improvements at
any public transportation stop;
      (4)   Fire hydrants; or
      (5)   Any doors, gates or other ingress and egress points to any building
appurtenant to the right-of-way.
   (L)   Placement and notice.
      (1)   All pole-mounted transmission equipment shall be mounted as close
as technically possible to the pole so as to reduce the overall visual profile
to the extent feasible subject to applicable safety codes.
      (2)   Prior to the installation or construction of a small wireless
facility within the right-of-way or utility easement, the wireless provider
must notify all utilities located within such right-of-way or utility easement
regarding its proposed use of the right-of-way or utility easement.
   (M)   Accessory equipment. All accessory equipment located at the base of a
pole or tower shall be placed (at the provider’s choice) underground, or in an
equipment cabinet that is designed to blend in with existing surroundings,
using architecturally compatible construction and colors and be located so as
to be unobtrusive as possible consistent with the proper functioning of the
wireless communication facilities.
   (N)   Site design flexibility. Individual sites vary in the location of
adjacent buildings, existing trees, topography and other local variables. By
mandating certain design standards, there may result a project that could have
been less intrusive if the location of the various elements of the project
could have been placed in more appropriate locations within a given site.
Therefore, the wireless communication facilities and supporting equipment may
be installed so as to best camouflage, disguise or conceal them, to make the
wireless communication facilities more closely compatible with and blend into
the setting or host structure, upon approval by the municipality.
   (O)   New poles. To the extent technically feasible, new poles must be
designed to match the existing light fixtures and other poles, and they shall
serve a dual purpose (for example, a new light fixture, flag pole or banner
clips).
   (P)   Maps and as-builts. The wireless provider shall furnish to the
municipality paper and electronic maps showing the location of its equipment in
the right-of-way and as-builts after construction is completed.
(Ord. 909, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 12-107 DEPLOYMENT IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY; ATTACHMENT TO AND REPLACEMENT OF
DECORATIVE POLES.
   (A)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, an applicant
may not install a small wireless facility on a decorative pole, or replace a
decorative pole with a new decorative pole unless the municipality has
determined, in its sole discretion, that each of the following conditions has
been met:
      (1)   The application qualifies for issuance of a permit; and
      (2)   The attachments and replacement pole are in keeping with the
aesthetics of the decorative pole.
   (B)   An applicant may not install a small wireless facility on a decorative
pole, replace a decorative pole with a new decorative pole, or install new
above-ground facilities in the Historic District unless the municipality has
determined, in its sole discretion, that each of the following conditions has
also been met:
      (1)   The application qualifies for issuance of a permit; and
      (2)   The attachment and replacement pole are in keeping with the
aesthetics and character of the decorative pole and Historic District.
(Ord. 909, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 12-108 DEPLOYMENT IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY; GENERAL WORK REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General safety and compliance with laws. The permittee shall employ
due care during the installation, maintenance or any other work in the right-
of-way and shall comply with all safety and construction requirements of
applicable laws, municipal guidelines, standards and practices and any
additional commonly accepted safety standards.
   (B)   Traffic control. Unless otherwise specified in the permit, the
permittee shall erect a barrier around the perimeter of any excavation and
provide appropriate traffic control devices, signs and lights to protect, warn
and guide the public (vehicular and pedestrian) through the work zone. The
manner and use of these devices shall be as described within a traffic control
plan. The permittee shall maintain all barriers and other traffic control and
safety devices related to an open excavation until the excavation is restored
to a safe condition or as otherwise directed by the municipality.
   (C)   Non-interference. The permittee shall not interfere with any existing
facilities or structures in the right-of-way and shall locate its lines and
equipment in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual traffic patterns
(vehicular or pedestrian) or with the rights or reasonable convenience of
owners of property that abut any right-of-way.
   (D)   Utility locates. Before beginning any excavation in the right-of way,
the permittee shall comply with the State One Call Notification Act.
   (E)   Compliance with permit.
      (1)   All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance
with the permit and approved final plans and specifications. The municipality
and its representatives shall be provided access to the work site and such
further information as they may require to ensure compliance with such
requirements. All work that does not comply with the permit, the approved plans
and specifications for the work or the requirements of this article shall be
removed at the sole expense of the permittee. The municipality may stop work in
order to assure compliance with the provisions of this article.
      (2)   In addition to obtaining a permit for installation of a small
wireless facility or pole, an applicant must obtain all other required
approvals from the municipality.
(Ord. 909, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 12-109 DEPLOYMENT IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY; LOCATION OF NEW FACILITIES.
   (A)   The wireless provider shall not locate or maintain its wireless
communication facilities so as to interfere with the use of the right-of-way by
the municipality, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use
or be present in or upon the right-of-way.
   (B)   Whenever any existing electric utilities, natural gas, water or sewer
lines (or other public improvements) and communications facilities are located
underground within a right-of-way, the wireless provider with permission to
occupy the same portion of the right-of-way shall locate its wireless
communication facilities underground at its own expense where technically
feasible. The municipality may, in its sole discretion, approve above-ground
placement of equipment cabinets, pedestals and similar equipment. For
facilities or equipment such as small wireless facilities that cannot, by their
nature, operate unless located above-ground, the wireless provider and
municipality shall work to find a suitable location for such facilities or
equipment.
   (C)   In performing any work in or affecting the right-of-way, the wireless
provider and any agent or contractor of the provider shall comply with the
provisions of this article and all other applicable laws.
   (D)   The wireless provider, or its agent or contractor, shall restore,
repair and replace any portion of the right-of-way that is damaged or disturbed
by the provider’s wireless communication facilities or work in or adjacent to
the right-of-way as required in this article and all other applicable laws. If
the wireless provider fails to timely restore, repair or replace the right-of-
way as required in this subsection (D), the municipality or its contractor may
do so and the provider shall pay the municipality’s costs and expenses in
completing the restoration, repair or replacement including attorneys’ fees and
expenses.
(Ord. 909, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 12-110 DEPLOYMENT IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY; REMOVAL, RELOCATION AND ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   Within 30 days following written notice from the municipality, the
wireless provider shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
of its wireless communication facilities within the right-of-way, including
relocation of above-ground wireless communication facilities underground
(consistent with the provisions of this article), whenever the municipality has
determined, in its sole discretion, that such removal, relocation, change or
alteration is necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance or
installation of any municipal improvement, the operations of the municipality
in, under or upon the right-of-way, or otherwise, is in the public interest.
The wireless provider shall be responsible to the municipality for any damages
the municipality may incur as a result of the provider’s failure to remove or
relocate its wireless communication facilities.
   (B)   The municipality retains the right and privilege to cut or move any
wireless communication facility located within the right-of-way of the
municipality, as the municipality may determine, in its sole discretion, to be
necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall notify the wireless provider and
give the provider an opportunity to move its own facilities prior to cutting or
removing the wireless communication facilities. In all cases, the municipality
shall notify the wireless provider after cutting or removing the wireless
communication facility as promptly as reasonably possible.
   (C)   A wireless provider shall notify the municipality of abandonment of
any wireless communication facility at the time the decision to abandon is
made; however, in no case shall such notification be made later than 30 days
prior to abandonment. Following receipt of such notice, the wireless provider
shall remove its wireless communication facility at the provider’s own expense,
unless the municipality determines, in its sole discretion, that the wireless
communication facility may be abandoned in place. The wireless provider shall
remain solely responsible and liable for all of its wireless communication
facilities until they are removed from the right-of-way unless the municipality
agrees in writing to take ownership of the abandoned wireless communication
facilities.
   (D)   If the wireless provider fails to timely protect, support, temporarily
or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter any of its
wireless communication facilities or remove any of its abandoned wireless
communication facilities as required in this subsection (D), the municipality
or its contractor may do so and the provider shall pay all costs and expenses
related to such work, including any damages the municipality incurs arising
from the delay and attorneys’ fees and expenses.
(Ord. 909, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 12-111 DEPLOYMENT IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY; INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   The applicant and wireless provider shall defend, indemnify and hold
harmless the municipality, its agents, officers, officials and employees from
any and all damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, attorneys’ fees, costs and
expenses, whether for personal injury, death or property damage, arising out of
or in connection with the activities or performance of the applicant or
wireless provider. In the event the municipality becomes aware of any actions
or claims, the municipality shall promptly notify the applicant and wireless
provider and reasonably cooperate in the defense.
   (B)   It is expressly agreed that the municipality shall have the right to
approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, the legal counsel
providing the municipality’s defense, and the applicant and the wireless
provider, as applicable, shall reimburse the municipality for any costs,
expenses and attorneys’ fees directly and necessarily incurred by the
municipality in the course of the defense.
(Ord. 909, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 12-112 DEPLOYMENT IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY; INSURANCE.
   No person shall own or operate a small wireless facility within the
municipality without having secured and at all times maintained in place
insurance coverage which conforms to the following:
   (A)   Comprehensive general liability, automobile, workers’ compensation,
employers’ liability and umbrella insurance in amounts satisfactory to the
municipality;
   (B)   For a small wireless facility in the right-of-way, the commercial
general liability insurance policy shall specifically include the municipality
and its officers, officials, employees and agents as additional insureds;
   (C)   All insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or representative
of an insurance company licensed to do business in the state and with a Best’s
A+ rating; and
   (D)   Such policies shall not be modified or cancelled without 30 days prior
written notice being given to the municipality and the insurance must be
replaced by the owner of the wireless communication facility up to its original
amounts.
(Ord. 909, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 12-113 DEPLOYMENT IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY; INDEPENDENT TECHNICAL AND LEGAL
REVIEW.
   (A)   Although the municipality intends for municipal staff to review
applications to the extent feasible, the municipality may retain the services
of an independent technical consultant and attorney of its choice to provide
technical and legal evaluations of permit applications. The technical
consultant and attorney shall have recognized qualifications in the field of
small wireless facilities.
   (B)   The review may include, but is not limited to:
      (1)   The accuracy and completeness of the items submitted with the
application;
      (2)   The applicability of analysis and techniques and methodologies
proposed by the applicant;
      (3)   The validity of conclusions reached by the applicant; and
      (4)   Whether the proposed small wireless facilities comply with the
applicable approval criteria set forth in this article.
   (C)   The applicant shall pay the cost for any independent technical
consultant and attorneys’ fees through a deposit, estimated by the
municipality, within ten business days of the municipality’s request. When the
municipality requests such payment, the application shall be deemed incomplete
for purposes of application processing time lines until the deposit is
received. In the event that such costs and fees do not exceed the deposit
amount, the municipality shall refund any unused portion within 30 days after
the final permit is released or, if no final permit is released, within 30 days
after the municipality receives a written request from the applicant.
   (D)   If the costs and fees exceed the deposit amount, then the applicant
shall pay the difference to the municipality before the permit is issued. The
technical consultant and attorney shall provide an itemized description of the
services provided and related fees and costs. The fees shall be limited to a
reasonable approximation of costs and the costs shall be reasonable.
(Ord. 909, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 12-114 DEPLOYMENT IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY; SHOT CLOCKS.
   (A)   Eligible facilities requests. This subsection (A) implements § 6409(a)
of the Spectrum Act, 47 U.S.C. § 1455(a), as interpreted by the FCC in its
report and Order No. 14-153 and the FCC’s Declaratory Ruling and Third Report
and Order released September 27, 2018, which requires a state or local
government to approve any eligible facilities request for a modification of an
existing tower or base station that does not result in a substantial change to
the physical dimensions of such tower or base station. Eligible facilities
requests shall be governed by the provisions of federal law, including, but not
limited to, application review, the 60-day shot clock, tolling and the deemed
granted remedy. Eligible facilities requests are subject to administrative
review by the municipality.
   (B)   Small wireless facilities; collocation on existing structures. This
subsection (B) implements the 60-day shot clock which is contained in the FCC’s
Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order released September 27, 2018,
regarding the collocation of small wireless facilities on existing structures.
These requests shall be governed by the provisions of federal law, including,
but not limited to, application review and incompleteness, resetting of the 60-
day shot clock once upon timely notice of incompleteness, tolling and available
remedies.
   (C)   Small wireless facilities; construction (new structures). This
subsection (C) implements the 90-day shot clock which is contained in the FCC’s
Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order released September 27, 2018,
regarding the construction of small wireless facilities on a new structure.
These requests shall be governed by the provisions of federal law, including,
but not limited to, application review and incompleteness, resetting of the 90-
day shot clock once upon timely notice of incompleteness, tolling and available
remedies.
   (D)   Collocation for other than small wireless facilities. This subsection
(D) implements, in part, 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7) of the Federal Communications
Act of 1934, as amended, as interpreted by the FCC regarding collocation
applications for other than small wireless facilities, including, but not
limited to, application review, the 90-day shot clock and tolling.
   (E)   New macro cell towers. This subsection (E) implements, in part, 47
U.S.C. § 332(c)(7) of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended, as
interpreted by the FCC regarding new macro cell tower applications, including,
but not limited to, application review, the 150-day shot clock and tolling.
(Ord. 909, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 12-115 RELIEF.
   Any applicant desiring relief, waiver or exemption from any aspect or
requirement of these regulations may request such; provided, that the relief,
waiver or exemption is contained in the submitted application. The burden of
proving the need for the requested relief, waiver or exemption is solely on the
applicant. No such relief, waiver or exemption shall be approved unless the
applicant demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that, if granted the
relief, waiver or exemption, will have no significant effect on the health,
safety and welfare of the municipality, its residents and other service
providers.
(Ord. 909, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 12-116 OTHER APPROVALS.
   All other proposed installations within the right-of-way involving wireless
communication facilities (for example, where the facilities do not qualify as
small wireless facilities) shall require the issuance of a conditional use
permit or special use permit under this municipal code.
(Ord. 909, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 12-117 LAWS, RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   This article shall be subject to all applicable laws, rules and regulations
now or hereafter enacted.
(Ord. 909, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 12-118 CONFLICTS.
   In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this article, federal
law and the Act, federal law or the Act, as applicable, shall control. Any
other ordinance or part thereof in conflict with the provisions of this article
is hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
(Ord. 909, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 12-119 PENALTY.
   Violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable with
a fine of up to for each violation. Each day that a violation occurs or is
allowed to exist by the applicant or wireless provider constitutes a separate
offense.
(Ord. 909, passed 9-3-2019)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Nebraska Revised Statutes
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NEBRASKA REVISED STATUTES
Neb. RS Section Code Section
Neb. RS Section             Code Section
9-124 through 9-173         10-204
9-166                       10-201
9-201 et seq.               6-349
9-301 et seq.               6-349
9-401 et seq.               6-349
9-501 et seq.               6-349;
                            10-406
9-601 et seq.               1-628;
                            6-349
9-701                       6-349
9-801 et seq.               6-349
9-1201 et seq.              6-349
10-101 through 10-143       1-619
10-606 through 10-612       1-619
Chapter 11, article 1       3-402
11-104                      1-219
11-105                      1-219
11-109                      1-219
11-110                      1-219
11-111                      1-219
11-112                      1-219
11-113                      1-219
11-114                      1-219
11-115                      1-219
11-116                      1-219
11-117                      1-219
11-118                      1-219
12-301 through 12-403       3-801
12-401 through 12-403       2-104
12-403                      3-802
13-310                      8-204
13-312                      8-204
13-314                      8-204
13-403                      8-110
                            1-603;
                            1-606;
13-501 et seq.              1-621;
                            1-622;
                            1-626;
                            1-912
13-503                      1-628
13-504                      1-602
13-505                      1-602
13-506                      1-603
13-507                      1-603
13-508                      1-604
13-509                      1-604;
                            1-623
13-509.01                   1-604.01
13-509.02                   1-604.01
13-510                      1-613
13-511                      1-626
13-518 through 13-522       1-603; 1-604;
                            1-626
13-519                      1-504
13-609                      1-625
                            1-622;
13-801 et seq.              1-1007;
                            1-1008;
                            3-403
13-903                      1-611
13-1802                     3-403
13-2001 et seq.             1-912
13-2020                     4-306
                            1-622;
13-2501 et seq.             1-1007;
                            3-403
13-2803                     1-506
16-217                      1-106
16-318(3)                   1-204
16-714 through 16-716       1-624
17-102                      1-509
17-103                      1-103
17-104                      1-103;
                            1-104
17-105                      1-1006
17-106                      1-1006
                            1-106;
17-107                      1-201;
                            1-210;
                            3-404
17-107.01                   1-104
17-108                      1-701
                            1-101;
17-108.02                   1-107;
                            1-202;
                            1-518
17-110                      1-101
17-111                      1-101
17-112                      1-101
17-113                      1-101
                            1-101;
17-114                      4-202;
                            4-203
17-117                      1-101
17-118                      3-403
17-119                      1-216
                            1-208;
17-121                      2-102;
                            4-101;
                            4-102
                            4-202;
                            4-203;
17-123                      6-109;
                            6-211;
                            11-404
17-129                      6-326
17-138                      6-208
17-142                      10-305
17-147                      3-301
17-148                      1-102
17-149                      3-201
17-310                      1-108
17-502                      1-301
17-503                      8-103
17-503.01                   8-103
17-503.02                   8-103.01
                            1-401;
                            1-1201;
                            2-201;
                            3-1301;
                            4-701;
17-505                      5-901;
                            6-501;
                            7-601;
                            8-601;
                            9-801;
                            10-1101;
                            11-502
17-509 through 17-521       8-206
17-510                      8-311
17-511                      8-311.01
17-522                      8-204;
                            8-206
17-524                      8-204;
                            8-206
17-525                      10-407
                            6-102;
                            6-103;
17-526                      6-111—
                            6-113;
                            6-201
17-531                      3-101
17-534                      3-101
17-536                      3-113
                            3-104;
17-537                      3-106;
                            3-111;
                            3-115
17-538                      3-110
17-539                      3-114
17-540                      3-107
                            3-105;
17-542                      3-108;
                            3-109
17-547                      6-201;
                            6-204
17-548                      6-116
                            7-211;
                            7-301;
17-549                      7-401;
                            7-402;
                            7-403
                            7-205;
17-550                      7-206;
                            7-209
17-555                      4-406;
                            8-113
                            6-317;
                            6-326;
                            7-211;
17-556                      7-401;
                            7-402;
                            7-403;
                            7-502
17-557                      8-104;
                            8-202
17-557.01                   8-104
17-558                      8-303;
                            8-314
17-559                      8-303;
                            8-314
17-563                      4-404;
                            6-332
17-567                      5-716;
                            8-102
17-568                      1-212
17-568.01                   1-212;
                            1-609
17-568.02                   1-609
17-573                      6-330
17-602                      1-507
                            1-201;
17-604                      1-219;
                            1-701
17-605                      1-203
17-606                      1-204
17-606(2)                   1-204
17-607                      1-617
17-608                      1-618
17-609                      1-618
17-610                      1-207
17-611                      1-701
17-612                      1-701
                            1-404;
                            1-407;
17-613                      1-408;
                            1-409;
                            1-609
                            1-405;
17-614                      1-406;
                            1-410
17-615                      1-408
17-616                      1-406
17-701                      1-601
17-702                      1-607;
                            1-615
17-706                      1-606
17-708                      1-608
17-710                      1-614
17-711                      1-612
17-714                      1-611
17-715                      1-611
17-718                      3-301
17-720                      1-624
17-901                      3-203
                            3-203;
                            3-1003;
17-902                      3-1006;
                            3-1008;
                            3-1009;
                            3-1013
17-902 through 17-904       3-1001
17-906                      3-1001
17-909                      3-1001
17-919                      1-212
                            3-201;
17-925.01                   3-208;
                            3-209
17-925.02                   3-206
17-941                      3-803
17-948                      3-501;
                            3-601
17-948 through 17-952       3-501
                            3-501;
17-949                      3-602;
                            3-603
17-951                      3-501;
                            3-601
17-952                      3-501;
                            3-601
17-953                      8-111
17-953 et seq.              3-301
17-953.01                   8-111
17-954                      8-111
                            4-404;
17-1001                     9-301;
                            9-401
                            11-102;
17-1002                     11-201;
                            11-203;
                            11-206
17-1003                     11-102
                            7-201;
18-132                      9-301;
                            9-401;
                            11-401
18-412                      1-915
18-412.01                   1-609
18-412.02                   1-915
18-1001 through 18-1006     8-103
18-1208                     10-407
18-1214                     1-620
18-1701                     1-203
18-1706                     7-205
                            1-1201;
                            2-201;
                            3-1301;
                            4-401;
                            4-404;
                            4-701;
18-1720                     5-901;
                            6-331;
                            6-501;
                            7-601;
                            8-601;
                            9-801;
                            10-1101;
                            11-502
                            1-1201;
                            2-201;
                            3-1301;
                            4-701;
                            5-901;
18-1722                     6-501;
                            7-601;
                            8-601;
                            9-801;
                            10-1101;
                            11-502
18-1729                     5-409
18-1736                     5-410;
                            5-410.02
                            5-410;
18-1737                     5-410.01;
                            5-410.08
                            5-410;
18-1739                     5-410.01;
                            5-410.05
18-1741.01                  5-410.02;
                            5-410.09
18-1741.04                  5-410.09
18-1741.06                  5-410.09
18-1748                     8-312
18-1751                     8-107
18-1755                     8-109;
                            8-111
18-1756                     1-609
18-1801 through 18-1805     1-619
18-2101 et seq.             1-622
18-2102.01                  2-108
18-2401 et seq.             1-1007
18-2438                     1-1002
18-2501 through 18-2511     1-901
18-2501 through 18-2531     1-914
18-2512                     1-902
18-2513                     1-902
18-2514                     1-903
18-2515                     1-903
18-2516                     1-904
18-2517                     1-905
18-2518                     1-906;
                            1-912
18-2519                     1-907
18-2520                     1-908
18-2521                     1-909
18-2522                     1-910
18-2523 through 18-2526     1-911
18-2524                     1-912
18-2526                     1-912
18-2527                     1-912
18-2528                     1-912
18-2529                     1-912
18-2529 through 18-2531     1-913
18-2530                     1-912
18-2532 through 18-2535     1-914
18-2536                     1-915
18-2537                     1-915
18-2715                     2-108
                            1-601;
18-2801 et seq.             1-602;
                            1-621
18-2803 through 18-2808     1-621
18-3301                     1-212
18-3302                     11-206
18-3301 through 18-3315     11-102
18-3304                     11-203
18-3307                     11-202
18-3315                     11-501
19-613                      1-104
19-901                      9-401
19-901 et seq.              2-108
19-901 through 19-914       2-110
19-901 through 19-915       2-110
                            7-201;
19-902                      9-301;
                            11-206;
                            11-403
19-903                      2-108
19-905                      1-912
19-908 through 19-910       2-110
19-912                      2-110 ;
                            11-315
                            2-108;
                            11-101;
19-916                      11-201;
                            11-203;
                            11-206 
                            7-201;
19-922                      9-301;
                            9-401;
                            11-401
19-925 through 19-933       2-108
                            2-108;
19-926                      4-501—
                            4-504
19-927                      2-108
19-928                      2-108
19-929                      2-108
19-930 through 19-933       2-108
19-1101                     1-204
19-1102                     1-203
19-1103                     1-203;
                            1-204
19-1301                     1-615
19-1302                     1-615
19-1303                     1-615
19-1304                     1-615
19-1305                     3-101
                            3-1003;
19-1404                     3-1005—
                            3-1010
19-2101 through 19-2106     3-901
                            10-702;
19-2105                     10-705—
                            10-707
19-2106                     10-701—
                            10-707
19-2417 through 19-2419     8-206
19-2427                     8-108
19-2428 through 19-2431     8-107
19-2901 through 19-2909     1-610
19-3101                     1-105.01
19-3301 et seq.             1-622
19-3701                     1-409
19-4624 et seq.             1-912
20-203                      6-117
21-1316.01                  1-618
23-122                      1-203
23-168.04                   11-315
25-505.01                   1-517
25-1801                     3-1102
25-21,275                   3-1102
25-21,276 through 25-21,278 3-1102
Chapter 28, article 3       10-106
28-318                      6-313;
                            6-348
Chapter 28, article 4       10-106
28-411                      6-321;
                            6-324
28-412                      6-322
28-431                      6-334
                            3-809;
28-512                      3-1014;
                            6-306
28-513                      6-305
28-514                      6-306;
                            6-339
28-515.02                   3-1103
28-517                      6-307
28-519                      6-327;
                            7-103
28-520                      6-117
28-520 through 28-522       6-304
28-521                      6-117;
                            6-343
                            3-502;
28-523                      6-308;
                            6-330;
                            10-703
28-524                      6-305
28-610                      6-301
Chapter 28, article 7       10-106
28-710 et seq.              6-313
Chapter 28, article 8       10-106
28-801                      6-313
28-801 through 28-804       6-315
28-802                      6-314
28-804                      6-312
28-806                      6-348
28-808                      6-328
28-809                      6-328
28-813.02                   6-328
28-830                      6-313
28-831                      6-313
28-833                      6-349
28-903                      6-302
28-904                      6-303
28-907                      6-338;
                            7-109
                            7-102;
28-908                      7-104;
                            7-106;
                            7-110
28-920                      6-328
Chapter 28, article 10      10-106
28-1012.01                  6-202
28-1004                     6-205
28-1005                     6-206;
                            6-207
28-1008                     6-117;
                            6-208
28-1009                     6-208;
                            6-210
28-1009.01                  6-341
28-1012                     6-208;
                            6-209
28-1013                     6-208
Chapter 28, article 11      10-106
28-1101                     6-349
28-1102                     6-349
28-1103                     6-349
28-1104                     6-349
28-1107                     6-349
28-1108                     6-349
28-1109                     6-349
28-1110                     6-349
28-1111                     6-349
28-1112                     6-349
28-1113                     6-349
28-1117                     6-349
Chapter 28, article 12      10-106
28-1213                     7-402
                            7-401;
28-1229                     7-402;
                            7-403
                            7-401;
28-1233                     7-402;
                            7-403
28-1233(3)                  7-402;
                            7-403
28-1241                     7-501;
                            7-502
28-1244                     6-320;
                            7-502
28-1245                     7-502
28-1310                     6-344;
                            6-345
28-1321                     4-404
28-1322                     6-325
28-1418                     6-350
28-1419                     6-351
28-1420                     10-902
28-1420 through 28-1429     10-903
28-1421                     10-902
28-1422                     10-903
28-1423                     10-901
28-1424                     10-904
28-1425                     10-904;
                            10-907
28-1426                     10-905
28-1427                     6-351;
                            6-352
28-1428                     10-906
28-1429                     10-907
28-1465                     3-403
28-1466                     3-403
28-1472                     3-403
28-1601                     6-349
29-215                      3-403
29-422 through 29-429       6-208
29-4001 et seq.             6-402
29-4003                     6-401;
                            6-402
29-4013                     6-401;
                            6-402
31-1001 through 31-1023     11-301
                            1-501;
32-101 et seq.              1-504;
                            1-615;
                            1-622
32-109                      1-101;
                            1-107
32-110                      1-507
32-115                      1-507
32-328                      1-514
                            1-501;
32-404                      1-515;
                            1-520
32-405                      1-504;
                            1-517
32-556                      1-501
32-558                      1-510
32-559                      1-504
32-560                      1-105;
                            1-105.01
32-560 through 32-572       1-105
32-561                      1-105
32-562                      1-517
32-567 through 32-570       1-517
32-568                      1-105;
                            1-106
32-569                      1-105;
                            1-106
32-574                      1-517
32-602                      1-518
32-603                      1-101;
                            1-107
32-604                      1-101;
                            1-107
32-606                      1-521
32-607                      1-521
32-608                      1-502;
                            1-505
32-615                      1-505;
                            1-516
32-616                      1-505
32-617                      1-505
32-618                      1-505
32-621                      1-505
32-622                      1-521
32-625                      1-521
32-625(2)                   1-505
32-627                      1-505;
                            1-521
32-628                      1-505
32-628 through 32-631       1-622
32-629                      1-505;
                            1-517
32-630                      1-505;
                            1-517
32-702                      1-512
32-710                      1-505
32-802                      1-503;
                            1-622
32-918                      1-508
32-952 through 32-959       1-504
32-1122                     1-513
32-1202                     1-504
32-1301                     1-517
32-1302                     1-517
32-1303                     1-517
32-1304                     1-517
32-1305                     1-517
32-1306                     1-517
32-1307                     1-517
32-1308                     1-105;
                            1-517
32-1309                     1-517
32-1524                     1-508
32-1525                     1-508
33-139.01                   3-303
33-141                      1-204
35-102                      3-303
35-103                      3-303
35-106                      10-402;
                            10-407
35-108                      3-303
35-506                      7-212
35-508                      7-212
35-509                      7-212
35-511                      7-212
35-520                      7-109
35-530 through 35-536       7-212
37-310                      5-412
37-1254.01                  3-403
37-1254.02                  3-403
39-311                      5-701
39-1302                     12-102
39-2512                     1-216
43-245 et seq.              6-351
43-248                      6-313
44-4301 et seq.             1-1008
44-4301 through 44-4339     1-1101
44-4303                     1-1101
45-601 et seq.              1-627
45-623                      1-627
46-1212                     8-112
46-1601 through 46-1670     11-302
48-101 et seq.              3-303
48-115                      3-303
48-1503                     1-609
49-1408                     1-702
49-1425                     1-702
49-1499.04                  1-702
49-14,102                   1-702
49-14,103.01                1-702
49-14,103.02                1-702
49-14,103.03                1-702
49-14,103.05                1-702
49-14,103.06                1-702
51-201                      1-622
                            2-101;
51-201 through 51-219       3-701;
                            3-704
51-201.01                   3-705
51-205                      3-701
51-206                      3-709
51-207                      3-702
51-210                      3-701;
                            3-707
                            3-704;
51-211                      3-705;
                            3-707;
                            3-713
51-212                      3-705
51-213                      3-706
51-214                      3-710
51-215                      1-615;
                            3-711
51-216                      1-615;
                            3-708
51-501                      1-622
52-601.01 through 52-605    6-334
                            10-102;
                            10-105;
                            10-106;
                            10-109—
53-101 et seq.              10-111;
                            10-121—
                            10-123;
                            10-126;
                            10–127
53-101.01                   10-123
53-102                      10-102;
                            10-123
53-103                      6-311
53-103.01 through 53-103.51 10-101
53-103.23                   6-310
53-116.01                   10-126
53-118                      10-119
53-123.04(3)                6-309
53-123.11(1)(c)             6-309
53-123.12                   10-109
53-124                      10-109;
                            10-403
53-124(5)                   10-125
53-124.01                   10-109
53-124.12                   10-125
53-124.15                   10-103
53-124.17                   10-109
53-125                      10-106
53-129                      10-109
53-131                      10-109
53-132                      10-109;
                            10-407
53-133                      10-103;
                            10-109
                            10-109;
53-134                      10-123;
                            10-124
                            10-109;
53-134.03                   10-117;
                            10-119
53-134.04                   10-127
53-135                      10-108
53-135.01                   10-108;
                            10-109
53-148                      10-105
53-160                      10-407
53-167.02                   10-128
53-167.03                   10-128
53-168.06                   10-122
53-177                      10-103
53-177.01                   10-103
53-178                      10-104
53-179                      10-118
53-180                      10-113
53-180.01                   6-310
53-180.05                   6-310
53-183                      10-114
53-184                      10-116
53-186                      10-121
53-186(2)                   10-121
53-186.01                   10-121
53-1,101                    10-110
53-1,102                    10-111
53-1,115                    10-127
53-1,121                    10-112
54-601                      6-112
54-602                      6-112
                            6-101.01;
54-603                      6-102;
                            6-103
54-605                      6-106;
                            6-108
54-606                      6-104;
                            6-112
54-607                      6-201
54-624                      6-121
60-101 et seq.              1-620
60-169                      6-334
Chapter 60, article 3       5-301;
                            5-302
60-301 et seq.              1-620;
                            6-334
60-301                      1-620;
                            6-334
60-302                      5-301;
                            5-302
60-311                      5-302
60-321                      5-301;
                            5-302
60-323                      5-301
60-324                      5-303
60-325                      5-303
60-362                      5-301;
                            5-302
60-376                      6-334
60-3,104                    1-620
                            5-410.03;
60-3,113 et seq.            5-410.04;
                            5-410.06;
                            5-410.07; 5-410.10
60-3,113                    5-410;
                            5-410.01
60-3,113.02                 5-410.02
60-3,113.03                 5-410.02
60-3,164                    5-407
Chapter 60, article 4       5-301
60-462                      5-709
60-462 to 60-4,189          5-709
69-498.01 through 60-498.04 6-340
60-4,108 et seq.            5-301;
                            5-302
60-4,163                    3-403
60-4,164                    3-403
60-4,182                    5-707
60-4,186                    5-301
Chapter 60, article 6       5-101
60-606 through 60-676       5-101
60-638                      6-342
60-658.01                   5-213
                            5-202;
                            5-203;
                            5-206;
                            5-209—
60-680                      5-211;
                            5-401—
                            5-403;
                            5-411;
                            5-703;
                            5-716
60-681                      5-201
60-682.01                   5-213
60-683                      5-709
60-6,109                    5-206
60-6,114                    5-408
60-6,119 through 60-6,121   5-210;
                            5-211 
60-6,129                    5-212;
                            5-702
60-6,130                    5-212
60-6,131                    5-208
60-6,134.01                 5-213;
                            5-214
60-6,142                    5-501;
                            5-717
60-6,146 through 60-6,154   5-207
60-6,159                    5-205
60-6,160                    5-203
60-6,161                    5-206
60-6,161 through 60-6,163   5-204
60-6,165                    5-411
60-6,166                    7-105
60-6,167                    5-401;
                            5-402
60-6,183                    7-108
60-6,184                    7-107
60-6,186                    5-719
60-6,187                    5-719
60-6,188                    5-719
60-6,196                    3-403
60-6,196(1)                 6-340
60-6,196(1)(b)              6-340.01
60-6,196(1)(c)              6-340.01
60-6,197                    3-403
60-6,197(1)                 6-340
60-6,197(2)                 6-340
60-6,197(3)                 6-340
60-6,197(4)                 6-340
60-6,201                    6-340;
                            6-340.01
60-6,203                    6-340;
                            6-340.01
60-6,211.01                 3-403;
                            6-340.01
60-6,211.02                 3-403;
                            6-340.01
60-6,211.08                 6-309;
                            10-121
60-6,213                    5-707
60-6,215                    5-707
60-6,219                    5-304
60-6,220                    5-304
60-6,224                    5-304
60-6,235                    5-304
60-6,244                    5-304
60-6,254 through 60-6,256   5-305
60-6,267                    5-718
60-6,268                    5-718
60-6,274 to 60-6,276        5-717
60-6,278 through 60-6,282   5-602
60-6,285                    5-304
60-6,286                    5-306
60-6,305                    5-719
60-6,313                    5-719
60-6,315                    5-501
60-6,317                    5-501
60-6,318                    5-501
                            5-413;
60-1901                     5-421;
                            6-334
60-1902                     6-334
                            5-415;
60-1903                     5-416;
                            6-334
60-1903.01                  5-419;
                            6-334
60-1903.02                  5-412;
                            6-334
60-1904                     6-334
60-1905                     5-418;
                            6-334
60-1906                     5-414;
                            6-334
60-1907                     6-334
60-1908                     6-334
60-1909                     5-417;
                            6-334
60-1911                     6-334
60-2410                     6-334
66-489                      10-407
66-489.02                   10-407
66-4,140                    10-407
66-4,145                    10-407
66-4,146                    10-407
70-504                      1-915
70-624.04                   1-702
70-650.01                   1-915
70-650.02                   1-915
70-655                      12-103
70-1601                     3-1104
70-1601 through 70-1615     3-1103
70-1602                     3-1101
70-1605                     3-109;
                            3-1101
70-1606                     3-1101
70-1607                     3-1101
70-1608 through 70-1614     3-1101
70-1615                     3-1101
71-423                      10-112
71-503                      4-201
71-605                      3-805
71-1520                     2-107
71-1522 through 71-1524     2-107
71-1555 et seq.             11-403
71-1557                     11-403
71-1572 et seq.             2-106;
                            2-106.01
71-1576                     2-106.01
71-1598                     2-107
71-1637                     1-622
71-1908 et seq.             6-402
71-4401                     6-104;
                            6-114
71-4406                     6-114
71-4407                     6-122
71-4408                     6-116
71-4603                     6-334
71-5301                     9-502
71-6403                     9-301;
                            9-501
73-101 et seq.              1-609
76-704 through 76-724       3-701;
                            3-707
76-1461                     9-401
77-1343                     8-315
77-1601                     1-623
77-1606                     1-622
77-1632                     1-623
77-1633                     1-623
77-1702                     1-625
77-2201                     1-204
77-2201 through 77-2215     1-204
77-2202                     1-204
77-2209                     1-204
77-2210                     1-204
77-2212                     1-204
77-2304                     1-624
77-2337                     1-615
77-2341                     1-618 
77-2362                     1-617
77-2365.01                  1-617
77-2366                     1-617;
                            1-624
77-2386 et seq.             1-617;
                            1-624
77-2602                     10-407
77-2704.24                  10-407
77-3301 et seq.             6-402
                            1-607;
77-3442                     1-622;
                            3-501
77-3443                     1-622
77-3444                     1-504;
                            1-622
77-4008                     10-407
80-202                      1-622
80-203 through 80-205       1-915
81-145 through 81-162       1-609
81-201                      6-208
81-502                      7-201
81-506                      3-309
81-512                      7-203
81-520.01                   7-211;
                            7-213
81-829.51                   1-626
81-829.65                   3-403
81-1438                     1-210
81-1439 through 81-1446     1-210
81-1444                     3-402
81-1517                     3-902
81-1519                     3-902
81-2005                     5-708
81-3423                     8-112
81-3445                     8-112
81-3449                     8-112
81-3453                     8-112
Chapter 84, article 7       12-104
84-712 through 84-712.09    1-203;
                            1-204
84-712(2)                   1-203
84-1201 et seq.             1-203
84-1407                     1-1004
84-1408                     1-1004
                            1-1002;
84-1408 through 84-1414     1-1007;
                            1-1008
84-1409                     1-1007
84-1409(1)                  1-1005
84-1410                     1-1001
84-1411                     1-1004;
                            1-1007
84-1411(3)                  1-1008
84-1411(7)                  1-1004
84-1412                     1-1002
86-704                      10-407;
                            12-101
86-1201 et seq.             12-101;
                            12-102
                            
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Sections
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Sections
251      5-15-1979   1-104;
                     1-1003
252      5-15-1979   1-106
253      5-15-1979   1-201
                     1-501;
255      5-15-1979   1-511—
                     1-516;
257      5-15-1979   1-503
261      5-15-1979   1-609
262      5-15-1979   1-610
264      5-15-1979   2-102
265      5-15-1979   4-401
268      5-15-1979   5-708
269      5-15-1979   6-116
270      5-15-1979   6-306
275      5-15-1979   7-212
290      10-7-1980   6-335;
                     6-336
295      4-7-1981    9-601
303      6-1-1982    2-105
304      6-1-1982    2-104
306      6-1-1982    2-106
308      6-1-1982    2-102
                     10-601;
310      6-18-1982   10-602;
                     10-604—
                     10-616
315      9-7-1982    7-211
316      9-7-1982    7-213
317      9-7-1982    6-339
318      9-7-1982    6-338
320      9-7-1982    5-715
322      9-7-1982    2-107
323      9-7-1982    2-106
324      9-7-1982    1-702
331      7-5-1983    10-701—
                     10-707
332      7-5-1983    5-716
335      11-1-1983   1-702
336      11-1-1983   1-609
337      11-1-1983   11-206
338      11-1-1983   8-311
339      11-1-1983   1-212
342      11-1-1983   1-914
343      11-1-1983   3-1102
344      1-4-1984    7-211
222      6-4-1984    10-501—
                     10-512
228      4-1-1985    6-116
352      10-1-1985   1-518
353      10-1-1985   1-702
355      10-1-1985   8-312
356      10-1-1985   5-411
357      10-1-1985   1-1001;
                     1-1002
362      1-6-1987    8-202
372      3-3-1987    4-301
373      5-5-1987    10-801—
                     10-807
363      6-1-1987    10-124
365      6-1-1987    10-123
366      6-1-1987    1-407
367      6-1-1987    1-702
368      6-1-1987    3-402
369      6-1-1987    3-810
371      6-1-1987    8-314
                     9-601—
240      6-23-1987   9-615;
                     9-617—
                     9-621
                     9-604;
243      9-4-1987    9-606;
                     9-611
376      11-3-1987   1-1002
378      11-3-1987   1-1101
380      11-3-1987   8-107
381      11-3-1987   8-108
384      4-5-1988    2-109
385      6-7-1988    9-502
388      2-7-1989    4-501—
                     4-505
389      2-7-1989    5-602
390      2-7-1989    5-717
391      2-7-1989    5-411
392      2-7-1989    6-205—
                     6-207
393      2-7-1989    7-501
394      2-7-1989    7-502
279      5-15-1989   10-201
280      5-15-1989   10-403
281      5-15-1989   11-206
399      7-5-1989    9-201
403      3-6-1990    1-618
405      3-6-1990    5-212
408      3-6-1990    6-121
409      3-6-1990    7-403
411      3-6-1990    10-123
412      3-6-1990    10-124
415      10-2-1990   10-406
417      12-18-1990  3-1202
418      1-2-1991    1-107
420      1-2-1991    1-202
421      1-2-1991    5-718
422      1-2-1991    6-209;
                     6-210
423      1-2-1991    6-205—
                     6-207
427      3-25-1991   3-903
434      2-4-1992    5-412—
                     5-423
435      2-4-1992    5-301
                     5-410;
436      2-4-1992    5-410.01—
                     5-410.08
437      2-4-1992    10-116
438      2-4-1992    10-125
442      4-28-1992   4-302—
                     4-305
443      4-28-1992   7-211
444      5-11-1992   4-301
448      10-6-1992   3-118—
                     3-125
451      3-2-1993    1-1005
452      3-2-1993    1-1001
453      3-2-1993    1-912
454      3-2-1993    5-410.05
455      3-2-1993    5-410.08
456      3-2-1993    5-412—
                     5-423
462      4-5-1994    2-104
463      4-5-1994    2-109
464      5-3-1994    4-601—
                     4-603
468      5-3-1994    1-621
469      5-3-1994    1-606
470      5-3-1994    5-101
471      5-3-1994    5-207
472      5-3-1994    5-301
473      5-3-1994    5-302
474      5-3-1994    5-304
475      5-3-1994    5-501
476      5-3-1994    5-602
478      5-3-1994    5-401
479      5-3-1994    5-410
480      5-3-1994    5-410.01
481      5-3-1994    5-410.02
482      5-3-1994    5-410.06
483      5-3-1994    5-410.08
484      5-3-1994    5-410.09
485      5-3-1994    5-706;
                     6-340
486      5-3-1994    7-401;
                     7-402
487      5-3-1994    7-403
489      6-7-1994    3-1016;
                     3-1017
492      12-6-1994   6-211
494      2-7-1995    1-1001
498      2-7-1995    3-403
499      2-7-1995    6-333
500      2-7-1995    6-330
501      2-7-1995    7-213
502      2-7-1995    8-109
503      2-7-1995    8-110
504      2-7-1995    10-125
505      2-7-1995    11-403
518      2-7-1995    3-1103
507      5-2-1995    5-424
514      12-7-1995   1-601
516      12-7-1995   1-606
519      12-7-1995   3-404
520      12-7-1995   5-301
521      12-7-1995   5-302
522      12-7-1995   5-304
523      12-7-1995   5-410
524      12-7-1995   5-410.02
525      12-7-1995   5-410.03
526      12-7-1995   5-410.04
527      12-7-1995   5-410.05
528      12-7-1995   5-410.06
529      12-7-1995   5-410.07
530      12-7-1995   5-410.08
532      12-7-1995   8-111
533      12-7-1995   8-311.01
534      12-7-1995   10-122
                     3-202;
539      3-4-1997    3-204;
                     3-211—
                     3-234
541      6-3-1997    1-201
542      6-3-1997    1-1007
543      6-3-1997    1-401
544      6-3-1997    1-402
546      6-3-1997    1-407
547      6-3-1997    1-409
548      6-3-1997    1-410
553      6-3-1997    2-102
555      6-3-1997    5-410
556      6-3-1997    5-410.01
557      6-3-1997    5-410.02
558      6-3-1997    5-410.03
559      6-3-1997    5-410.04
560      6-3-1997    5-410.05
561      6-3-1997    5-410.06
562      6-3-1997    5-410.07
563      6-3-1997    5-410.09
564      6-3-1997    5-410.08
565      6-3-1997    10-125
571      2-4-1998    3-1202
573      2-4-1998    3-1202
579      8-11-1998   1-107
585      8-11-1998   1-607
586      8-11-1998   1-622
588      8-11-1998   1-617
589      8-11-1998   1-624
590      8-11-1998   1-609
591      8-11-1998   1-625
593      8-11-1998   3-201
594      8-11-1998   3-403
595      8-11-1998   5-213
596      8-11-1998   5-214
597      8-11-1998   6-101.01
598      8-11-1998   6-341
599      8-11-1998   6-338
609      2-1-1999    5-601
610      2-9-1999    4-607
611      4-13-1999   6-340.01
612      4-13-1999   5-410
614      4-13-1999   11-403
615      4-13-1999   10-202;
                     10-203
616      4-13-1999   4-306
617      4-13-1999   3-1104
626      4-11-2000   8-502—
                     8-504
629      5-10-2000   10-125
631      5-10-2000   10-107
634      5-10-2000   1-622
635      5-10-2000   1-613
637      5-10-2000   6-309
638      5-10-2000   2-106.01
639      5-10-2000   1-1008
640      5-10-2000   1-1007
                     1-120;
                     2-201;
                     3-1301;
                     4-701;
                     4-702;
642      5-10-2000   5-901;
                     6-501;
                     7-601;
                     8-601;
                     9-801;
                     10-1101;
                     11-502
644      9-12-2000   6-342
605      6-5-2001    5-410.03
646      6-5-2001    5-718
648      6-5-2001    4-103
649      6-5-2001    1-912
653      8-7-2001    3-1018
661      3-5-2002    3-103
662      4-2-2002    5-410.02
663      4-2-2002    5-410
664      4-2-2002    5-410.01
665      4-2-2002    5-410.03
666      4-2-2002    5-410.04
667      4-2-2002    5-410.05
668      4-2-2002    5-410.06
669      4-2-2002    5-410.07
670      4-2-2002    5-410.08
671      4-2-2002    8-303
672      4-2-2002    8-313;
                     8-314
673      4-2-2002    10-122
675      4-2-2002    10-125
676      4-2-2002    6-340
677      4-2-2002    6-311
678      4-2-2002    11-201
679      4-2-2002    11-101;
                     11-208
                     11-203—
680      4-2-2002    11-205;
                     11-207
                     3-703;
681      4-2-2002    3-705—
                     3-713
682      4-2-2002    10-401
684      6-4-2002    11-401;
                     11-402
                     1-213—
685      8-6-2002    1-215;
                     1-217
692      5-6-2003    1-912
696      5-6-2003    1-622
697      5-6-2003    1-617
698      5-6-2003    1-625
699      5-6-2003    3-1102
700      5-6-2003    3-1103
701      5-6-2003    5-718
702      5-6-2003    1-105.01
705      6-3-2003    9-201—
                     9-211
706      9-2-2003    3-1016;
                     3-1017
711      2-3-2004    5-407
712      2-3-2004    5-409
713      2-3-2004    2-109
715      3-2-2004    1-617
717      3-2-2004    8-103;
                     8-103.01
718      3-2-2004    3-1201
722      4-6-2004    9-209
723      4-6-2004    7-207
724      4-6-2004    7-208
721      5-4-2004    10-1001
731      12-7-2004   2-110
733      12-7-2004   8-203;
                     8-204
                     1-501;
734      12-7-2004   1-519;
                     1-520
736      12-7-2004   10-125
619      11-1-2005   4-505
622      11-1-2005   3-207;
                     3-208
742      11-1-2005   8-501
743      12-6-2005   7-205
744      12-6-2005   7-207
745      12-6-2005   7-208
746      12-6-2005   7-209
748      12-6-2005   3-403
749      2-7-2006    6-401—
                     6-403
750      6-6-2006    2-105
751      6-6-2006    3-126
752      6-6-2006    5-409.01
                     6-401;
753      7-11-2006   6-402;
                     6-403
756      9-5-2006    2-105
761      3-6-2007    3-1016;
                     3-1017
767      5-1-2007    6-318
763      6-5-2007    3-1016;
                     3-1017
765      6-5-2007    2-109
766      6-5-2007    10-602
768      8-7-2007    3-1105
769      8-7-2007    2-105
771      11-6-2007   4-307
772      12-4-2007   10-602
774      1-8-2008    3-216
773      2-5-2008    3-105
775      2-5-2008    5-407
776      4-1-2008    3-1105
777      4-1-2008    3-1006
779      5-6-2008    6-342
781      8-12-2008   4-505
782      8-12-2008   11-401
789      4-7-2009    3-1016;
                     3-1017
                     4-401—
794      12-1-2009   4-403;
                     4-405
796      5-4-2010    4-505
797      10-5-2010   10-602
802      6-7-2011    6-117—
                     6-120
803      7-5-2011    3-1106
804      8-2-2011    1-108
808      10-4-2011   3-207;
                     3-208
811      1-3-2012    10-113
813      1-3-2012    1-201
815      1-3-2012    3-403
816      1-3-2012    1-521
821      1-3-2012    1-609
824      1-3-2012    6-309
825      1-3-2012    7-213
828      8-7-2012    5-801—
                     5-812
833      2-5-2013    6-211
872      11-3-2015   4-505
878      3-1-2016    6-342
893      1-10-2017   2-101
894      2-7-2017    6-109
895      2-7-2017    6-101
897      8-1-2017    11-404
899      10-3-2017   3-1004
900      1-9-2018    9-501
901      1-9-2018    2-103
903      8-7-2018    3-108
904      8-7-2018    3-1015
906      11-6-2018   6-337
909      9-3-2019    12-101—
                     12-119
                     3-107;
911      11-5-2019   3-108;
                     3-109
962      6-8-2021    3-904
–      5-17-2022   4-505
964      6-7-2022    11-301—
                     11-318
965      6-7-2022    2-111
968      10-4-2022   9-212—
                     9-222
970      10-4-2022   9-701—
                     9-709
971      2-7-2023    3-1107
972      9-6-2023    6-343—
                     6-347
974      - -2024     11-401
976      8-6-2024    3-207;
                     3-208
978      10-1-2024   6-337
979      10-1-2024   Adopting Ordinance
986      11-4-2025   11-301—
                     11-318
                    
 
