GERING, NEBRASKA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Contains 2025 S-1 Supplement, current through:
Ordinance 2172, passed - -2025
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
ROSTER OF OFFICIALS
City Council
Kent Ewing, Mayor
Susan Wiedeman, City Councilmember, Ward I
Rebecca Shields, Councilmember, Ward I
Pam O’Neal, Councilmember, Ward II
Michael Gillen, Councilmember, Ward II
Julie Morrison, Councilmember, Ward III
Ben Backus, Councilmember, Ward III
Cody Bohl, Councilmember, Ward IV
Troy Cowan, Councilmember, Ward IV
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ADOPTING ORDINANCE NO. 2131
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF GERING, REVISING,
AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH
CODE OF ORDINANCES.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the political
subdivision are in need of revision and updating for the preservation of the
public safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper
conduct of its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Nebraska empower and
authorize the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and
WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of the Political Subdivision has authorized
a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the
Political Subdivision of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinance in book form.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE POLITICAL
SUBDIVISION OF GERING, NEBRASKA:
Section 1.   The general ordinances of the Political Subdivision as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Gering, Nebraska."
Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following Titles:
GERING, NEBRASKA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
               Chapter
   TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
               10.   General Provisions
   TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
               30.   Elected Officials; Ordinances
               31.   Appointed City Officials
               32.   Organizations
               33.   General Municipal Policies
               34.   Elections
               35.   Finance and Revenue
   TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
               50.   Utilities, Generally
               51.   Water
               52.   Sewer
               53.   Solid Waste
               54.   Electric
   TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
               70.   General Provisions
               71.   Traffic Regulations
               72.   Parking Regulations
               73.   Recreational Vehicles
               74.   Traffic Schedules
               75.   Parking Schedules
               76.   Emergency Snow Removal
   TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
               90.   Leisure and Recreation
               91.   Cemetery and Memorials
               92.   Fire Regulations
               93.   Junked and Abandoned Motor Vehicles
               94.   Health and Safety; Nuisances
               95.   Streets, Sidewalks, and Public Way
               96.   Animals
               97.   Trees
               98.   Alarm Systems
   TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
               110.   Business Licensing
               111.   Alcoholic Beverages
               112.   Hotels
               113.   Special Events
               114.   Peddlers, Itinerant Merchants, and Solicitors
               115.   Junk Shops, Pawnbrokers, and Secondhand Stores
               116.   Plumbers
               117.   Cable Television Franchises
               118.   Contractor's License
   TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
               130.   Offenses Against Public Order, Justice, and
Administration
               131.   Offenses Against Persons, Including Minors
               132.   Offenses Against Property
               133.   Offenses Against Health and Safety
               134.   Offenses Against Morals and Decency
   TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
               150.   Building Regulations
               151.   Mobile Homes
               152.   Flood Damage Prevention
               153.   Subdivision Regulations
               154.   Comprehensive Plan
               155.   Zoning Regulations
Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the Political
Subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of
Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.
Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.    
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Legislative Authority of the Political Subdivision on
this day of September, 2023.
                                       _______________________________
                                       Kent E. Ewing, Mayor
ATTEST:
_______________________________
Kathleen J. Welfl, City Clerk
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   WARDS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.17   Local changes to this code of ordinances
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances shall be designated as the Gering Code of
Ordinances and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Gering,
Nebraska.
      CITY COUNCIL or GOVERNING BODY. The legislative body of the city.
      CODE, THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as modified
by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
      COUNTY. The Scotts Bluff County, Nebraska.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR
and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Includes bodies politic and corporate, societies, communities,
the public generally, individuals, partnerships, limited liability companies,
joint-stock companies, and associations.
(Neb. RS 49-801(16))
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Nebraska.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the following
rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the Mayor
and City Council or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever a section refers to another section hereof, that reference shall
extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised,
recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is materially altered by
the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this city for the transaction of all city business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code contains all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to
the subjects enumerated and embraced in this code. All prior ordinances
pertaining to the subjects treated by this code are repealed, except that
nothing shall affect any rights acquired under, actions involving, or fines,
penalties, forfeitures, or liabilities incurred pursuant to those ordinances
prior to repeal.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code, including ordinances
specified in this section, shall remain in full force and effect unless
repealed expressly or by necessary implication:
   (A)   Vacating or setting the boundaries of streets, alleys, or other public
places;
   (B)   Annexing or detaching territory;
   (C)   Granting or accepting easements, plats, or dedication of land to
public use;
   (D)   Providing for the acquisition or conveyance of real or personal
property;
   (E)   Authorizing or directing public improvements to be made;
   (F)   Levying taxes or special assessments;
   (G)   Appropriating money;
   (H)   Granting franchises or special licenses; or
   (I)   Providing for the issuance of bonds or other instruments of
indebtedness.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance is repealed or modified
by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed
or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the ordinance
repealing or modifying it to give effect thereto.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, liability, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to
its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be
prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued
in force, unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
is itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former
ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
Statutory reference:
   Requirements for amendments and revisions, see Neb. RS 17-614
§ 10.16 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the text of
the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example: (Neb. RS 18-
132)
   (B)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
      § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
      copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
         Inspection of public records, see Neb. RS 84-712 et seq.
§ 10.17 LOCAL CHANGES TO THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.
   Any provision of this code of ordinances may be repealed, modified or
superseded by an ordinance passed by the City Council.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this code, unless
otherwise specifically provided herein, shall be deemed guilty of an offense
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not exceeding $1,000. A
new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of failure
to comply with the provisions of this code.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in § 94.30, the city may
proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in the manner
provided by law.
      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists,
the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.
   (C)   Classification of penalties, costs, sentences, and where served.
      (1)   For the purposes of this code and any subsequent amendments
thereto, violations are divided into the following classes which are
distinguished from one another by the following penalties which are authorized
upon conviction:
         (a)   Class I violation:
            1.   Maximum: seven days imprisonment or $1,000 dollar fine, or
both; and
            2.   Minimum: none.
         (b)   Class II violation:
            1.   Maximum: $1,000 dollar fine; and
            2.   Minimum: none.
      (2)   In all cases, the convicted defendant shall pay the costs of
prosecution.
      (3)   All sentences of imprisonment shall be served in the County
Detention Center.
      (4)   Any violation defined anywhere in this code without specification
of its class shall be punished as provided in that portion of this code which
defines the violation(s). If no specific penalty is provided, the violation is
a Class II violation.
(Prior Code, § 10.99) (Ord. 1786, passed 12-13-2004; Ord. 1901, passed 9-28-
2009; Ord. 2069, passed 11-26-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to abate nuisances, see Neb. RS 18-1720 and 18-1722
   Authority to impose fines and penalties, see Neb. RS 16-246
CHAPTER 11: WARDS
Section
   
11.01   Division into wards
§ 11.01 DIVISION INTO WARDS.
   The territory now embraced in the city shall stand divided into four wards
as follows:
   (A)   Ward I. All that portion of the city lying within the following
described boundary, to-wit; Beginning at the intersection of the center line of
Country Club Road and the centerline of the Union Pacific Railroad Company
(U.P.R.R.C.) property crossing Country Club Road; thence west along the center
line of Country Club Road to the intersection with the west right-of-way of
Five Rocks Road; thence north along said west right-of-way line to the
northeast corner of Pappas Northwest Addition; thence west along the north side
of Pappas Northwest Addition; thence continuing west along north side of Tract
6, Steele Tracts; thence continuing west along an extension of said north side
of Tract 5, Steele Tracts, to its intersection with the east right-of-way line
of the Gering Canal; thence northwest along east right-of-way line of the
Gering Canal to the intersection with the extension of the northwest corner of
Monument Shadows Golf course; thence south along west side of said golf course
to the northwest corner of Monument Shadows Subdivision; thence continuing
south along west side of said subdivision to the intersection of said west line
and the south right-of-way line of Country Club Road; thence east along said
south right-of-way line to the northwest corner of Monument Heights
Subdivision; thence south along the west line of said subdivision to the
southwest corner of said subdivision; thence east along the south line of said
subdivision to the intersection with the east right-of-way line of the Gering/
Ft. Laramie Irrigation Lateral; thence south along the east right-of-way line
of the Gering/Ft. Laramie Irrigation Lateral to the intersection with the north
line of southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 34, Township 22
North, Range 55 West; thence west on north line of said southeast quarter to
the intersection with the west right-of-way line of the Gering/Ft. Laramie
Irrigation Lateral; thence south along west right-of-way line of the Gering/Ft.
Laramie Irrigation Lateral to the intersection with the south line of said
Section 34; thence east along said south line to the south quarter corner of
said section; thence south along the center line of Section 3, Township 21
North, Range 55 West, said line also being the west line of Government Lot 2,
to the southwest corner of Government Lot 2; thence east to the southeast
corner of said Government Lot; thence south to a point that intersects the
centerline of the Gering Irrigation District Lateral No. 6.2; thence
southwesterly along centerline of said lateral to the northwest corner of The
Meadows Subdivision; thence south along the west line of said subdivision to
the intersection of said west line and the center line of “M” Street; thence
east along said street center line to the intersection with the extension of
the east line of Johannes Park; thence northeast along the east property line
of Johannes Park to a point which intersects with the center line of Five Rocks
Road: thence north along said center line to the intersection with the westerly
extension of the center line of the alley between Lots 19 and 14, Block 1,
Brandt Subdivision; thence; thence east along said alley center line to the
intersection with the center line of 21st Street; thence south along 21st
Street center line to the intersection with the center line of “S” Street;
thence east along “S” Street center line to the intersection with the center
line of 17th Street: thence north along the 17th Street center line to the
intersection with the center line of “U” Street: thence west along “U” Street
center line to the intersection with 17th Street; thence north along the 17th
Street center line to the intersection with Gentry Boulevard; thence east along
Gentry Boulevard to the intersection of the Pacific Boulevard centerline;
thence south along said center line to the intersection with the center line of
the alley between Lot 1, Block 6 Northfield First Addition and Lot 18, Block 7,
Northfield First Addition, thence east along center line of said alley to the
intersection with the centerline of 13th Street, thence north along said center
line to the intersection with the north line of Ewing Second Addition; thence
east along Ewing Second Addition north line easterly extension to its
intersection with U.P.P.R.C. property center line; thence northwest along said
railroad property center line to the intersection of said railroad property
center line with Country Club Road center line, the point of beginning.
   (B)   Ward II. All that portion of the city lying within the following
described boundary, to-wit: Beginning at the intersection of the center lines
of “S” Street and 7th Street; thence west along “S” Street center line to the
intersection with 21st Street center line; thence north to the easterly
extension of the alley center line between Lots 19 and 14, Block 1, Brandt
Subdivision; thence west along said alley center line to the intersection with
the center line of Five Rocks Road; thence south along said highway center line
to the intersection of said highway center line with the easterly center line
extension of “N” Street; thence west on said extension line to the intersection
with the east property line of Johannes Park; thence southwest along the east
property line of Johannes park to the intersection of the southerly extension
of the east property line with the centerline of “M” Street; thence west along
said center line to the intersection with the northerly extension of the west
property line of Block 2, Heritage Estates Subdivision; thence south along said
west property line to the southwest corner of said subdivision; thence east
along the south side of said subdivision; thence continuing east along the
south side of Block 1, Heritage Estates Subdivision to the southeast corner of
said Block 1; thence north along the east property line of said Block 1 to the
southwest corner of Block 1, Rejoice Lutheran Church Addition; thence southeast
along the south property line to the southeast corner of said addition; thence
east to the intersection with the center line of Five Rocks Road; thence south
along said road center line to the intersection of said highway center line
with the extension of the northwest corner of Westwood Estates Subdivision;
thence east along the north side of said subdivision to the northeast corner of
said subdivision; thence north along west side of Pioneer Plaza Subdivision to
the intersection with the center line of Yucca Drive; thence east along said
street center line to the intersection with the center line of 17th Street;
thence north to the intersection of 17th Street center line and “K” Street
center line; thence southeast and east along “K” Street center line to the
intersection with 7th Street center line; thence north along 7th Street center
line to the intersection with “S” Street center line, the point of beginning.
   (C)   Ward III. All that portion of the city lying within the following
described boundary, to-wit; Beginning at the intersection of the center line of
Country Club Road and the centerline of the Union Pacific Railroad Company
(U.P.R.R.C.) property crossing Country Club Road; thence southeast along said
railroad property center line to the intersection with easterly extension of
the north line of Ewing Second Addition; thence west along Ewing Second
Addition north line with an easterly extension to the intersection of the
center line of 13th Street; thence south along said center line to the
intersection with the center line of the alley between Lot 1, Block 6
Northfield First Addition and Lot 18, Block 7, Northfield First Addition,
thence west along said center line to the intersection with the center line of
Pacific Boulevard; thence north along said center line to the intersection of
the street center lines of Pacific Boulevard and Gentry Boulevard; thence west
on center line of Gentry Boulevard to the intersection with the center line of
17th Street; thence south on said street center line to the intersection with
the center line of “U” Street; thence east on said street center line to the
intersection with the center line of 17th Street; thence south on said street
center line to the intersection with the center line of “S” Street; thence east
along said street center line to the intersection with the center line of 7th
Street; thence south along 7th Street center line to the intersection with the
center line of “D” Street; thence east along “D” Street center line to the
intersection with northerly extension of the west property line of Block 1,
Gering Third Industrial Tract; thence south along the west side of Gering Third
Industrial Tract to the intersection with the north right-of-way line of the
Heartland Expressway (Highway 71 Bypass); thence northeast along said north
right-of-way line to the intersection with the east right-of-way line of
Lockwood Road; thence north along said east right-of-way line to the Northwest
corner of Lot 1a, Block 1, Treasure Valley Estates Subdivision; thence east on
north side of said subdivision to the northeast corner; thence south along the
east side of said subdivision and continuing south along Mckeemans Addition
east line to the southwest corner of Lot 5, Block 1, Rusure Subdivision; thence
east along the south line of Lot 5, Block 1, Rusure Subdivision to the
southeast corner of said property; thence north along the east line of Lot 5,
Block 1, R.U. Sure Subdivision to the southeast corner of Block 1, Silverstone
Addition, continuing north along the east line of Block 1, Silverstone
Addition, to its northeasterly extension intersection from the northeast corner
of said property with the south right-of-way of the Union Pacific Railroad
Company (U.P.R.R.C.) property; thence northwest along south right-of-way line
of U.P.R.R.C. property to its intersection with the northerly extension of the
east line of Block 4, Shadow Lane Estates; thence south along said extension to
the northeast corner of Block 4, Shadow Lane Estates; thence west along north
line of Block 4, Shadow Lane Estates, for a distance of 278.39 feet west;
thence north along Block 4, Shadow Lane Estates boundary line a distance of 30
feet; thence east along the south line of the northwest stormwater retention
pond property to the southeast corner of said property; thence northeast along
the east line of the northwest stormwater retention pond property to the
northeast corner of said property; thence northwest along the north line of
northwest stormwater retention pond property (also U.P.R.R.C. property south
right-of-way line) to the southerly extended east line of First Addition to
North Gering intersection with the U.P.R.R.C. south right-of-way line; thence
north along said extension to the southeast corner of Lot 4, Block 7, First
Addition to North Gering; thence southeast along U.P.R.R.C. north right-of-way
line to its intersection with the south line property corner of Block 6,
Pioneer Trails Industrial Park Subdivision; thence northeast, southeast and
east along the south side of said subdivision to the intersection with the east
right-of-way line of Lockwood Road (21st Avenue); thence north along said east
right-of-way line to a point intersecting with the easterly extension of the
southeast corner of Government Lot 5, Section 36, Township 22 North, Range 55
West; thence west on said easterly extension and along the south side of
Government Lot 5 a distance of 316 feet; thence north parallel to the right of
way of Lockwood Road to a point intersecting with the meander line of the North
Platte River; thence northwest along said meander line to its intersection with
the northerly extension of the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of
Section 36, Township 22 North, Range 55 West; thence south on said northerly
extension and continuing south along the west line of the northeast and the
southeast quarters of said section to the intersection with the north right-of-
way line of “U” Street; thence west along said street right-of-way to the
intersection with the east property line of the Western Sugar Manufacturing
Company; thence northwest along said east property line the northeast corner of
said property; thence west along north line of said property to an intersection
with the corner on the north line; thence north and west to an intersection
with the southeast corner of the Scotts Bluff County Detention Center Addition
(S.B.C.D.C.A.); thence north along S.B.C.D.C.A. east line to property northeast
corner; thence west along S.B.C.D.C.A. north line to property northwest corner;
thence south along S.B.C.D.C.A. west line to property corner; thence west along
S.B.C.D.C.A. property line to its intersection with the center line of 7th
Street; thence north along 7th Street center line to intersection of northerly
extended center line with the property line of Block 10B, Midtown Development
Addition Phase I; thence southeast to a property corner of Block 10B, Midtown
Development Addition Phase I, continuing around said property boundary to its
intersection with the northerly extension of 7th Street center line; thence
north on 7th Street center line northerly extension to its intersection with
the south property line of Block 9, Midtown Development Addition Phase I;
thence northeast along south line of Block 9, Midtown Development Addition
Phase I, continuing around said property boundary to its intersection with the
northerly extension of 7th Street center line; thence north on 7th Street
center line northerly extension to its intersection with the meander line of
the North Platte River; thence northwest along said meander line to its
intersection with the west right-of-way line of 10th Street; thence south along
said right-of-way line to the intersection with Central Irrigation District
Canal south right-of-way line; thence northwest along Central Irrigation
District Canal south right-of-way line (also Red Barn Subdivision north
property line) to the northwest corner of Red Barn Subdivision; thence south
along Red Barn Subdivision west line to its southerly extension intersection
with the center line of Country Club Road; thence west along Country Club Road
center line to its intersection with the center line of the U.P.R.R.C. property
center line, the point of beginning.
Excepting: A tract of land as described in Instrument Number 2020-4303 as
recorder with the Scotts Bluff County Register of Deeds.
   (D)   Ward IV. All that portion of the city lying, with the following
described boundary, to wit: Beginning at the intersection of the center lines
of “K” Street and 7th Street; thence west along “K” Street center line to its
intersection with the center line of 17th Street; thence south along 17th
Street center line to its intersection with the center line of Yucca Street;
thence west along Yucca Street center line to its intersection with the west
property line of Pioneer Plaza Subdivision; thence south along Pioneer Plaza
west property line to the northeast corner of Westwood Estates; thence west
along the north line of Westwood Estates property to the intersection of the
easterly extension of the north line and the centerline of Five Rocks Road;
thence north along said center line to the intersection with the easterly
extension of the southeast corner of Block 1, Rejoice Lutheran Church Addition;
thence northwest along the south line of said Block 1, Rejoice Lutheran Church
Addition to the southwest corner of said Block 1, Rejoice Lutheran Church
Addition: thence south along the east property line of Block 1, Heritage
Estates Subdivision to the southeast corner of said property; thence west along
the south line of said Block 1, Heritage Estates Subdivision and continuing
west to the intersection with the west line of the southeast quarter of Section
3, Township 21 North, Range 55 West; thence north along said west line of
Section 3, Township 21 North, Range 55 West, to the intersection with the north
right-of-way line of “M” Street; thence west along the said north right-of-way
line 33 feet; thence south parallel to the west line of Section 3, Township 21
North, Range 55 West, to the intersection with the north property line of West
Lawn Cemetery; thence west on said north line to the intersection of the
westerly extension of the northwest corner of said property and the east right-
of-way line of the Gering/Ft. Laramie Irrigation Lateral; thence south along
said east right-of-way line to the intersection with south line of the
southwest quarter of Section 3, Township 21 North, Range 55 West; thence east
along said south line of the southwest quarter to the northwest corner of Fox
Hill Subdivision; thence south along the west line of said subdivision to the
southwest corner of Fox Hill Subdivision; thence east along the easterly
extension of the south line of said subdivision to the intersection with the
east right-of-way line of Five Rocks Road; thence south on said east right-of-
way line to the southwest corner of Calderwood Addition property; thence east
along Calderwood Addition south property line to the southeast corner of said
property, also being the west right-of-way line of Kimball Avenue; thence
northeast along said west right-of-way line to its intersection with the
easterly extension of the alley center line between Aspen Street and Birch
Street; thence east to the intersection between the said alley center line
easterly extension and the west right-of-way line of Cox Drive; thence south
along Cox Drive west right-of-way line to its intersection with the north
property line of Block 1, Wiley Addition; thence west along Block 1, Wiley
Addition north property line to its northwest corner, continuing around said
property south, east and north to its northeast corner; thence east along the
south property line of Kimberly Park Subdivision to its southeast corner;
thence north along east line of Kimberly Park Subdivision to property corner;
thence east on south property line of said subdivision to the easterly
extension with the center line of 14th Street; thence north along 14th Street
center line to its intersection with the westerly extension of the south line
of Greenwalt First Addition; thence east along the south property line of
Greenwalt First Addition to the southeast corner, continuing around said
property to the north, east and back north to the intersection of the east
property line and the south right-of-way line of “D” Street; thence east along
said south right-of-way line to its intersection with the west right-of-way
line of 7th Street; thence south along said west right-of-way line to the north
right-of-way line of the Heartland Expressway (Highway 71 Bypass); thence
northeast along said north right-of-way line to the center line of Rundell
Road; thence north along the center line of Rundell Road to a southerly
extension point of the west line of Block 1, Central Stores, and continuing
north to the centerline of “D” Street; thence west on said street center line
to the intersection with the center line of 7th Street; thence north along 7th
Street center line to its intersection with the center line of “K” Street,
point of beginning.
Excepting: A tract of land described in Instrument Number 2001-4368 as recorder
with the Scotts Bluff County Register of Deeds and also excepting Lot 8b, Block
1, Walrath Subdivision as platted and recorded as Instrument Number 2004-6484
with the Scotts Bluff County Register of Deeds.
(Ord. 2159, passed - -2025)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   ELECTED OFFICIALS; ORDINANCES
      31.    APPOINTED CITY OFFICIALS
      
32.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   GENERAL MUNICIPAL POLICIES
      
34.   ELECTIONS
      
35.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
CHAPTER 30: ELECTED OFFICIALS; ORDINANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Vacancies
Mayor
   
30.15   Election
   
30.16   Duties
City Council
   
30.30   Number and qualifications
   
30.31   Change in office
   
30.32   Council organization
   
30.33   President; acting president
   
30.34   Standing committees
Ordinances, Resolutions, and Motions
   
30.45   Grant of power
   
30.46   Introduction of ordinances
   
30.47   Procedure for resolutions and motions
   
30.48   Ordinances; style, title
   
30.49   Reading and passage of ordinances, resolutions, orders, by-laws
   
30.50   Publication or posting
   
30.51   Certificate of publication or posting
   
30.52   Effective date; emergency ordinances
   
30.53   Amendments and revisions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 VACANCIES.
   (A)   Any vacancy on the Council resulting from causes other than expiration
of the term shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor with the consent of the
City Council to hold office for the remainder of the term. The appointment
guidelines shall be established by resolution.
   (B)   In addition to the events listed in Neb. RS 32-560 and any other
reasons for a vacancy provided by law, after notice and a hearing, a vacancy on
the City Council shall exist if a member is absent from more than five
consecutive regular meetings of the Council unless the absences are excused by
a majority vote of the remaining members.
(Neb. RS 19-3101)
   (C)   The City Council shall take a vote on whether to excuse a member’s
absence from a meeting upon either a written request from the member submitted
to the City Clerk or a motion of any other Councilmember.
   (D)   If a Councilmember has been absent from six consecutive regular
meetings and none of the absences have been excused by a majority vote of the
remaining members, the City Clerk shall include this as an item on the agenda
for the next regular meeting. At that meeting, the Council shall set a date for
a hearing and direct the City Clerk to give the member notice of the hearing by
personal service or first-class mail to the member’s last known address.
   (E)   (1)   At the hearing, the Councilmember shall have the right to
present information on why one or more of the absences should be excused.
      (2)   If the Council does not excuse one or more of the member’s absences
by a majority vote at the conclusion of the hearing, there shall be a vacancy
on the Council.
(Prior Code, § 30.01) (Ord. 1850, passed 6-11-2007)
MAYOR
§ 30.15 ELECTION.
   The Mayor shall be elected for a term of four years at the general election
held in the city and shall serve until his or her successor is elected and
qualified.
(Prior Code, § 30.10) (Ord. 682, passed 2-23-1970)
§ 30.16 DUTIES.
   (A)   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council and shall
have the right to vote when his or her vote will provide the additional vote
required to create a number of votes equal to a majority of the number of
members elected to the City Council. He or she shall have the superintending
control of all the officers and affairs of the city and shall take care that
the ordinances of the city and the provisions of the law relating to the cities
of the first class are complied with. He or she may administer oaths and shall
sign the commissions and appointments of all the officers appointed in the
city.
   (B)   (1)   The Mayor shall have the power to approve or veto any ordinance
passed by the City Council, and to approve or veto any order, by-law,
resolution, award of or vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance of
any claim. If the Mayor approves the ordinance, order, by-law, resolution,
contract, or claim, he or she shall sign it, and it shall become effective. If
the Mayor vetoes the ordinance, order, by-law, resolution, contract, or any
item or items of appropriations or claims, he or she shall return it to the
City Council stating that the measure is vetoed. The Mayor may issue the veto
at the meeting at which the measure passed or within seven calendar days after
the meeting. If the Mayor issues the veto after the meeting, the Mayor shall
notify the City Clerk of the veto in writing. The City Clerk shall notify the
City Council in writing of the Mayor’s veto. Any ordinance, order, by-law,
resolution, award, or vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance of any
claim vetoed by the Mayor, may be passed over his or her veto by a vote of two-
thirds of all the members elected to the Council, notwithstanding his or her
veto.
      (2)   If the Mayor neglects or refuses to sign any ordinance, order, by-
law, resolution, award of or vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance
of any claim, but fails to veto the measure within the time required by this
section, the measure shall become effective without his or her signature.
      (3)   The Mayor may veto any item or items of any appropriation bill or
any claims bills, and approve the remainder thereof, and the item or items so
vetoed may be passed by the City Council over the veto as in other cases.
   (C)   The Mayor shall, from time to time, communicate to the City Council
such information and recommend such measures as in his or her opinion may tend
to the improvement of the finances of the city, the police, the health,
comfort, and general prosperity of the city, and may have such jurisdiction as
may be invested in him or her by ordinances over all places within the
extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of the city, for the enforcement of health
or quarantine ordinances and the regulation thereof.
   (D)   The Mayor of a city of the first class shall have power after
conviction to remit fines and forfeitures, and to grant reprieves and pardons
for all offenses arising under the ordinances of the city.
   (E)   The Mayor or City Council shall have power, when he, she, or it deems
it necessary, to require any officer of the city to exhibit his or her accounts
to other papers and make reports to the City Council, in writing, touching any
subject or matter it may require pertaining to the office.
(Prior Code, § 30.11) (Ord. 1951, passed 2-29-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Mayor; legislative recommendations; jurisdiction, see Neb. RS 16-314
   Mayor; pardons; remission of fines, see Neb. RS 16-316
   Mayor; powers and duties, see Neb. RS 16-312
   Mayor; veto power; passage over veto, see Neb. RS 16-313
   Officers; reports required, see Neb. RS 16-327
CITY COUNCIL
§ 30.30 NUMBER AND QUALIFICATIONS.
   Each ward of the city shall be entitled to two Councilmembers, who shall be
registered voters of the city. Each Councilmember at the time of his or her
election shall be an actual resident of the ward from which he or she is
elected.
(Prior Code, § 30.20)
Statutory reference:
   City council; meetings, regular and special; quorum, see Neb. RS 16-401
§ 30.31 CHANGE IN OFFICE.
   The City Council shall meet on the first regular meeting of the Council in
December of each even-numbered year, and the outgoing officers and the outgoing
members of the City Council shall present their reports. The outgoing members
of the Council shall surrender their offices to the incoming members. Each
outgoing officer shall thereupon surrender to his or her successor in office
all property, records, papers, and moneys belonging to the same. After such
surrender, the outgoing Council shall adjourn sine die. The newly elected
Council shall then convene and proceed to organize itself for the ensuing year.
(Prior Code, § 30.21) (Ord. 1489, passed 12-14-1992)
§ 30.32 COUNCIL ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   City Councilmembers shall take office and commence their duties on the
first regular meeting of the Council in December following their election.
   (B)   The newly elected Council shall convene at the regular place of
meeting in the city on the first regular meeting of the Council in December of
each even-numbered year in which a city election is held immediately after the
prior Council adjourns and proceed to organize themselves for the ensuing year.
The Mayor elected for the new municipal term shall call the meeting to order.
The Council shall then proceed to examine the credentials of its members and
other elective officers of the city to see that each has been duly and properly
elected, and to see that such oaths and bonds have been given as are required.
   (C)   After ascertaining that all members are duly qualified, the Council
shall then elect one of its own body who shall be styled as President of the
Council. The Mayor shall then nominate his or her candidates for appointive
offices. He or she shall then proceed with the regular order of business.
   (D)   (1)   It is hereby made the duty of each and every member of the
Council, or his or her successor in office, and to each officer elected to any
office, to qualify prior to the first regular meeting in December following his
or her election. All appointive officers shall qualify within two weeks
following their appointments.
      (2)   Qualifications for each officer who is not required to give bond
shall consist in his or her subscribing and taking an oath to support the
Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the state, the laws of
the city, and to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of his or her
office, the oath to be filed in the office of the City Clerk.
      (3)   Each officer who is required to give bond shall file the required
bond in the office of the City Clerk with sufficient sureties, conditioned on
the faithful discharge of the duties of his or her office, with the oath
endorsed thereon.
(Prior Code, § 30.22) (Ord. 980, passed 11-22-1976; Ord. 1489, passed 12-14-
1992; Ord. 1931, passed 1-10-2011)
§ 30.33 PRESIDENT; ACTING PRESIDENT.
   The Council, on the first regular meeting in December, shall select one of
their own body who shall be styled the “President of the Council” and who shall
preside at all meetings of the Council in the absence of the Mayor. The
President, when occupying the place of Mayor, shall have the same privileges as
other members of the Council. All acts of the President while so acting shall
be as binding upon the Council and the city as if done by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 30.23) (Ord. 682, passed 2-23-1970; Ord. 1931, passed 1-10-2011)
§ 30.34 STANDING COMMITTEES.
   (A)   At the organizational meeting of the City Council, the Mayor shall
appoint four members of the Council to each standing committees as the City
Council may by ordinance create. The membership of such standing committees may
be changed at any time by the Mayor. The Mayor shall be a member ex officio of
each standing committee. The members of the standing committees shall serve a
term of two years and may be reappointed.
   (B)   The following standing committees shall be appointed or reappointed
every two years: Personnel, Public Works; Public Safety; Recreation, Amusement,
and Cultural; and Administrative, Office, and Economic Development.
(Prior Code, § 30.24) (Ord. 980, passed 11-22-1976; Ord. 1397, passed 11-14-
1988; Ord. 1891, passed 6-22-2009; Ord. 1924, passed 11-8-2010)
ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, AND MOTIONS
§ 30.45 GRANT OF POWER.
   The City Council may make all ordinances, by-laws, rules, regulations, and
resolutions not inconsistent with the general laws of the state as may be
necessary or expedient, in addition to the special powers otherwise granted by
law, for maintaining the peace, good government, and welfare of the city and
its trade, commerce, and manufactures; for preserving order and securing
persons or property from violence, danger, and destruction; for protecting
public and private property; and for promoting the public health, safety,
convenience, comfort, and morals and the general interests and welfare of the
inhabitants of the city.
(Neb. RS 16-246) (Prior Code, § 30.40)
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of standard codes, see Neb. RS 18-132
§ 30.46 INTRODUCTION OF ORDINANCES.
   Unless the City Council provides otherwise, ordinances shall be introduced
by members of the City Council in one of the following ways.
   (A)   With the recognition of the Mayor, a member may, in the presence and
hearing of a majority of the members elected to the City Council, read aloud
the substance of the proposed ordinance and file a copy with the City Clerk for
future consideration.
   (B)   With the recognition of the Mayor, a member may present the proposed
ordinance to the Clerk, who, in the presence and hearing of a majority of the
members elected to the City Council, shall read aloud the substance of the
ordinance and file it for future consideration.
§ 30.47 PROCEDURE FOR RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS.
   (A)   Unless the City Council provides otherwise, resolutions and motions
shall be introduced in one of the methods prescribed in §
30.46 for the introduction of ordinances.
   (B)   The issue raised by the resolution or motion shall be disposed of in
accordance with the usage of parliamentary law adopted for the guidance of the
City Council.
   (C)   A majority vote shall be required to pass any resolution or motion.
   (D)   The vote on any resolution or motion shall be by roll call vote.
§ 30.48 ORDINANCES; STYLE, TITLE.
   (A)   Style. The style of all city ordinances shall be: “Be it ordained by
the Mayor and Council of the City of Gering, Nebraska:...”
(Neb. RS 16-405)
   (B)   Titles. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not clearly
expressed in the title.
(Neb. RS 16-404)
(Prior Code, § 30.42)
§ 30.49 READING AND PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, ORDERS, BY-LAWS.
   (A)   Ordinances of a general or permanent nature shall be read by title on
three different days unless three-fourths of the Councilmembers vote to suspend
this requirement, except that such requirement shall not be suspended for any
ordinance for the annexation of territory. In the case such requirement is
suspended, the ordinance shall be read by title or number and then moved for
final passage. Three-fourths of the Councilmembers may require a reading of any
such ordinance in full before enactment under either procedure set out in this
section. All ordinances and resolutions or orders for the appropriation or
payment of money shall require for their passage or adoption the concurrence of
a majority of all members elected to the City Council.
(Neb. RS 16-404)
   (B)   On the passage or adoption of every resolution or order to enter into
a contract, or accepting of work done under contract, by the Mayor or Council,
the yeas and nays shall be called and entered upon the record. To pass or adopt
any by-law or ordinance or any such resolution or order, a concurrence of a
majority of the whole number of the members elected to the Council shall be
required. The requirements of a roll call or viva voce vote shall be satisfied
by a city which utilizes an electronic voting device which allows the yeas and
nays of each Councilmember to be readily seen by the public.
(Neb. RS 16-503)
(Prior Code, § 30.43)
§ 30.50 PUBLICATION OR POSTING.
   All ordinances of a general nature shall, within 15 days after they are
passed, be published in a legal newspaper in or of general circulation within
the city, or in book, pamphlet form, or electronic form, to be distributed or
sold, as may be provided by ordinance. Every ordinance fixing a penalty or
forfeiture for its violation shall, before the same takes effect, be published
for at least one week in some manner prescribed in this section.
(Neb. RS 16-405) (Prior Code, § 30.44)
Statutory reference:
   Additional provisions, see Neb. RS 18-131
   Emergency ordinance, see Neb. RS 16-405
§ 30.51 CERTIFICATE OF PUBLICATION OR POSTING.
   The passage, approval, and publication of an ordinance shall be sufficiently
proved by a certificate under the seal of the city from the City Clerk showing
that the ordinance was passed and approved, and when and in what paper the
ordinance was published.
(Neb. RS 16-403) (Prior Code, § 30.45)
Statutory reference:
   Additional provisions, see Neb. RS 18-131
   Emergency ordinance, see Neb. RS 16-405
§ 30.52 EFFECTIVE DATE; EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
30.50 and division (B) below, an ordinance for the government of the city which
has been adopted by the City Council without submission to the voters of the
city shall not go into effect until 15 days after the passage of the ordinance.
(Neb. RS 19-3701)
   (B)   In cases of riots, infectious diseases, or other impending danger, or
any other emergency requiring its immediate operation, an ordinance shall take
effect upon the proclamation of the Mayor immediately upon the first
publication of the ordinance.
(Neb. RS 16-405)
(Prior Code, § 30.46)
§ 30.53 AMENDMENTS AND REVISIONS.
   No ordinance or section thereof shall be revised or amended unless the new
ordinance contains the entire ordinance or section as revised or amended and
the ordinance or section so amended is repealed, except that an ordinance
revising all the ordinances of the municipality and modifications to zoning or
building districts may be adopted as otherwise provided by law.
(Neb. RS 16-404) (Prior Code, § 30.47)
Statutory reference:
   Ordinance revising all the ordinances of the city, see Neb. RS 16-247 and
16-404
CHAPTER 31: APPOINTED CITY OFFICIALS
Section
   
31.01   Appointive officers; selection
   
31.02   Residency
   
31.03   Clerk; duties
   
31.04   Treasurer
   
31.05   Warrant register
   
31.06   Treasurer’s reports
   
31.07   City Attorney
   
31.08   City Administrator
   
31.09   City Engineer; Special Engineer
§ 31.01 APPOINTIVE OFFICERS; SELECTION.
   (A)   All appointive officers of this city shall be nominated and appointed
by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. The vote thereon shall be
recorded in the minutes of the meeting by the Clerk, together with the names of
the members voting for and against the appointment.
   (B)   There shall be appointed by the Mayor, at the beginning of their term
on the first regular meeting in December, appointive officers as follows:
Clerk, Treasurer, Engineer, Attorney, and such other officers as may from time
to time be established by ordinance or by resolution of the Mayor and Council.
(Prior Code, § 31.01)
§ 31.02 RESIDENCY.
   Any citizen of the United States, regardless of sex, race, national origin,
or religion, shall be eligible to be the head of any administrative department
or to hold any other office or employment of the city, except as otherwise
provided by statute, ordinance, or regulation.
(Prior Code, § 31.02) (Ord. 1496, passed 2-8-1993)
§ 31.03 CLERK; DUTIES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Clerk to attend every meeting of the
Council and keep a record of the proceedings thereof.
   (B)   The Clerk shall keep and carefully preserve all papers and books which
may come into his or her possession as Clerk, filing and arranging them in a
manner convenient for reference. He or she shall keep a record of all bonds
outstanding against the city showing the number and amount of each, and for and
to whom the bonds were issued and when any bonds are purchased, paid, or
cancelled, the records shall show the fact, and in his or her annual report, he
or she shall describe particularly the bonds issued and sold during the past
year and the terms of the sale with each and every item of expense thereof.
   (C)   The Clerk shall keep the seal of the city and shall duly attest
thereby the Mayor’s signature to all ordinances and all deeds and papers
required to be attested, when ordered by the Mayor and Council, and all orders
for money or warrants for the payment of money, and shall enter the same in
numerical order in a book to be kept for that purpose.
   (D)   The Clerk shall keep a register of all licenses granted in the city
and the purpose for which they were issued, and report to the Council at every
meeting and at the beginning of each month, shall, if required by the Police
Department, furnish them with a true copy of the register of all licenses then
in force.
   (E)   Within 30 days after any meeting of the Council, the Clerk shall
prepare and publish the proceedings of the Council in a legal newspaper,
designated by the Mayor and Council, or more than one legal newspaper if
directed by the Council, within the county; provided, however, the charge for
the publication shall not exceed one-third of the legal rate. The publication
charge shall be paid and allowed as other claims against the General Fund.
   (F)   The Clerk shall hereafter keep and preserve the proceedings of the
Mayor and Council in two separate and distinct record books:
      (1) “Minute Record,” wherein shall be recorded the miscellaneous and
informal doings of the Mayor and Council; and
      (2) “Ordinance Record,” wherein shall be recorded the formal proceedings
of the Mayor and Council in the matter of passing, approving, publishing, or
posting and certifying to ordinances. The ordinance minutes shall be recorded
in the “Ordinance Record” book on printed forms to be designated by the Mayor
and Council. Hereafter when single ordinances are introduced, appropriate
reference shall be made in the “Minute Record.”
   (G)   The Clerk shall perform such other duties as the Mayor and Council
shall from time to time provide.
   (H)   (1)   The Clerk shall permit any person to examine and copy the public
records in the Clerk’s custody, and may charge a fee for providing copies of a
public record, as provided in Neb. RS 84-712 through 84-712.09.
      (2)   The Clerk may charge a reasonable fee for certified copies of any
record in his or her office as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 31.03)
§ 31.04 TREASURER.
   The Treasurer shall be required to give bond in not less than $25,000, or he
or she may be required to give bond in double the sum of money estimated by the
Council at any time to be in his or her hands belonging to the city and school
district, and he or she shall be the custodian of all money belonging to the
corporation. The City Council shall pay the actual premium of the bond of the
Treasurer. The Treasurer shall keep a separate account of each fund or
appropriation, and the debts and credits belonging thereto. He or she shall
give every person paying money into the Treasury a receipt therefor, specifying
the date of payment and on what account paid. He or she shall also file a copy
of such receipts, except tax receipts, with his or her monthly reports; and he
or she shall, at the end of every month, and as often as may be requested,
render an account to the City Council, under oath, showing the state of the
Treasury at the date of such account, the amount of money remaining in each
fund and the amount paid therefrom, and the balance of money in the Treasury.
He or she shall also accompany such account with a statement of all receipts
and disbursements, together with all warrants redeemed and paid by him or her,
which warrants, with all vouchers held by him or her, shall be filed with his
or her account in the Clerk’s office. He or she shall produce and show all
funds shown by such report to be on hand, or satisfy the Council or its
committee that he or she has such funds in his or her custody or under his or
her control. If the Treasurer fails to render his or her account within 20 days
after the end of the month, or by a later date established by the governing
body, the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council may use this
failure as cause to remove the Treasurer from office. The Treasurer may employ
and appoint a delinquent tax collector, who shall be allowed a percent upon his
or her collections to be fixed by the Council not to exceed the fees allowed by
law to the County Treasurer for like services, and upon taxes collected by such
delinquent tax collector, the City Treasurer shall receive no fees. The City
Treasurer shall prepare all paving and curbing tax lists and shall collect all
paving and curbing taxes.
(Neb. RS 16-318) (Prior Code, § 31.04)
§ 31.05 WARRANT REGISTER.
   The Treasurer shall procure and keep a warrant register which shall show in
columns arranged for that purpose the number, date, and amount of each warrant
presented and registered as hereinafter provided, the particular fund in which
the same is drawn, the date of presentation, the name and address of the person
in whose name the same is registered, the date of payment, the amount of
interest, and the total amount paid thereon, with the date when the notice to
such person in whose name such warrant is registered is mailed. Whenever a
warrant is presented for payment to the Treasurer and there is not sufficient
money on hand to the credit of the proper fund to pay the same, it shall be the
duty of the Treasurer to enter such warrant in his or her warrant register for
payment in the order of its presentation, and upon every warrant so presented
and registered, he or she shall endorse registered for payment, with the date
of registration, and shall sign such endorsement.
(Prior Code, § 31.05) (Ord. 682, passed 2-23-1970)
§ 31.06 TREASURER’S REPORTS.
   It shall be the duty of the Treasurer to prepare and publish annually within
60 days following the close of its municipal fiscal year, a statement of the
receipts and expenditures by funds of the city for the preceding fiscal year.
Not more than the legal rate provided for in Neb. RS 33-141 shall be charged
and paid for such publication.
(Prior Code, § 31.06)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 19-1101
§ 31.07 CITY ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the Council and city
officers. The City Attorney shall commence, prosecute, and defend all suits and
actions necessary to be commenced, prosecuted, or defended on behalf of the
city, or that may be ordered by the Council. He or she shall attend meetings of
the Council and give his or her opinion upon any matters submitted to him or
her, either orally or in writing as may be required. The Mayor and City Council
shall have the right to pay the City Attorney additional compensation for legal
services performed by him or her for the city or to employ additional legal
assistance and to pay for such legal assistance out of the funds of the city.
Whenever the Mayor and City Council have by ordinance so authorized, the Board
of Public Works shall have the right to pay the City Attorney additional
compensation for legal services performed by him or her for it or to employ
additional legal assistance other than the City Attorney and pay such legal
assistance out of funds disbursed under the orders of the Board of Public
Works.
(Neb. RS 16-319) (Prior Code, § 31.07)
§ 31.08 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Office created. For the purpose of providing for the centralization of
administrative responsibilities, there is hereby created and established the
office of City Administrator. The City Administrator will be appointed by the
Mayor and a majority of the elected members of the Council. The Mayor and
Council shall determine all municipal policies, adopt ordinances, and
resolutions, and vote all appropriations. The Mayor and Council are the
governing body of the city, and the City Administrator is its agent in carrying
out the policies and directions which the Mayor and Council shall determine.
The City Administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council and
may be removed at any time by the Mayor and a majority of the elected members
of the Council.
   (B)   Responsibilities and duties. The City Administrator shall be
responsible to the Mayor and Council for the efficient administration of all
departments and affairs of the city which are under the Mayor and Council’s
control. The City Administrator shall work within the policies set forth by the
Mayor and Council. The City Administrator shall be the administrative head of
the city government under the direction and control of the Mayor and Council.
In addition to his or her general authority as administrative head, and not as
a limitation thereon, it shall be the duty of the City Administrator, and he or
she shall have the following duties and powers:
      (1)   Take charge of and direct the operations of all city departments;
administer, supervise, be responsible for and coordinate all departments,
divisions, and services of the city government which are under the control and
jurisdiction of the Mayor and City Council, as provided by law, specifically
including civil service laws; provided, however, the office of City Physician
shall not come under the administration and supervision or be the
responsibility of the Administrator, although the Administrator shall be
available to and shall assist the office in any administrative matter that may
arise, and the office shall be available to and shall assist the Administrator
in the discharge of the duties, responsibilities and powers of the
Administrator as set forth in this section;
      (2)   Recommend to the Mayor and Council appointments to, and dismissals
from, the offices of City Treasurer, City Clerk, City Engineer, and City
Attorney as provided in Neb. RS 16-308;
      (3)   Employ, discipline, transfer, and remove all subordinate, non-
elected employees of the city including all department heads with the exception
of those positions identified in division (B)(2) above, in concurrence with the
classification and pay plan as adopted by the Mayor and Council;
      (4)   Recommend to the Mayor and Council for the adoption such measures
and ordinances as are deemed necessary or expedient;
      (5)   Prepare and submit to the Mayor and Council the annual city budget;
and after its adoption, he or she is responsible for the execution and
administration of the budget; he or she will also act as the purchasing agent
for the city for the purchase of all material and supplies;
      (6)   Keep the Mayor and Council, at all times, fully advised as to the
financial conditions and needs of the city;
      (7)   Make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department
or division thereof, and any contact, or the proper performance of any
obligation running to the city;
      (8)   Exercise general supervision and control over all real and personal
property and other public property under the control and jurisdiction of the
Mayor and City Council;
      (9)   Prepare and submit to the Mayor and Council at the end of the
fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of
the city for the preceding year;
      (10)   Serve in any appointed office or head of department within the
city government to which he or she may be qualified, if the need arises and
when appointed thereto by the Mayor and Council and to hold and perform the
duties thereof at the pleasure of the Mayor and City Council;
      (11)   Attend all regularly scheduled meetings of the City Council and
such other meetings of the City Council and city departments, divisions,
service, boards, commissions, committees, and officers as the Administrator’s
duties may require; to report at such meetings any matter concerning city
affairs within the jurisdiction and under the control of the Administrator, and
to recommend to the Mayor and City Council for passage and adoption such
measures, resolutions, and ordinances which may be deemed necessary or
expedient;
      (12)   Serve as public relations officer of the city government; to
endeavor to investigate and adjust all complaints made or filed against the
city government or against any department, division, service, officer, or
employee thereof; and to cooperate with all community organizations whose aim
and purpose is to advance the best interest of the city and its citizens;
      (13)   Properly manage the affairs of the city and any department,
division, or service thereof and any contract or obligation running to the
city; and
      (14)   Perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be
delegated to the Administrator from time to time by ordinance or resolution;
and to delegate any duty, responsibility, or power set forth herein upon
approval of the Mayor and City Council by proper ordinance.
   (C)   Mayor and Council; rights and duties.
      (1)   The Mayor and Council (body) reserve the right to make inquiries of
city personnel relative to municipal activities.
      (2)   The Mayor and Council (individual members) shall deal with the
administrative service through the office of the City Administrator and any
direction to municipal officials shall be given through the office of the City
Administrator. The Mayor and individual members of the Council may require
reports from the office of the City Administrator on any municipal activity.
   (D)   Residency required. The City Administrator must reside within the
corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 31.08) (Ord. 1495, passed 2-8-1993; Ord. 1644, passed 9-27-1999)
§ 31.09 ENGINEER.
   (A)   The Engineer shall make a record of the minutes of his or her surveys
and of all work done for the city, which shall be public records and belong to
the city. He or she shall accurately make all plats, sections, profiles, and
maps that may be necessary in any work for the city. He or she shall, upon
request of the Mayor and Council, make estimates of the cost of labor and
material which may be done or furnished by contract with the city, and make all
surveys, estimates, and calculations necessary for the establishment of grades,
bridges, or culverts and for the building, constructing, or repairing of any
public improvement of the city and file the same with the Clerk. He or she
shall inspect all works of public improvement, and if found to be properly
done, shall accept the same and forthwith report his or her acceptance to the
Council. He or she shall estimate the cost of all proposed municipal utilities
and public improvements, together with any extensions thereof, which the
Council proposes to construct or improve.
   (B)   The Mayor and Council, whenever they deem it expedient, may employ a
special engineer to make or assist in making any particular estimate or survey.
The Engineer may be Ex Officio Plumbing Inspector and Sewer Commissioner.
(Prior Code, § 31.09)
CHAPTER 32: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Boards and Commissions
   
32.001   Library Board
   
32.002   Planning Commission
   
32.003   Board of Adjustment
   
32.004   Board of Health
   
32.005   Park, Cemetery, and Tree Board
   
32.006   Civil Service Commission
   
32.007   Community Development Agency
Police Department
   
32.020   Department established
   
32.021   Chief of Police; duties
   
32.022   Police officers; badges
   
32.023   Refusal to aid in making arrest
   
32.024   Police Reserve; established
   
32.025   Retirement Committee
   
32.026   Pension
Fire Department
   
32.040   Organization
   
32.041   Chief
   
32.042   Officers; duties
   
32.043   Equipment; care of
   
32.044   Membership and vacancies
   
32.045   Control
   
32.046   Apparatus
   
32.047   Inspection of premises
   
32.048   Fire investigations; reports
   
32.049   Records
   
32.050   Fire Police
   
32.051   Funds; expenditure of
   
32.052   Traffic; pedestrians at fire; regulation of
   
32.053   Equipment; disturbing prohibited
   
32.054   Tax; levy
   
32.055   Fire drill; right-of-way
   
32.056   Fire Marshal; duties
   
32.057   Retirement Committee
Civil Defense Organization
   
32.070   Director
   
32.071   Functions and duties
   
32.072   Obstruction; impersonation
   
32.073   Use of city equipment
   
32.074   Mutual aid
Community Redevelopment Authority
   
32.085   Creation
   
32.086   Members
   
32.087   Officers
   
32.088   Rules and records
   
32.089   Director
   
32.090   Funds
   
32.091   Community Development Law
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§ 32.001 LIBRARY BOARD.
   (A)   When the City Council has decided by ordinance to establish and
maintain a public library and reading room under Neb. RS 51-201 to 51-219, and
except as otherwise provided by the Council pursuant to Neb. RS 51-202, the
Library Board shall have five appointed members who shall be residents of the
city and who shall serve terms of four years. The Board members shall be
appointed by a majority vote of the members of the City Council. Neither the
Mayor nor any member of the City Council shall be a member of the Library
Board. The terms of members serving on the effective date of a change in the
number of members shall not be shortened, and any successors to those members
shall be appointed as the terms of those members expire. In cases of vacancies
by resignation, removal, or otherwise, the City Council shall fill the vacancy
for the unexpired term. No member shall receive any pay or compensation for any
services rendered as a member of the Library Board.
(Neb. RS 51-202)
   (B)   (1)   The members of the Library Board shall immediately after their
appointment meet and organize by electing from their number a president, a
secretary, and such other officers as may be necessary. A majority of the
members of the Library Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business.
(Neb. RS 51-204)
      (2)   No member of the Board shall serve in the capacity of both the
president and secretary of the Board. It shall be the duty of the secretary to
keep the full and correct minutes and records of all meetings and to file the
same with the City Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection at
any reasonable time.
      (3)   The Board shall meet at such times as the Board may designate.
Special meetings may be held upon the call of the president or a majority of
the members of the Board.
§ 32.002 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Established. There shall hereby be created and established a Planning
Commission for the city.
   (B)   Purpose. It shall be the function and duty of the Commission to make
and adopt plans for the physical development of the municipality, including any
areas outside its boundaries which, in the Commission’s judgment, bear relation
to the planning of such municipality.
   (C)   Membership. The Planning Commission shall consist of nine regular
members and one alternate member who shall represent, insofar as is possible,
the different professions or occupations in the municipality and shall be
appointed by the Mayor, by and with the approval of a majority vote of the
members elected to the Council. All members of the Commission shall serve as
such without compensation and shall hold no other municipal office. The term of
each members shall be three years, except that three members of the first
Commission to be so appointed shall serve for the term of one year, three for
the term of two years, and three for a term of three years. All regular members
shall hold office until their successors are appointed. Any member may, after a
public hearing before the Council or village board, be removed by the Mayor
with the consent of a majority vote of the members elected to the Council or
village board for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office, or
other good and sufficient cause. All members may, after a public hearing before
the Council, be removed by the Mayor, by and with the consent of a majority
vote of the Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office
or other good and sufficient cause. Three successive unexcused absences shall
be deemed neglect of duty, inefficiency, or other good and sufficient cause.
Vacancies occurring otherwise than through expiration of term shall be filled
for the unexpired term by the Mayor. The commission shall adopt rules and
regulations for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its
resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which shall be a public
record.
(Neb. RS 19-926 and 19-927)
   (D)   Duties. The Commission shall, from time to time, recommend to the
appropriate public officials programs for public structures and improvements
and for the financing thereof. It shall be part of its duties to consult and
advise with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic,
educational, professional, and other organizations and with citizens with
relation to the projection or carrying out of the plan.
   (E)   Organization; meetings. The Commission shall elect its chairperson
from its members and create and fill such other of its offices as it may
determine. The term of Chairperson shall be one year, and he or she shall be
eligible for re-election. The Commission shall hold at least one regular
meeting in each month. It shall adopt rules for transaction of business and
shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and
determinations, which record shall be a public record.
   (F)   Funds. The Council may provide the funds, equipment, and
accommodations necessary for the work of the Commission, but the expenditures
of the Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated
for that purpose by the Council; and no expenditures nor agreements for
expenditures shall be valid in excess of such amounts.
(Prior Code, § 32.02) (Ord. 455, passed 5-5-1964; Ord. 575, passed 5-16-1967;
Ord. 2062, passed - -2018)
§ 32.003 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   If the City Council adopts zoning or other regulations pursuant to
Neb. RS 19-901 et seq., except as provided in division (B) below, the Council
shall provide for the appointment of a Board of Adjustment. Any actions taken
by the Board of Adjustment shall not exceed the powers granted by division (F)
below.
(Neb. RS 19-907)
   (B)   If the county has adopted a comprehensive development plan, as defined
by Neb. RS 23-114.02, and is enforcing zoning regulations based upon such a
plan, the zoning Board of Adjustment of the county shall, upon request of the
City Council, serve as the zoning Board of Adjustment for the city. If the city
is located in more than one county, it shall be served by request or otherwise
only by the county zoning Board of Adjustment of the county in which the
greatest area of the city is located, and the jurisdiction of such county
zoning Board of Adjustment shall include all portions of the city and its
extraterritorial control, regardless of county lines.
(Neb. RS 19-912.01)
 
   (C)   (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five regular members,
plus one additional member designated as an alternate who shall attend and
serve only when one of the regular members is unable to attend for any reason,
each to be appointed for a term of three years and removable for cause by the
appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearings. Vacancies
shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant.
One member only of the Board of Adjustment shall be appointed from the
membership of the Planning Commission, and the loss of membership on the
Planning Commission by such member shall also result in his or her immediate
loss of membership on the Board of Adjustment and the appointment of another
Planning Commissioner to the Board of Adjustment. The first vacancy occurring
on the Board of Adjustment shall be filled by the appointment of a person who
resides in the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of the city at such time as
more than 200 persons reside within such area if the Board does not already
include such a person. Thereafter, at all times, at least one member of the
Board of Adjustment shall reside outside of the corporate boundaries of the
city but within its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction.
      (2)   The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules in accordance with the
provisions of any ordinance adopted pursuant to Neb. RS 19-901 to 19-914.
Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. Such
Chairperson, or in his or her absence the Acting Chairperson, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall
be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing
the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the
Board and shall be a public record.
(Neb. RS 19-908)
   (D)   A number of members equal to a majority of the number of regular
members appointed to the Board of Adjustment shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of any business. All members of an appointed Board of Adjustment
shall serve without compensation and shall hold no other city office except for
the member of the Planning Commission appointed to serve on the Board of
Adjustment. No member of the Board of Adjustment shall serve in the capacity of
both Chairperson and Secretary of the Board. The Secretary shall keep the full
and correct minutes and records of all meetings and file them with the City
Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection during office hours.
   (E)   Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the city affected
by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken
within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with
the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Adjustment a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the
appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An
appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless
the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment,
after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her, that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board
of Adjustment or by a court of record on application on notice to the officer
from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. The Board of Adjustment
shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice
thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same
within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or
by agent or by attorney.
(Neb. RS 19-909)
   (F)   (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall, subject to such appropriate
conditions and safeguards as may be established by the City Council, have only
the following powers:
         (a)   To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is error in
any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative
official or agency based on or made in the enforcement of any zoning regulation
or any regulation relating to the location or soundness of structures, except
that the authority to hear and decide appeals shall not apply to decisions made
by the City Council or Planning Commission regarding a conditional use or
special exception under Neb. RS 19-929(3);
         (b)   To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of any
zoning regulation, requests for interpretation of any map; and
         (c)   When by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape
of a specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of the zoning
regulations, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other
extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property,
the strict application of any enacted regulation under Neb. RS 19-901 and 19-
903 to 19-904.01 and division (C) above and this division (F) would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue
hardships upon the owner of such property, to authorize, upon an appeal
relating to the property, a variance from such strict application so as to
relieve such difficulties or hardship, if such relief may be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing
the intent and purpose of any ordinance or resolution.
      (2)   (a)   No such variance shall be authorized by the Board unless it
finds that:
            1.   The strict application of the zoning regulation would produce
undue hardship;
            2.   Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in
the same zoning district and the same vicinity;
            3.   The authorization of such variance will not be of substantial
detriment to adjacent property and the character of the district will not be
changed by the granting of the variance; and
            4.   The granting of such variance is based upon reason of
demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for
purposes of convenience, profit, or caprice.
         (b)   No variance shall be authorized unless the Board finds that the
condition or situation of the property concerned or the intended use of the
property is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably
practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an
amendment to the zoning regulations.
      (3)   In exercising the powers granted in this division (F), the Board
may, in conformity with Neb. RS 19-901 to 19-915, reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination
appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination
as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer
from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four members of the Board
shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of any such administrative official or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such
regulation or to effect any variation in such regulation.
(Neb. RS 19-910)
   (G)   Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision
of the Board of Adjustment, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board,
or bureau of the city, may present to the district court a petition duly
verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and
specifying the grounds of such illegality. Such petition must be presented to
the court within 15 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the
Board. Upon the filing of such petition a summons shall be issued and be served
upon the Board of Adjustment, together with a copy of the petition. Return of
service shall be made within four days after the issuance of the summons.
Within ten days after the return day of such summons, the Board of Adjustment
shall file an answer to the petition which shall admit or deny the substantial
averments of the petition and shall state the contentions of the Board with
reference to the matters in dispute as disclosed by the petition. The answer
shall be verified in like manner as required for the petition. At the
expiration of the time for filing answer, the court shall proceed to hear and
determine the cause without delay and shall render judgment thereon according
to the forms of law. If, upon the hearing, it appears to the court that
testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take
evidence or appoint a referee to take such evidence as it may direct and report
the same to the court with his or her findings of fact and conclusions of law,
which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination
of the court shall be made. The court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly,
or may modify the decision brought up for review. The appeal to the district
court shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court
may, on application, on notice to the Board and on due cause shown, grant a
restraining order. Any appeal from such judgment of the district court shall be
prosecuted in accordance with the general laws of the state regulating appeals
in actions at law.
(Neb. RS 19-912)
§ 32.004 BOARD OF HEALTH.
   A Board of Health is hereby created consisting of five members who shall
serve terms of three years. The Board members shall consist of the Mayor, who
shall be chairperson; a physician, who shall be medical advisor; the Chief of
Police, who shall be secretary and quarantine officer; and two other members. A
majority of such Board shall constitute a quorum and shall enact rules and
regulations, having the force and effect of law, to safeguard the health of the
people of such city and prevent nuisances and unsanitary conditions, enforce
the same, and provide fines and punishments for the violation thereof.
(Prior Code, § 32.04) (Ord. 1868, passed 6-23-2008)
§ 32.005 PARK, CEMETERY, AND TREE BOARD.
   (A)   Established. There is hereby established a Park, Cemetery, and Tree
Board for the city. Such Board shall be composed of six members who shall be
residents of the city, and shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council. The members shall be appointed at the first
regular meeting in December of each year, except for the original Board. At the
time of the original appointments, one-third of the number to be appointed
shall be appointed for a term of one year, one-third of the number to be
appointed shall be appointed for a term of two years, and one-third of the
number to be appointed shall be appointed for a term of three years, which
terms shall be computed from the first meeting in the preceding December. After
the appointment of the original Board, it shall be the duty of the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council to appoint or reappoint one-third of the
Board for a term of three years to commence at the time of appointment at the
first meeting in December. Each member shall serve until his or her successor
is appointed and qualified. A vacancy occurring on such Board by death,
resignation, or disqualification of a member shall be filled for the remainder
of such term at the next regular meeting of the Mayor and City Council. A
majority of the members of the Park, Cemetery, and Tree Board shall constitute
a quorum. Any reference in the city code to the Board of Park Commissioners,
Park Board, Park and Cemetery Board, Tree Board, or Cemetery Board shall be
construed to mean and shall refer to the Park, Cemetery and Tree Board.
   (B)   Organization. The members of the Park, Cemetery, and Tree Board at
their first meeting in each year following the appointment of members by the
Mayor and City Council shall elect one of their own members as Chairperson of
the Board and another member to be Secretary of the Board. Before entering upon
their duties, each member of the Board shall take an oath to be filed with the
City Clerk that he or she will faithfully perform the duties of his or her
office and will not in any manner be actuated or influenced therein by personal
or political motives. No member shall receive any compensation for his or her
service as a member of the Park, Cemetery, and Tree Board. The Board shall make
such rules as it deems expedient for the regulation of its own organizational
business.
   (C)   Duties.
      (1)   The Park, Cemetery, and Tree Board shall act in an advisory
capacity to the City Council and City Administrator pertaining to the proper
care, maintenance, improvement, development, and use of the city park and tree
systems and the cemetery. The Board shall also, upon the request of the City
Council or City Administrator, consider, investigate, make findings, reports,
and recommendations concerning any manner or question involving parks, trees,
or the cemetery in the city together with any other duties vested in the Board
by this code or by a resolution of the City Council.
      (2)   The Park, Cemetery, and Tree Board shall develop and recommend to
the City Council and City Administrator appropriate rules, regulations, and
policies for the use, care, and general operation of the park and tree systems
and the cemetery.
      (3)   The Park, Cemetery, and Tree Board shall make recommendations to
the City Council and City Administrator concerning the park, cemetery, and tree
budget expenditures and revenues including fees and charges and may make
recommendations to the City Council and City Administrator on contracts of any
nature involving expenditures in accordance with the policies and procedures of
the city and to the extent that funds may be provided for such purpose.
(Prior Code, § 32.05) (Ord. 1728, passed 6-23-2003; Ord. 1732, passed 7-28-
2003)
§ 32.006 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION.
   (A)   Membership. The members of the Civil Service Commission created by
Neb. RS Ch. 19, Art. 18, shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the
City Council. Vacancies in the membership of the Commission shall be filled by
appointments made in the same manner. The Commission shall be composed of three
members.
   (B)   Terms. The term of office of such Commissioners shall be for six
years.
   (C)   Duties. The duty and power of the Commission is as set forth in Neb.
RS Ch. 19, Art. 18, as amended.
   (D)   Rules and regulations. The city hereby adopts Rules and Regulations of
the Civil Service Commission for the city, attached to the ordinance
incorporated herein by reference.
(Prior Code, § 32.06) (Ord. 859, passed 11-25-1974; Ord. 1966, passed 1-14-
2013)
§ 32.007 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AGENCY.
   (A)   Created. There is hereby created a community development agency, which
agency shall be known as the Community Development Agency.
   (B)   Purpose. The purposes for which the Agency is formed will be to
formulate for the city a workable program for utilizing appropriate private and
public resources to eliminate or prevent the development or spread of urban
blight, to encourage needed urban rehabilitation, to provide for the
redevelopment of substandard and blighted areas, or to undertake such of the
aforesaid activities or other feasible municipal activities as may be suitably
employed to achieve the objectives of such workable program. Such workable
program may include without limitation, provision for the prevention of the
spread of blight into areas of the municipality which are free from blight
through diligent enforcement of housing, zoning, and occupancy controls and
standards; the rehabilitation or conservation of substandard or blighted areas
or portions thereof by replanning, removing congestion, providing parks,
playgrounds, and other public improvements by encouraging voluntary
rehabilitation, and by compelling the repair and rehabilitation of deteriorated
or deteriorating structures; and the clearance and redevelopment of substandard
and blighted areas or portions thereof.
   (C)   Membership.
      (1)   Such Agency shall consist of the Mayor and Council of the city.
      (2)   No member or employee of the Community Development Agency shall
voluntarily acquire any interest, direct or indirect, in any redevelopment
project or in any property included or planned by the Agency to be included in
any project or in any contract or proposed contract in connection with any such
project. Where the acquisition is not voluntary, such member or employee shall
immediately disclose such interest in writing to the Agency and such disclosure
shall be entered into the minutes of the Agency. If any member or employee of
the Agency presently owns or controls or owned or controlled within the
preceding two years, an interest, direct or indirect, in any property, included
or planned by the Agency to be included in any redevelopment project, they
shall immediately disclose such interest in writing to the Agency and such
disclosure shall be entered upon the minutes of the Agency. Upon such
disclosure, such member or employee of the Agency shall not participate in any
action by the Agency affecting such property.
   (D)   Function; authority. The Agency shall function in a manner prescribed
in this section and may exercise all of the power and authority granted to a
community redevelopment authority pursuant to Neb. RS 18-2101 through 18-2144,
18-2147 through 18-2151, and 18-2154.
(Prior Code, § 32.07) (Ord. 1314, passed 12-10-1984)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.020 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
      There shall be and is hereby established a Police Department in and for
the city, which shall consist of the Chief of Police and such further number of
regular police officers as may be duly ordered by resolution of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 32.20)
§ 32.021 CHIEF OF POLICE; DUTIES.
   The Chief of Police shall, subject to the direction of the City
Administrator, have control and management of all matters relating to the
Police Department, its officers and members, and shall have the custody and
control of all property and books belonging to the Department. He or she shall
devote his or her whole time to the municipal affairs and interests of the city
and to the preservation of peace, order, safety, and cleanliness thereof, and
to this end, he or she shall execute and enforce all provisions of this code,
and also the orders from the City Administrator. It shall be his or her duty to
protect the rights of persons and property. He or she shall provide a proper
police force at fires. He or she shall take notice of all nuisances,
impediments, obstructions, and defects in the streets, alleys, business places,
and/or residences of the city. The Chief of Police and all regular and special
police officers shall become thoroughly conversant with the laws of the city,
shall see that the same are strictly enforced and shall make sworn complaint
against any person for violation of the same.
(Prior Code, § 32.21) (Ord. 1951, passed 2-29-2012)
§ 32.022 POLICE OFFICERS; BADGES.
   (A)   Every member of the police force shall wear a suitable badge, to be
furnished by the city, and any member who shall lose or destroy the same shall
be required to pay the costs of replacing it.
   (B)   Whenever any member shall leave the force, he or she shall immediately
deliver his or her badge to the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 32.22)
§ 32.023 REFUSAL TO AID IN MAKING ARREST.
   In the execution of his or her powers and duties in arresting any person
accused or suspected of any crime or in the suppression of any riot or unlawful
assembly, or in preventing the commission of any offense against the city or
the state, he or she shall have the power, whenever the same shall be
necessary, to require the aid of citizens or of one citizen, and any person who
shall refuse or wilfully neglect to obey the summons of the officer in such
case, shall be deemed guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 32.23) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 32.024 POLICE RESERVE; ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Generally. There is hereby established a law enforcement reserve force
for the city, which shall be known as the Police Reserve.
   (B)   Manual. A reserve force manual setting forth minimum qualifications,
training standards, and standard operating procedures for the members of the
Police Reserve, and such higher qualifications, standards, and operating
procedures as may actually be used, shall be adopted by the City Council by
resolution.
   (C)   Training standards. All members of the Police Reserve shall meet the
minimum qualifications and training standards as set forth in the reserve force
manual, adopted by resolution of the City Council.
   (D)   Appointment of Mayor. All members of the Police Reserve shall be
appointment of the Mayor of city, subject to approval by the Chief of Police of
the city.
   (E)   Salary. Each member of the Police Reserve shall be paid a salary of $1
per year, and shall be provided a uniform consisting of a shirt, pants, collar
brass and badge to be worn while on duty.
   (F)   Rights, privileges, obligations and duties. Members of the Police
Reserve upon being activated by the Mayor and Chief of Police, and while on
assigned duty shall be vested with the same rights, privileges, obligations,
and duties of any regular officer of the Police Department, subject to the
provisions of the reserve force manual, and the provisions of the statutes of
the state governing law enforcement reserve forces.
(Prior Code, § 32.24) (Ord. 1217, passed 10-27-1980)
§ 32.025 RETIREMENT COMMITTEE.
   (A)   The City Council hereby establishes the Police Department Retirement
Committee which shall supervise the general operation of the Police
Department’s retirement system. The Retirement Committee shall consist of six
members of which four members shall be selected by the active paid police
officers. Two members shall be designated by the City Council. The members who
are not participants in such retirement system shall have a general knowledge
of retirement plans. Members of the City Council, active members of the Police
Department, and members of the general public may serve on the Retirement
Committee. The Committee members shall be appointed to four year terms.
Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the term by a person with the
same representation as his or her predecessor. Members of the Retirement
Committee shall receive no salary and shall not be compensated for expenses.
   (B)   The funds of the retirement system shall be invested by the Retirement
Committee. The municipality or Committee shall contract with an insurance
company, trust company, or other financial institution including, but not
limited to, brokerage houses, investment managers, savings and loan
associations, banks, credit unions, or Farmers Home Administration or Veterans’
Administration approved lenders. Such funds shall be invested pursuant to the
policies established by the State Investment Council.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Retirement Committee to:
      (1)   Provide each employee a summary of plan eligibility requirements
and benefit provisions;
      (2)   Provide, within 30 days after a request is made by a participant, a
statement describing the amount of benefits such participant is eligible to
receive;
      (3)   Make available for review an annual report of the system’s
operations describing both the amount of contributions to the system from both
employee and employer sources and an identification of the total assets of the
retirement system; and
      (4)   Have an analysis made of the investment return that has been
achieved on the assets of the retirement system administered by the Committee.
Such analysis shall be prepared as of January 1, 1989, and each five years
thereafter. The analysis shall be prepared by an independent private
organization which has demonstrated expertise to perform this type of analysis
and which is unrelated to any organization offering investment advice or which
provides investment management services to the retirement system.
(Prior Code, § 32.25) (Ord. 1291, passed 12-12-1983)
§ 32.026 PENSION.
   (A)   The city shall provide pension to police officers in accordance with
state law and the plan adopted by City Council, which is hereby adopted by
reference.
   (B)   Copies of the police pension plan shall be available for public
inspection at the City Clerk’s office.
(Prior Code, § 32.26)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.040 ORGANIZATION.
   All volunteer fire companies which have heretofore been, or shall hereafter
be, organized according to law, in the city shall be and constitute the Fire
Department of the city. The compensation of officers
and/or members of the Fire Department shall be such as may from time to time be
fixed by the Mayor and Council.
(Prior Code, § 32.40)
§ 32.041 CHIEF.
   The Fire Chief shall, subject to the direction of the City Administrator,
have control and management of all matters relating to the Fire Department, its
officers and members, and shall have the custody and control of all property
and books belonging to the Department. He or she shall devote his or her whole
time to the municipal affairs and interests of the city and to the preservation
of peace, order, safety, and cleanliness thereof, and to this end, he or she
shall execute and enforce all provisions of this code, and also the orders from
the City Administrator. It shall be his or her duty to protect the rights of
persons and property. He or she shall provide a proper fire fighting force at
fires. He or she shall take notice of all fire related nuisances, impediments,
obstructions, and defects in the streets, alleys, business places, and/or
residences of the city. The Fire Chief and all members of the Fire Department
shall be thoroughly conversant with the laws of the city pertaining to fires,
shall take such actions as necessary and reasonable to see that the same are
strictly enforced and shall make sworn complaint against any person for
violation of the same. The Fire Chief shall manage the Fire Department, and it
shall be his or her duty to inform the City Council when any of the fire
engines, hose, ladders, or other apparatus needs repair. The Fire Chief shall
cause the repair, improvement, or maintenance of the equipment and shall
personally supervise and approve of the same. It shall be the duty of the Fire
Chief to come annually before the City Council at a regular meeting to give a
report to the City Council of the general condition and the proposed additions
or improvements recommended by him or her.
(Ord. 2152, passed - -2025)
§ 32.042 OFFICERS; DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department, the Assistant
Chief, or the firefighters of any fire company lawfully acting in his or her
stead, in all cases of fire, to take and have control of all members of the
Fire Department and of all proper means for the extinguishment of fires, the
protection of property, the preservation of order at and in the vicinity of
fires, and to secure the observance of all laws and regulations respecting
fires.
(Prior Code, § 32.42)
§ 32.043 EQUIPMENT; CARE OF.
   All apparatus and appliances for the extinguishment of fire belonging to or
used by the city shall be under direct and immediate control of the Chief of
the Fire Department and of the several fire companies to which such appliances
have been delivered. No person shall, under any pretense whatsoever, remove any
of such appliances from the place or house where it is kept by its respective
company except the members of such company, without the order of one of the
properly authorized officers of such company, the Chief of the Department or
someone authorized to act in his or her stead. It shall be the duty of the
aforesaid fire companies to keep all apparatus and hose furnished by the city
in a serviceable and clean condition and in such a state as to be of immediate
use in case of fire.
(Prior Code, § 32.43) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.044 MEMBERSHIP AND VACANCIES.
   (A)   The membership of the Fire Department shall have the authority to
approve members of the Department as provided by law at any regular meeting of
the Fire Department. The Mayor and City Council will ratify the new members and
active roster at a regular meeting of the City Council, which ratification
shall serve as approval and authorization for issuance of a certificate of
exemption by the City for each member of the Department in good standing. All
vacancies that may occur in the membership shall be filled in the same manner.
(Neb. RS 35-101)
   (B)   The volunteer Fire Department shall not have upon its rolls at one
time more than 25 persons, for each engine and hose company in the Fire
Department, and no hook and ladder company shall have upon its rolls at any one
time more than 25 members. No organization shall be deemed to be a bona fide
fire or hook and ladder company until it has procured for active service
apparatus for the extinguishment or prevention of fires, in case of a hose
company, to the value of $700, and of a hook and ladder company to the value of
$500.
(Neb. RS 35-102)
   (C)   Members in good standing are those who keep their dues promptly paid
up and are present and render active service when called out for the legitimate
purposes of the Fire Department.
(Neb. RS 35-103)
   (D)   Volunteer firefighters of the Fire Department shall be deemed
employees of the city while in the performance of their duties as members of
the Department. Members of the volunteer Fire Department, before they are
entitled to benefits under the State Workers' Compensation Act, being Neb. RS
48-101 set seq., shall be recommended by the Fire Chief or some person
authorized to act for the Chief for membership therein to the Mayor and City
Council and upon confirmation shall be deemed employees of the city. Members of
the Fire Department after confirmation to membership may be removed by
procedures established by the membership of the Department and thereafter shall
not be considered employees of the city. Firefighters of the Fire Department
shall be considered as acting in the performance and within the course and
scope of their employment when performing activities outside of the corporate
limits of the city, but only if directed to do so by the Fire Chief or some
person authorized to act for the Chief.
(Neb. RS 48-115)
   (E)   The City Council shall purchase and maintain in force a policy of
group term life insurance to age 65 covering the lives of all of the active
volunteer fire and rescue personnel, except that when any such person serves
more than one city or rural or suburban fire protection district, the policy
shall be purchased only by the first city or district which he or she serves.
The policy shall provide a minimum death benefit of $10,000 for death from any
cause and shall, at the option of the insured, be convertible to a permanent
form of life insurance at age 65. The coverage of such policy shall terminate
as to any individual who ceases to be an active volunteer member of the Fire
Department.
(Neb. RS 35-108)
   (F)   For purposes of the prohibition on receipt of any witness fee,
attendance fee, or mileage fee by an employee of the city called as a witness
in connection with his or her officially assigned duties, volunteer
firefighters and rescue squad members testifying in that capacity alone shall
not be deemed employees of the city.
(Neb. RS 33-139.01)
   (G)   The City Council may compensate or reimburse any member of the Fire
Department for expenses incurred in carrying out his or her duties in an amount
set by resolution.
   (H)   All members of the Fire Department shall be subject to such rules and
regulations, and shall perform such duties, as may be prescribed or required of
them by the Fire Chief or the City Council. The members of the Fire Department
shall, during the time of a fire or great public danger, have and exercise the
powers and duties of police officers and shall have full power and authority to
arrest all persons guilty of any violation of the city code or the laws of the
state.
   (I)   Members of the Fire Department may hold meetings and engage in social
activities with the approval of the City Council. The secretary shall, upon
request, keep a record of all meetings and shall make a report to the City
Council of all meetings and activities of the Fire Department.
(Ord. 2152, passed - -2025)
§ 32.045 CONTROL.
   The exclusive control of the Fire Department in all matters except
expenditures, shall be in the Chief of the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 32.45)
§ 32.046 APPARATUS.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have the custody of all apparatus and
property used in fire protection either belonging to or used by the city. He or
she shall have authority to direct how it shall be cared for, and shall be
responsible for its safe and proper keeping.
(Prior Code, § 32.46)
§ 32.047 INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
   (A)   The Fire Chief where a Fire department is established or the Mayor
where no Fire Department exists, at all reasonable hours, may enter into all
buildings and upon all premises within his or her jurisdiction for the purposes
of examination, in harmony with Neb. RS 81-501.01 to 81-531, being the State
Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act of 1969; the Petroleum Products and Hazardous
Substances Storage and Handling Act, being Neb. RS 81-15,117 et seq.; and any
other statutory duties imposed upon the State Fire Marshal.
(Neb. RS 81-512)
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief, when directed to do so by the
City Council, to inspect or cause to be inspected by Fire Department officers,
members, or some other official as often as may be necessary, but not less than
two times a year, all buildings, premises, and public thoroughfares, except the
interiors of private dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to
be corrected any conditions liable to create a fire hazard. The inspection
shall be of the storage, sale, and use of flammable liquids, combustibles, and
explosives; electric wiring and heating; the means and adequacy of exits, in
case of fire in schools, churches, hotels, halls, theaters, factories,
hospitals, and all other buildings in which numbers of persons congregate from
time to time for any purpose whether publicly or privately owned; the design,
construction, location, installation, and operation of equipment for storing,
handling, and utilizing liquefied petroleum gases, specifying the odorization
of such gases and the degree thereof; and chemicals, prozylin plastics,
nitrocellulose films, or any other hazardous material that may now or hereafter
exist.
§ 32.048 FIRE INVESTIGATIONS; REPORTS.
   The Fire Chief shall investigate or cause to be investigated the cause,
origin, and circumstances of every fire occurring in the city by which property
has been destroyed or damaged. All fires of unknown origin shall be reported,
and such officer shall especially make an investigation and report as to
whether the fire was the result of carelessness, accident, or design. The
investigation shall begin immediately after of the occurrence of the fire, and
the State Fire Marshal shall have the right to supervise and direct the
investigation whenever he or she deems it expedient or necessary. The officer
making the investigation of fires occurring in the city shall forthwith notify
the State Fire Marshal and shall within one week of the occurrence of the fire
furnish him or her written statement of all the facts relating to the cause and
origin of the fire and such further information as he or she may call for.
(Neb. RS 81-506)
§ 32.049 RECORDS.
   The Fire Chief shall keep or cause to be kept a record of all meetings of
the Fire Department, the attendance record of all members, and a record of all
fires and shall make a full report of these records to the City Clerk during
the last week in April each year. The record of any fire shall include the
cause, origin, circumstances, property involved, and whether criminal conduct
may have been involved. In the event of sizable property damage, the Fire Chief
shall include the information of whether the losses were covered by insurance,
and if so, in what amount. All records shall be available to the public at any
reasonable time.
§ 32.050 FIRE POLICE.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall, at fires, have control of the police
and of all other persons present. He or she may appoint persons to assist in
the protection of property, who may, on his or her recommendation, be
compensated by the Council for any services rendered.
(Prior Code, § 32.50)
§ 32.051 FUNDS; EXPENDITURE OF.
   No obligations, except in emergencies and with regard to minor expenditures,
shall be incurred on behalf of the Fire Department unless authorized by the
Council.
(Prior Code, § 32.51)
§ 32.052 TRAFFIC; PEDESTRIANS AT FIRE; REGULATION OF.
   No person, without the specific consent of the Chief of the Fire Department
or his or her assistant in command, shall drive any vehicle over any
unprotected hose of the Fire Department. Pedestrians shall not loiter within
150 feet from where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm until
the fire
apparatus shall have left.
(Prior Code, § 32.52) (Ord. 549, passed 2- -1968) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.053 EQUIPMENT; DISTURBING PROHIBITED.
   No person other than the Fire Chief and members of the Fire Department
shall, at any time, molest, handle, or interfere with any of the fire apparatus
belonging to the city.
(Prior Code, § 32.53) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 32.054 TAX; LEVY.
   The city shall have power and authority to levy a tax annually of not more
than one mill on the dollar upon the assessed value of all the taxable property
within the city, except intangible property, for the maintenance and benefit of
the Fire Department. The amount of the tax shall be established at the
beginning of the year and shall be published in the “Annual Estimate” and
included in the “Annual Appropriation Bill.” Upon collection of such tax, the
Treasurer shall disburse the same upon the order of the Fire Chief with the
approval of the Mayor and Council.
(Prior Code, § 32.54)
§ 32.055 FIRE DRILL; RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   All fire companies of the city shall hold training drills at least six times
per year at such times as the companies shall by their own rules fix. The Fire
Department shall have the right-of-way upon any street, alley, or highway when
going to or returning from fires or drill had under the direction or by order
of the Fire Chief. When fires occur, the Fire Chief, Chief of Police, or any
officer specially deputized, shall have the power to close any street or
highway or public place adjacent to such fire.
(Prior Code, § 32.55)
§ 32.056 FIRE MARSHAL; DUTIES.
   (A)   The Fire Marshal shall, subject to the direction and control of the
Mayor, have the immediate control and be charged with the maintenance and
management of the fire equipment of the city. Such duties shall be concurrent
with the general authority vested in the Fire Chief; provided, however, that
the Fire Chief shall be exclusively in charge at fires and the Fire Marshal’s
authority shall not be concurrent with the Fire Chief at fires.
   (B)   The Fire Marshal shall devote time and effort toward the fire safety
of the city and the residents thereof. Such duties shall include but not be
limited to training the various members and prospective members of the
Volunteer Fire Department in fire fighting techniques, fire safety, detection
of fire hazards, new developments and technology related to fire fighting and
fire safety, inspection of fire hazards and potential fire hazards and the
general welfare and safety of the city generally. The Fire Marshal shall take
notice of all fire hazards and potential fire hazards and report the same to
the City Administrator and Fire Chief in such form and manner as may be
prescribed by the Mayor and Fire Chief. The Fire Marshal shall become
thoroughly familiar with the ordinances of the city and statutes of the state
relating to fire safety, fire hazards, fire fighting, and fire departments
generally. The same person may occupy the position of Fire Chief and Fire
Marshal. Candidates for the position of Fire Marshal shall be recommended to
the Mayor by the Fire Department. The Fire Marshal shall then be appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 32.56) (Ord. 847, passed 10-14-1974)
§ 32.057 RETIREMENT COMMITTEE.
   (A)   The City Council hereby establishes the Fire Department Retirement
Committee, which shall supervise the general operation of the Fire Department’s
retirement system. The Retirement Committee shall consist of six members, of
which four members shall be selected by the active paid firefighters. Two
members shall be designated by the City Council. The members who are not
participants in such retirement system shall have a general knowledge of
retirement plans. Members of the City Council, active members of the Fire
Department, and members of the general public may serve on the Retirement
Committee. The Committee members shall be appointed to four year terms.
Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the term by a person with the
same representation as his or her predecessor. Members of the Retirement
Committee shall, subject to approval by the City Council, be reimbursed for
their actual and necessary expenses incurred in carrying out their duties.
   (B)   (1)   The funds in the Firefighters Retirement System Fund shall be
invested by the Retirement Committee. The city, subject to the approval of the
Retirement Committee, shall contract with a funding agent or agents to hold or
invest the assets of the retirement system and to provide for the benefits
provided by Neb. RS 16-1020 to 16-1042. The Retirement Committee, subject to
the approval of the city, may also select an investment manager. The city,
subject to approval of the Retirement Committee, may contract with investment
managers registered under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940, being 15 U.S.C.
§ 80b-1, to invest, reinvest, and otherwise manage such portion of the assets
of the retirement system as may be assigned by the city or Retirement
Committee.
      (2)   The Retirement Committee shall establish an investment plan which
allows each member of the retirement system to allocate all contributions to
his or her employee account and, if he or she commenced his or her employment
after January 1, 1984, his or her employer account to the various investment
options or combinations of investment options described in such plan. Each
firefighter shall have the option of investing his or her employee account and,
if he or she commenced his or her employment after January 1, 1984, his or her
employer account in any proportion, including full allocation, in any
investment option offered by the plan. Upon the direction of the city,
firefighters employed on January 1, 1984, may have the option to allocate their
employer account to various investment options or combinations of investment
options in any proportion, including full allocation, in any investment option
offered by the plan. Each firefighter shall be given a summary of the
investment plan and a detailed current description of each investment option
prior to making or revising his or her allocation.
      (3)   The funds in the Firefighters Retirement System Fund shall be
invested pursuant to the policies established by the State Investment Council.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Retirement Committee to:
      (1)   Provide each employee a summary of plan eligibility requirements
and benefit provisions;
      (2)   Provide, within 30 days after a request is made by a participant, a
statement describing the amount of benefits such participant is eligible to
receive;
      (3)   Make available for review an annual report of the system’s
operations describing both the amount of contributions to the system from both
employee and employer sources and an identification of the total assets of the
retirement system; and
      (4)   The analysis shall be prepared by an independent private
organization or public entity employing actuaries who are members in good
standing of the American Academy of Actuaries, and which organization or entity
has demonstrated expertise to perform this type of analysis and is unrelated to
any organization offering investment advice or which provides investment
management services to the retirement plan.
(Prior Code, § 32.57) (Ord. 1292, passed 12-12-1983)
CIVIL DEFENSE ORGANIZATION
§ 32.070 DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Created. The office of Director of Civil Defense is hereby created.
The Director shall be appointed and shall serve at the will of the Mayor and
Council. The Clerk shall be the assistant Director of Civil Defense.
   (B)   Duties. The duties of the Director of Civil Defense shall include the
following:
      (1)   The recommendation for adoption by the Mayor and Council of a Civil
Defense Plan;
      (2)   The maintenance of necessary liaison between the Council and the
Civil Defense Organization and with other civil defense organizations;
      (3)   The control and direction of the training of the Civil Defense
Organization; and
      (4)   Such other duties as prescribed by law or by regulation adopted by
the Mayor and Council.
(Prior Code, § 32.70)
§ 32.071 FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES.
   The Civil Defense Organization shall consist of the officers and employees
of the city designated by regulations as well as all volunteer defense workers.
The functions and duties of the Organization shall be distributed among such
divisions and services as shall be prescribed by regulation of the Mayor and
Council.
(Prior Code, § 32.71)
§ 32.072 OBSTRUCTION; IMPERSONATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully obstruct, hinder, or
delay any member of the Civil Defense Organization in carrying out his or her
duties under this subchapter.
   (B)   It shall also be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, or display
any emblem, insignia, or other means of identification as a member of the Civil
Defense Organization unless so authorized by the proper officials.
(Prior Code, § 32.72) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.073 USE OF CITY EQUIPMENT.
   The Director of Civil Defense is hereby empowered in case of natural
disaster, subversive action, or enemy action to use any city equipment of any
kind or description and he or she may call upon any or all employees of the
city to assist him or her, particularly those in charge of maintenance and
operation of such equipment; and no further authority shall be required for
such Director of Civil Defense to act.
(Prior Code, § 32.73)
§ 32.074 MUTUAL AID.
   The Director of Civil Defense shall, in collaboration with other public and
private agencies within this county or within the state, develop or cause to be
developed mutual aid arrangements for reciprocal civil defense aid and
assistance in case of a disaster too great to be dealt with unassisted. Such
arrangements shall be consistent with the State Civil Defense Plan, and, in
time of emergency, it shall be the duty of the Civil Defense Organization to
render assistance in accordance with the provisions of the mutual aid
arrangements.
(Prior Code, § 32.74)
COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
§ 32.085 CREATION.
   The Community Redevelopment Authority of the city (the “Authority”) is
created, pursuant to the provisions of Neb. RS 18-2102.01.
(Ord. 2031, passed 8- -2016)
§ 32.086 MEMBERS.
   The Authority shall be made up of seven persons. The initial members of the
Authority shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City
Council. The terms of office of the members initially appointed shall be one
member each for one year, two years, and five years, and two members each for
three years and four years, as designated by the Mayor. As the terms of the
initial members expire, the Mayor shall appoint or reappoint the members with
the approval of the City Council for five year terms, unless a vacancy is being
filled, in which case the appointment shall be for the remainder of the term of
the member being replaced. There shall be no limit on the number of terms for
which a member can be reappointed. Four members shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business.
(Ord. 2031, passed 8- -2016)
§ 32.087 OFFICERS.
   The Authority shall organize by electing one of the members as Chairperson
of the Authority, and another of its members as Vice Chairperson.
(Ord. 2031, passed 8- -2016)
§ 32.088 RULES AND RECORDS.
   (A)   The Authority shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business
and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and
determinations, which records shall be made available for public inspection
during regular business hours.
   (B)   No member of the Authority shall have any interest directly or
indirectly in any contract for property, materials, or services to be required
by the Authority.
(Ord. 2031, passed 8- -2016)
§ 32.089 DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The City Administrator or his or her designated representative shall
serve as the Director, and Ex Officio Secretary of the Authority.
   (B)   The Director shall perform such duties as may be assigned by the
Authority, including the necessary administrative functions described in the
statutes under which the Authority has been created.
(Ord. 2031, passed 8- -2016)
§ 32.090 FUNDS.
   If budgeted by the City Council, the Authority may levy a tax in an amount
not to exceed the levy permitted by state law. All income, revenue, profits,
and other funds received by the Authority shall be deposited with the City
Treasurer as Ex Officio Treasurer of the Authority without commingling such
money with any other money under his or her control and disbursed by him or her
by check or draft only upon warrants, orders, or requisitions by the
Chairperson of the Authority or other person authorized by the Authority, which
shall state distinctly the purpose for which the same are drawn. A permanent
record shall be kept by the Authority of all warrants, orders, or requisitions
so drawn, showing the date, amount, consideration, and to whom payable.
(Ord. 2031, passed 8- -2016)
§ 32.091 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT LAW.
   The Authority shall be vested with all the powers, duties and
responsibilities provided for in the Community Development Law, Neb. RS 18-2101
et seq. as may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2031, passed 8- -2016)
CHAPTER 33: GENERAL MUNICIPAL POLICIES
Section
Meetings
   
33.01   Definitions
   
33.02   Open to public; notice; agenda
   
33.03   Meetings; regular and special
   
33.04   Videoconferencing
   
33.05   Teleconferencing
   
33.06   Closed sessions
   
33.07   Emergency meetings
   
33.08   Minutes
   
33.09   Votes
   
33.10   Notice to news media
   
33.11   Public participation
   
33.12   Order of business
   
33.13   Prohibited acts; exempt events
   
33.14   Manner of addressing the Council; time limit
   
33.15   Decorum; generally
Bonds and Oaths
   
33.30   Bonds; form
   
33.31   Oath of office; municipal officials
Compensation
   
33.45   Municipal officials
   
33.46   Conflict of interest involving contracts
   
33.47   Pension
MEETINGS
§ 33.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MEETING. All regular, special, or called meetings, formal or informal, of a
public body for the purposes of briefing, discussion of public business,
formation of tentative policy, or the taking of any action.
   PUBLIC BODY.
      (1)   (a)   The City Council;
         (b)   All independent boards, commissions, bureaus, committees,
councils, subunits, or any other bodies created by the Constitution of the
state, statute, ordinance, or otherwise pursuant to law; and
         (c)   Advisory committees of the bodies listed above.
      (2)   PUBLIC BODY does not include subcommittees of such bodies unless a
quorum of the public body attends a subcommittee meeting or unless the
subcommittees are holding hearings, making policy, or taking formal action on
behalf of their parent body.
(Neb. RS 84-1409)
§ 33.02 OPEN TO PUBLIC; NOTICE; AGENDA.
   (A)   The formation of public policy is public business and may not be
conducted in secret. Every meeting of a public body shall be open to the public
in order that citizens may exercise their democratic privilege of attending and
speaking at meetings of public bodies, except as otherwise provided by the
Constitution of the state, federal statutes, and the Open Meetings Act, being
Neb. RS 84-1407 to 84-1414.
(Neb. RS 84-1408)
   (B)   (1)   Each public body shall give reasonable advance publicized notice
of the time and place of each meeting as provided in division (B)(2) below. The
notice shall be transmitted to all members of the public body and to the
public.
      (2)   The notice shall be published by:
         (a)   Publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the
public body’s jurisdiction and, if available, on such newspaper’s website; or
         (b)   Posting written notice in three conspicuous public places in the
city. The notice shall be posted in the same three places for each meeting.
      (3)   In addition to a method of notice required by division (B)(2)
above, the notice shall also be provided by any other appropriate method
designated by the public body.
      (4)   Each public body shall record the methods and dates of the notice
in its minutes.
      (5)   The notice shall contain an agenda of subjects known at the time of
the publicized notice or a statement that the agenda, which shall be kept
continually current, is readily available for public inspection at the office
of the public body during normal business hours. Agenda items shall be
sufficiently descriptive to give the public reasonable notice of the matters to
be considered at the meeting. Except for items of an emergency nature, the
agenda shall not be altered later than 24 hours before the scheduled
commencement of the meeting or 48 hours before the scheduled commencement of a
meeting of the City Council scheduled outside the corporate limits of the city.
The public body shall have the right to modify the agenda to include items of
an emergency nature only at such public meeting.
(Neb. RS 84-1411)
Statutory reference:
   Videoconferencing when emergency is declared by the Governor under the
Emergency Management Act, see Neb. RS 84-1411(7)
§ 33.03 MEETINGS; REGULAR AND SPECIAL.
   The regular meetings of the Mayor and Council shall be held on the second
and fourth Mondays of each month in the City Hall, or in such other places as
the Mayor and Council shall from time to time determine, beginning at the hour
of 6:00 p.m.; provided, that the Mayor and Council may, by order, adjourn at
any time not to exceed one regular meeting. Any regular meeting may be
adjourned from time to time prior to the next regular meeting, and at such
adjourned meeting any and all business may be transacted as at any regular
meeting. Under special circumstances the Mayor and Council may determine it is
necessary to adjust the time of regular meetings; proper notice of said meeting
time will be published according to law. Special meetings may be held outside
of the corporate limits if it is deemed necessary. Special meetings shall be
called at the discretion of the Mayor or when three Councilmembers so request
by signing a written call thereof. The object of said special meeting shall be
submitted to Council in writing and the call and objects as well as the
disposition thereof shall be entered upon the journal by the Clerk. Special
meetings may be conducted at such times as deemed appropriate and not limited
to 6:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 33.03) (Ord. 1694, passed - -; Ord. 1931, passed 1-10-2011; Ord.
2003, passed 7-27-2015)
§ 33.04 VIDEOCONFERENCING.
   (A)   A meeting of an organization created under the Interlocal Cooperation
Act, being Neb. RS 13-825 et seq.; the Joint Public Agency Act, being Neb. RS
13-2501 et seq.; or the Municipal Cooperative Financing Act, being Neb. RS 18-
2401 et seq., or of the governing body of a risk management pool or its
advisory committees organized in accordance with the Intergovernmental Risk
Management Act, being Neb. RS 44-4301 et seq., may be held by means of
videoconferencing if:
      (1)   Reasonable advance publicized notice is given;
      (2)   Reasonable arrangements are made to accommodate the public’s right
to attend, hear, and speak at the meeting, including seating, recordation by
audio or visual recording devices, and a reasonable opportunity for input such
as public comment or questions to at least the same extent as would be provided
if videoconferencing was not used;
      (3)   At least one copy of all documents being considered is available to
the public at each site of the videoconference;
      (4)   At least one member of the City Council or advisory committee is
present at each site of the videoconference; and
      (5)   No more than one-half of the governing body’s or advisory
committee’s meetings in a calendar year are held by videoconference.
   (B)   Videoconferencing or conferencing by other electronic communication
shall not be used to circumvent any of the public government purposes
established in the Open Meetings Act, being Neb. RS 84-1407 to 84-1414.
   (C)   City Council may allow a member of the public or any other witness
other than a member of the City Council to appear before the City Council by
means of video or telecommunications equipment.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      VIDEOCONFERENCING. Conducting a meeting involving participants at two or
more locations through the use of audio-video equipment which allows
participants at each location to hear and see each meeting participant at each
other location, including public input. Interaction between meeting
participants shall be possible at all meeting locations.
(Prior Code, § 33.05)
Statutory reference:
   Meetings of public body; notice; method; contents; when available; right to
modify; duties concerning notice; virtual conferencing authorized;
requirements; emergency meeting without notice; appearance before public body,
see Neb. RS 84-1411
   Terms; defined, see Neb. RS 84-1409
§ 33.05 TELECONFERENCING.
   (A)   A meeting of the City Council governing body of an entity formed under
the Interlocal Cooperation Act, being Neb. RS 13-825 et seq., or the Joint
Public Agency Act, being Neb. RS 13-2501 et seq., or of the governing body of a
risk management pool or its advisory committees organized in accordance with
the Intergovernmental Risk Management Act, being Neb. RS 44-4301 et seq., may
be held by telephone conference call if:
      (1)   The territory represented by the member public agencies of the
entity or pool covers more than one county;
      (2)   Reasonable advance publicized notice is given which identifies each
telephone conference location at which a member of the entity’s or pool’s
governing body will be present;
      (3)   All telephone conference meeting sites identified in the notice are
located within public buildings used by members of the entity or pool or at a
place which will accommodate the anticipated audience;
      (4)   Reasonable arrangements are made to accommodate the public’s right
to attend, hear, and speak at the meeting, including seating, recordation by
audio recording devices, and a reasonable opportunity for input such as public
comment or questions to at least the same extent as would be provided if a
telephone conference call was not used;
      (5)   At least one copy of all documents being considered is available to
the public at each site of the telephone conference call;
      (6)   At least one member of the governing body of the entity or pool is
present at each site of the telephone conference call identified in the public
notice;
      (7)   The telephone conference call lasts no more than one hour; and
      (8)   No more than one-half of the entity’s or pool’s meetings in a
calendar year are held by telephone conference call.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the participation of
consultants, members of the press, and other nonmembers of the governing body
at sites not identified in the public notice. Telephone conference calls,
emails, faxes, or other electronic communication shall not be used to
circumvent any of the public government purposes established in the Open
Meetings Act, being Neb. RS 84-1407 to 84-1414.
(Neb. RS 84-1411)
(Prior Code, § 33.06)
§ 33.06 CLOSED SESSIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Any public body may hold a closed session by the affirmative
vote of a majority of its voting members if a closed session is clearly
necessary for the protection of the public interest or for the prevention of
needless injury to the reputation of an individual and if that individual has
not requested a public meeting. The subject matter and the reason necessitating
the closed session shall be identified in the motion to close. Closed sessions
may be held for, but shall not be limited to, such reasons as:
         (a)   Strategy sessions with respect to collective bargaining, real
estate purchases, pending litigation, or litigation which is imminent as
evidenced by communication of a claim or threat of litigation to or by the
public body;
         (b)   Discussion regarding deployment of security personnel or
devices;
         (c)   Investigative proceedings regarding allegations of criminal
misconduct; or
         (d)   Evaluation of the job performance of a person when necessary to
prevent needless injury to the reputation of a person and if that person has
not requested a public meeting.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall permit a closed meeting for
discussion of the appointment or election of a new member to any public body.
   (B)   The vote to hold a closed session shall be taken in open session. The
entire motion, the vote of each member on the question of holding a closed
session, and the time when the closed session commenced and concluded shall be
recorded in the minutes. If the motion to close passes, then the presiding
officer immediately prior to the closed session shall restate on the record the
limitation of the subject matter of the closed session. The public body holding
such a closed session shall restrict its consideration of matters during the
closed portions to only those purposes set forth in the motion to close as the
reason for the closed session. The meeting shall be reconvened in open session
before any formal action may be taken. For purposes of this section, FORMAL
ACTION means a collective decision or a collective commitment or promise to
make a decision on any question, motion, proposal, resolution, order, or
ordinance or formation of a position or policy but shall not include
negotiating guidance given by members of the public body to legal counsel or
other negotiators in closed sessions authorized under division (A)(1)(a) above.
   (C)   Any member of any public body shall have the right to challenge the
continuation of a closed session if the member determines that the session has
exceeded the reason stated in the original motion to hold a closed session or
if the member contends that the closed session is neither clearly necessary for
the protection of the public interest or the prevention of needless injury to
the reputation of an individual. Such challenge shall be overruled only by a
majority vote of the members of the public body. The challenge and its
disposition shall be recorded in the minutes.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that any meeting
be closed to the public.
(Neb. RS 84-1410)
§ 33.07 EMERGENCY MEETINGS.
   When it is necessary to hold an emergency meeting without reasonable advance
public notice, the nature of the emergency shall be stated in the minutes and
any formal action taken in that meeting shall pertain only to the emergency.
Such emergency meetings may be held by means of electronic or telecommunication
equipment. The provisions of §
33.03 shall be complied with in conducting emergency meetings. Complete minutes
of such emergency meetings specifying the nature of the emergency and any
formal action taken at the meeting shall be made available to the public by no
later than the end of the next regular business day.
(Neb. RS 84-1411)
§ 33.08 MINUTES.
   (A)   Each public body shall keep minutes of all meetings showing the time,
place, members present and absent, and the substance of all matters discussed.
   (B)   The minutes of all meetings and evidence and documentation received or
disclosed in open session shall be public records and open to public inspection
during normal business hours.
   (C)   Minutes shall be written or kept as an electronic record and shall be
available for inspection within ten working days or prior to the next convened
meeting, whichever occurs earlier.
(Neb. RS 84-1413)
§ 33.09 VOTES.
   (A)   Any action taken on any question or motion duly moved and seconded
shall be by roll call vote of the public body in open session, and the record
shall state how each member voted, or if the member was absent or not voting.
The requirements of a roll call or viva voce vote shall be satisfied by a city
which utilizes an electronic voting device which allows the yeas and nays of
each member of the City Council to be readily seen by the public.
   (B)   The vote to elect leadership within a public body may be taken by
secret ballot, but the total number of votes for each candidate shall be
recorded in the minutes.
(Neb. RS 84-1413)
§ 33.10 NOTICE TO NEWS MEDIA.
   The City Clerk, in the case of the City Council, and the secretary or other
designee of each other public body shall maintain a list of the news media
requesting notification of meetings and shall make reasonable efforts to
provide advance notification to them of the time and place of each meeting and
the subjects to be discussed at that meeting.
(Neb. RS 84-1411)
§ 33.11 PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   Subject to this subchapter and the Open Meetings Act, being Neb. RS
84-1407 to 84-1414, the public has the right to attend and the right to speak
at meetings of public bodies, and all or any part of a meeting of a public
body, except for closed sessions called pursuant to §
33.07, may be videotaped, televised, photographed, broadcast, or recorded by
any person in attendance by means of a tape recorder, a camera, video
equipment, or any other means of pictorial or sonic reproduction or in writing.
   (B)   It shall not be a violation of division (A) above for any public body
to make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations regarding the conduct of
persons attending, speaking at, videotaping, televising, photographing,
broadcasting, or recording its meetings, including meetings held by virtual
conferencing. A body may not be required to allow citizens to speak at each
meeting, but it may not forbid public participation at all meetings.
   (C)   No public body shall require members of the public to identify
themselves as a condition for admission to the meeting nor shall such body
require that the name of any member of the public be placed on the agenda prior
to such meeting in order to speak about items on the agenda. The body shall
require any member of the public desiring to address the body to identify
himself or herself, including an address and the name of any organization
represented by such person unless the address requirement is waived to protect
the security of the individual.
   (D)   No public body shall, for the purpose of circumventing this subchapter
or the Open Meetings Act, hold a meeting in a place known by the body to be too
small to accommodate the anticipated audience.
   (E)   No public body shall be deemed in violation of this section if it
holds its meeting in its traditional meeting place which is located in the
state.
   (F)   No public body shall be deemed in violation of this section if it
holds a meeting outside of the state if, but only if, a member entity of the
public body is located outside of the state and the other requirements of Neb.
RS 84-1412 are met.
   (G)   The public body shall, upon request, make a reasonable effort to
accommodate the public’s right to hear the discussion and testimony presented
at the meeting.
   (H)   Public bodies shall make available at the meeting, for examination and
copying by members of the public, at least one copy of all reproducible written
material to be discussed at an open meeting, either in paper or electronic
form. Public bodies shall make available at least one current copy of the Open
Meetings Act posted in the meeting room at a location accessible to members of
the public. At the beginning of the meeting, the public shall be informed about
the location of the posted information.
(Neb. RS 84-1412)
§ 33.12 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   Promptly at the hour set by law on the day of each regular meeting, the
members of the City Council, the Mayor, the City Clerk, and such other city
officials that may be required shall take their regular stations in the meeting
place, and the business of the city shall be taken up for consideration and
disposition in the manner prescribed by the official agenda on file at the
office of the City Clerk.
§ 33.13 PROHIBITED ACTS; EXEMPT EVENTS.
   (A)   No person or public body shall fail to invite a portion of its members
to a meeting, and no public body shall designate itself a subcommittee of the
whole body for the purpose of circumventing this subchapter or the Open
Meetings Act, being Neb. RS 84-1407 to 84-1414. No closed session, informal
meeting, chance meeting, social gathering, email, fax, or electronic
communication shall be used for the purpose of circumventing the requirements
of this subchapter or the Act.
   (B)   This subchapter and the Act do not apply to chance meetings or to
attendance at or travel to conventions or workshops of members of a public body
at which there is no meeting of the body then intentionally convened, if there
is no vote or other action taken regarding any matter over which the public
body has supervision, control, jurisdiction, or advisory power.
(Neb. RS 84-1410)
§ 33.14 MANNER OF ADDRESSING THE COUNCIL; TIME LIMIT.
   (A)   Any individual who desires to address the Council concerning an agenda
item will be recognized by the Mayor and be asked to state their name and
address and the subject about which they want to speak.
   (B)   In order to conduct an orderly meeting, the Mayor is allowed to limit
the amount of time a speaker may address the Council. The time limit shall be
five minutes per person unless further time is granted by the Council.
   (C)   All remarks shall be addressed to the Council as a body and not to any
member thereof. No person, other than the members of the Council and the person
having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either
directly or through a member of the Council, without the permission of the
presiding officer. No questions shall be asked a Councilmember except through
the presiding officer.
(Prior Code, § 33.15) (Ord. 1872, passed 7-28-2008)
§ 33.15 DECORUM; GENERALLY.
   (A)   By Councilmembers. While the City Council is in session, the members
shall preserve decorum and order, and no member shall, by conversation or
otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the Council, nor
disturb any members while speaking, or refuse to obey the orders of the Council
or its presiding officer, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (B)   By other persons. No person shall make personal, impertinent, or
slanderous remarks, nor otherwise disturb the order and decorum of any Council
meeting. Defamatory or abusive remarks will not be allowed. Undue interruption
or other interference with the orderly conduct of business will not be allowed.
A speaker’s privilege to address the Council may be terminated if a speaker
persists in improper conduct or remarks. A police officer summoned for that
purpose at the direction of the presiding officer, shall remove any person
violating the provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 33.16) (Ord. 1872, passed 7-28-2008)
BONDS AND OATHS
§ 33.30 BONDS; FORM.
   (A)   The following officers and employees shall each give bond for their
respective offices with good and sufficient sureties or a surety bond to be
approved by the Mayor and Council in sums as follows:
      Clerk   $500
      Councilmembers   2,000
      Treasurer   25,000
         Provided, the Mayor and Council, by resolution, may require the
Treasurer, if they deem it advisable, to give additional bond equal to double
the amount    of money passing through his or her hands.
   (B)   The Mayor and Council may require a bond from any other officer or
employee conditioned in such sum as they may by resolution designate. The
premium, if any, on all bonds required by this section, if surety bonds be
given, shall be paid out of the General Fund, or such other funds of the city
as the Mayor and Council shall designate. The bonds of all officers and
employees required by law to be given shall be filed with and remain in the
custody of the Clerk; provided, the bond of the Clerk shall be filed with and
remain in the custody of the Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 33.30)
§ 33.31 OATH OF OFFICE; MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS.
   (A)   All officials of the city, whether elected or appointed, except when a
different oath is specifically provided herein, shall before entering upon
their respective duties take and subscribe the following oath, which shall be
endorsed upon their respective bonds:
      “I, ______________________________, do solemnly swear that I will support
the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Nebraska, against all enemies foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith
and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely and without
mental reservation or for the purpose of evasion; and that I will faithfully
and impartially perform the duties of the office of ____________________,
according to law and to the best of my ability. And I do further swear that I
do not advocate nor am I a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state
by force or violence; and that during such time as I am in this position I will
not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state
by force or violence. So help me God.”
   (B)   If any such officer is not required to give bond, the oath shall be
filed with the City Clerk.
(Neb. RS 11-101)
COMPENSATION
§ 33.45 MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS.
   (A)   The officers and employees of the city shall receive such compensation
as the Mayor and Council shall fix by resolution.
(Neb. RS 16-310)
   (B)   All officers and employees of the city shall receive such compensation
as the Mayor and City Council may fix at the time of their appointment or
employment, subject to the limitations on the salary or compensation of merged
and combined offices or employments.
(Neb. RS 16-305)
   (C)   The emoluments of any elective officer shall not be increased or
diminished during the term for which he or she was elected, except that in the
case of the City Council and when there are officers elected to a board or
commission having more than one member and the terms of one or more members
commence and end at different times, the compensation of all members of the
Council or such board or commission may be increased or diminished at the
beginning of the full term of any member thereof. No person who shall have
resigned or vacated any office shall be eligible to the same during the time
for which he or she was elected when, during the same time, the emoluments have
been increased.
(Neb. RS 16-326)
   (D)   No officer shall receive any pay or perquisites from the city other
than his or her salary, as provided by ordinance and state law, and the City
Council shall not pay or appropriate any money or any valuable thing to any
person not an officer for the performance of any act, service, or duty, the
doing or performance of which shall come within the proper scope of the duties
of any officer of the city, unless the same is specifically appropriated and
ordered by a vote of three-fourths of all the members elected to the Council.
(Neb. RS 16-502)
(Prior Code, § 33.45)
§ 33.46 CONFLICT OF INTEREST INVOLVING CONTRACTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BUSINESS ASSOCIATION.
         (a)   A business in which:
            1.   The individual is a partner, limited liability company member,
director, or officer; or
            2.   The individual or a member of the individual’s immediate
family is a stockholder of closed corporation stock worth $1,000 or more at
fair market value or which represents more than a 5% equity interest or is a
stockholder of publicly traded stock worth $10,000 or more at fair market value
or which represents more than 10% equity interest.
         (b)   An individual who occupies a confidential professional
relationship protected by law shall be exempt from this definition. This
definition shall not apply to publicly traded stock under a trading account if
the filer reports the name and address of the stockbroker.
(Neb. RS 49-1408)
      IMMEDIATE FAMILY. A child residing in an individual’s household, a spouse
of an individual, or an individual claimed by that individual or that
individual’s spouse as a dependent for federal income tax purposes.
(Neb. RS 49-1425)
      OFFICER.
         (a)   Includes:
            1.   A member of any board or commission of the city which spends
and administers its own funds, who is dealing with a contract made by such
board or commission; or
            2.   Any elected city official.
         (b)   OFFICER does not mean volunteer firefighters or ambulance
drivers with respect to their duties as firefighters or ambulance drivers.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 49-1499.04 or 70-624.04, no
officer may have an interest in any contract to which his or her governing
body, or anyone for its benefit, is a party. The existence of such an interest
in any contract shall render the contract voidable by decree of a court of
competent jurisdiction as to any person who entered into the contract or took
assignment of the contract with actual knowledge of the prohibited conflict. An
action to have a contract declared void under this section may be brought by
the County Attorney, the governing body, or any resident within the
jurisdiction of the governing body and shall be brought within one year after
the contract is signed or assigned. The decree may provide for the
reimbursement of any person for the reasonable value of all money, goods,
material, labor, or services furnished under the contract, to the extent that
the governing body has benefitted thereby.
      (2)   The prohibition in this division (B) shall apply only when the
officer or his or her parent, spouse, or child:
         (a)   Has a business association with the business involved in the
contract; or
         (b)   Will receive a payment, fee, or commission as a result of the
contract.
   (C)   Division (B) above does not apply if the contract is an agenda item
approved at a meeting of the governing body and the interested officer:
      (1)   Makes a declaration on the record to the governing body responsible
for approving the contract regarding the nature and extent of his or her
interest prior to official consideration of the contract;
      (2)   Does not vote on the matters of granting the contract, making
payments pursuant to the contract, or accepting performance of work under the
contract, or similar matters relating to the contract, except that if the
number of members of the governing body declaring an interest in the contract
would prevent the body with all members present from securing a quorum on the
issue, then all members may vote on the matters; and
      (3)   Does not act for the governing body which is a party to the
contract as to inspection or performance under the contract in which he or she
has an interest.
   (D)   The receiving of deposits, cashing of checks, and buying and selling
of warrants and bonds of indebtedness of any such governing body by a financial
institution shall not be considered a contract for purposes of this section.
The ownership of less than 5% of the outstanding shares of a corporation shall
not constitute an interest within the meaning of this section.
   (E)   If an officer’s parent, spouse, or child is an employee of the
officer’s governing body, the officer may vote on all issues of the contract
which are generally applicable to all employees, or all employees within a
classification, and do not single out his or her parent, spouse, or child for
special action.
   (F)   Neb. RS 49-14,102 does not apply to contracts covered by this section.
(Neb. RS 49-14,103.01)
   (G)   (1)   The person charged with keeping records for the governing body
shall maintain separately from other records a ledger containing the
information listed in divisions (G)(1)(a) through (G)(1)(e) below about every
contract entered into by the governing body in which an officer of the body has
an interest and for which disclosure is made pursuant to division (C) above.
This information shall be kept in the ledger for five years from the date of
the officer’s last day in office and shall include:
         (a)   The names of the contracting parties;
         (b)   The nature of the interest of the officer in question;
         (c)   The date that the contract was approved by the governing body;
         (d)   The amount of the contract; and
         (e)   The basic terms of the contract.
      (2)   The information supplied relative to the contract shall be provided
no later than ten days after the contract has been signed by both parties. The
ledger kept pursuant to this division (G) shall be available for public
inspection during the normal working hours of the office in which it is kept.
(Neb. RS 49-14,103.02)
   (H)   An open account established for the benefit of any governing body with
a business in which an officer has an interest shall be deemed a contract
subject to this section. The statement required to be filed by division (G)
above shall be filed within ten days after the account is opened. Thereafter,
the person charged with keeping records for the governing body shall maintain a
running account of amounts purchased on the open account. Purchases made from
petty cash or a petty cash fund shall not be subject to this section.
(Neb. RS 49-14,103.03)
   (I)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) through (H) above, the governing body
may prohibit contracts over a specific dollar amount in which an officer of the
governing body may have an interest.
(Neb. RS 49-14,103.05)
   (J)   The governing body may exempt from divisions (A) through (H) above,
contracts involving $100 or less in which an officer of that body may have an
interest.
(Neb. RS 49-14,103.06)
Statutory reference:
   Other provisions on conflicts of interest, see Neb. RS 18-305 through 18-312
and 49-1499.03 through 49-14,103
   Penalty for violation of restrictions on contracts, see Neb. RS 49-14,103.04
§ 33.47 PENSION.
   The city shall provide pension to employees in accordance with state law and
the plan adopted by City Council, which is hereby adopted by reference. Copies
of the pension plan shall be available for public inspection at the City
Clerk’s office.
(Prior Code, § 33.47)
CHAPTER 34: ELECTIONS
Section
   
34.01   Election procedures
   
34.02   Certifications required
§ 34.01 ELECTION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   All municipal issues and offices shall be combined on the statewide
primary and general election ballots whenever possible. The issuance of
separate ballots shall be avoided in a statewide election if municipal offices
or issues can reasonably be combined with the non-partisan ballot and state law
does not require otherwise. All municipal elections involving the election of
officers shall be held in accordance with the Election Act, being Neb. RS 32-
101 et seq., and in conjunction with the statewide primary or general election.
(Neb. RS 32-556)
   (B)   When the municipality holds an election in conjunction with the
statewide primary or general election, the election shall be held as provided
in the Election Act. Any other election held by the municipality shall be held
as provided in the Election Act unless otherwise provided by the charter, code,
or by-laws of the political subdivision.
(Neb. RS 32-404)
(Prior Code, § 34.01) (Ord. 809, passed 11-26-1973)
§ 34.02 CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED.
   No later than January 5 of each even-numbered year, the City Council shall
certify to the Secretary of State, the Election Commissioner, or the County
Clerk the name of the city, the number of officers to be elected, the length of
the terms of office, the vacancies to be filled by election and length of
remaining term, and the number of votes to be cast by a registered voter for
each office. The Secretary of State, Election Commissioner, and County Clerk
shall prescribe the forms to be used for certification to him or her.
(Neb. RS 32-404)
CHAPTER 35: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
General Provisions
   
35.01   Classification of funds
   
35.02   Contracts and purchases; bidding and other requirements
   
35.03   Claims; warrants
   
35.04   Deposit of funds
   
35.05   Judgments; satisfaction of
Annual Budget
   
35.20   Fiscal year
   
35.21   Annual budget
   
35.22   Appropriation bill
   
35.23   Reappropriation of unexpended balances
   
35.24   Emergency expenditures
Taxes
   
35.35   Certification of tax levy
   
35.36   Sales and use tax
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01 CLASSIFICATION OF FUNDS.
   (A)   All moneys in the hands of the Treasurer and all moneys hereafter
coming into the possession of the city, or received by the Treasurer, shall be
kept and disbursed under the following heads and allocated and accounted for
under a system of bookkeeping adopted by the Mayor and Council:
      (1)   Fire:
         (a)   Maintenance;
         (b)   Equipment; and
         (c)   Fire hydrant rental.
      (2)   Free music and amusement. (.6 mill, unless increased to 1 mill by
special vote.);
      (3)   Funding bonds:
         (a)   Sinking; and
         (b)   Interest.
      (4)   General:
         (a)   Road Fund (1.7 mills for grading and repair; poll tax and
gasoline tax, no levy);
         (b)   Salaries of city officers and employees;
         (c)   Printing and stationery;
         (d)   General occupation tax (no levy);
         (e)   City publicity (one-fifth of 1 mill);
         (f)   Insurance (city officers only);
         (g)   City jail and maintenance; and
         (h)   Purposes not specifically enumerated (special counsel,
judgments, contingent, ordinance revision, auditing city books).
      (5)   Library;
      (6)   Park;
      (7)   Paving (gravel, curb, and/or gutter):
         (a)   Intersection:
            1.   Sinking; and
            2.   Interest.
         (b)   District. Sinking for delinquent special assessments and
interest.
      (8)   Refunding bonds:
         (a)   Sinking; and
         (b)   Interest.
      (9)   Special Occupation Tax Fund, Fire Department (no levy);
      (10)   Street lighting;
      (11)   Water:
         (a)   Sinking;
         (b)   Interest; and
         (c)   Maintenance.
      (12)   Light:
         (a)   Sinking;
         (b)   Interest; and
         (c)   Maintenance.
      (13)   Sewer:
         (a)   Interest;
         (b)   Sinking; and
         (c)   Maintenance.
   (B)   Any unexpended balances in the several funds mentioned shall be
reappropriated according to law for municipal purposes at the time the annual
estimate and the annual appropriation bill are made at the beginning of each
municipal year; provided, however, the Treasurer may invest and transfer
without reappropriation, upon resolution of the Mayor and Council, surplus
funds as permitted by state statute.
   (C)   All other moneys of the city not belonging to or included in the
annual appropriation bill and not otherwise designated shall be held, kept, and
disbursed from the General Fund and shall be used for payment of all expenses
and liabilities of the city as provided by this code or by resolution or order
of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 35.01)
§ 35.02 CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES; BIDDING AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No contract shall hereafter be made by the Mayor and Council or any
committee or member thereof, and no expense shall be incurred by any of the
officers or departments of the city, whether the object of the expenditure
shall have been ordered by the Mayor and Council or not, unless an
appropriation therefor shall have been previously made, except as otherwise
provided by state statute.
   (B)   Before the Council shall make any contract for building bridges or
sidewalks, or for any work on the streets, or for any other work or
improvement, an estimate of the cost thereof shall be made by the Engineer and
submitted to the Council, and no contract shall be entered into for any work or
improvement for a price exceeding such estimate; and in advertising for any
such work, the Council shall cause the amount of such estimate to be published
therewith. Where the estimate aforesaid shall not exceed the sum of $2,000, it
shall not be necessary for the Mayor and Council to advertise for bids, except
in those cases specifically directed by the state statutes. Such advertisement
shall be published in at least two issues of a legal weekly newspaper published
in or of general circulation in the city, said newspaper to be designated by
motion of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 35.02)
Statutory reference:
   Contracts; appropriation a condition precedent, see Neb. RS 16-501
   Contracts; concurrence of majority of city council required; vote of Mayor;
record, see Neb. RS 16-503
   Officer; extra compensation prohibited; exception, see Neb. RS 16-502
§ 35.03 CLAIMS; WARRANTS.
   (A)   Procedure. All claims against the city shall be presented to the Mayor
and Council, in writing, with a full account of the items, verified by the oath
of the claimant, or his or her agent, that the claims are correct, reasonable
and just, and no claim or demand shall be audited or allowed unless the same
shall be presented and verified as provided by this chapter, and no costs shall
be recovered against the city in any action brought against it for an
unliquidated claim which has not been presented to the Mayor and Council to be
audited, nor upon claims allowed in part, unless the recovery shall be for a
greater sum than the amount allowed with interest due.
   (B)   Allowance of claims; payment. Upon the allowance of claims by the
Mayor and Council, the order for their payment must specify the particular fund
or appropriation, and no order or warrant shall be drawn in excess of 85% of
the current levy for the purpose for which it is drawn, unless there shall be
sufficient money in the Treasury to the credit of the proper fund for its
payment, and no claim shall be audited or allowed except an order or warrant
for the payment thereof may legally be drawn.
   (C)   Audit and approval. No claim against the city shall be presented for
allowance or refusal by the Mayor and Council until the same shall have been
audited and approved by the Audit Committee.
(Prior Code, § 35.03)
§ 35.04 DEPOSIT OF FUNDS.
   (A)   The City Treasurer shall deposit, and at all times keep on deposit,
for safekeeping, in banks, capital stock financial institutions, or qualifying
mutual financial institutions of approved and responsible standing, all money
collected, received, or held by him or her as City Treasurer. Such deposits
shall be subject to all regulations imposed by law or adopted by the City
Council for the receiving and holding thereof. The fact that a stockholder,
director, or other officer of such bank, capital stock financial institution,
or qualifying mutual financial institution shall also be serving as Mayor, as a
member of the City Council, or as any other officer of the city shall not
disqualify such bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual
financial institution from acting as a depository for such city funds. Neb. RS
77-2366 shall apply to deposits in capital stock financial institutions. Neb.
RS 77-2365.01 shall apply to deposits in qualifying mutual financial
institutions.
(Neb. RS 16-712)
   (B)   The City Treasurer may deposit the funds received and held by him or
her, by virtue of such office, with a cooperative credit association situated
within the boundaries of the county, or a county adjoining thereto, where the
city is situated, if the city is the depositor, as well as in a commercial
state or national bank if the cooperative credit association performs all the
conditions precedent required by the laws of this state of commercial state and
national banks to qualify them to receive deposits of such public funds. It
shall not be necessary for the city, in making such a deposit of public funds,
to purchase shares in such cooperative credit association or become a member
thereof, and such a cooperative credit association is hereby authorized and
empowered to receive such money under such conditions.
(Neb. RS 21-1316.01)
(Prior Code, § 35.04)
§ 35.05 JUDGMENTS; SATISFACTION OF.
   Should any judgment be obtained against the city, the Mayor and Audit
Committee, under the sanction of the Council, may borrow a sufficient amount of
money to pay the same, for a space of time not exceeding the close of the next
fiscal year, which sum and interest shall, in like manner be added to the
amount authorized to be raised in the general tax levy of the next year, and
embraced therein.
(Prior Code, § 35.05)
ANNUAL BUDGET
§ 35.20 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year in this city shall commence on October 1 in each year
insofar as revenue, fiscal management, and liability are concerned.
(Prior Code, § 35.20)
§ 35.21 ANNUAL BUDGET.
   Before the annual appropriation bill, as provided for in §
35.22, shall be passed, the Mayor and Council shall prepare an estimate of the
probable amount of money necessary for all purposes to be raised by taxation in
the city during the fiscal year for which appropriation is to be made,
including interest and principal due on the bonded debt and sinking fund,
itemizing and classifying the different objects and branches of expenditure, as
nearly as may be, with a statement of the entire revenue of the city for the
previous fiscal year. The annual estimate or yearly budget shall be presented
to the Mayor and Council in the form of a resolution, shall be passed, approved
and entered at large upon the minutes of the proceedings of the Council and
thereafter a copy thereof published by the Clerk for four weeks in some legal
newspaper published or of general circulation in the city.
(Prior Code, § 35.21)
§ 35.22 APPROPRIATION BILL.
   (A)   During the second 30 days of the first quarter of the fiscal year
subsequent to the passage and approval of the estimate of expense or budget for
the fiscal year, as prescribed in §
35.21, but within the first quarter of each fiscal year, the Mayor and Council
shall pass, approve, record, and publish an ordinance, to be termed, “The
Annual Appropriation Bill,” in which such corporate authorities may appropriate
such sums of money as may be deemed necessary to defray all necessary expenses
and liabilities of the city, not exceeding in the aggregate the amount of tax
authorized to be levied during that year. In such ordinance, the Mayor and
Council shall specify the objects and purposes for which such appropriations
are made, and the amount appropriated for each object or purpose. No further
appropriation shall be made at any other time within such fiscal year, unless
the proposition to make such appropriation has been first sanctioned by a
majority of the legal voters of the city; either by a petition signed by them
or at a general or special election duly called therefor. All appropriations
shall end with the fiscal year for which they are made.
   (B)   (1)   Unless otherwise provided by law, whenever, during the current
fiscal year or biennial period, it becomes apparent to the City Council that
there are circumstances which could not reasonably have been anticipated at the
time the budget for the current year or biennial period was adopted; the budget
adopted violated Neb. RS 13-518 to 13-522, that the revenue of the current
fiscal year or biennial period for any fund thereof will be insufficient,
additional expenses will be necessarily incurred, or there is a need to reduce
the budget requirements to comply with Neb. RS 13-518 to 13-522; or the City
Council has been notified by the auditor of a mathematical or accounting error
or noncompliance with the Nebraska Budget Act, being Neb. RS 13-501, the City
Council may propose to revise the previously adopted budget statement and shall
conduct a public hearing on such proposal.
      (2)   Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published at
least four calendar days prior to the date set for hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation within the city. For purposes of such notice, the four
calendar days shall include the day of publication but not the day of hearing.
The published notice shall set forth the time and place of the hearing, the
amount in dollars of additional or reduced money required and for what purpose,
a statement setting forth the nature of the unanticipated circumstances, and,
if the budget requirements are to be increased, the reasons why the previously
adopted budget of expenditures cannot be reduced during the remainder of the
current year or biennial period to meet the need for additional money in that
manner, a copy of the summary of the originally adopted budget previously
published, and a copy of the summary of the proposed revised budget.
      (3)   At such hearing, any taxpayer may appear or file a written
statement protesting any application for additional money. A written record
shall be kept of all such hearings.
      (4)    Upon conclusion of the public hearing on the proposed revised
budget and approval of the proposed revised budget by the City Council, the
City Council shall file with the Clerk and with the Auditor, a copy of the
revised budget, as adopted. The City Council may then issue warrants in payment
for expenditures authorized by the adopted revised budget. Such warrants shall
be referred to as registered warrants and shall be repaid during the next
fiscal year or biennial period from funds derived from taxes levied therefor.
      (5)   Within 30 calendar days after the adoption of the budget under Neb.
RS 13-506, the City Council may, or within 30 calendar days after notification
of an error by the auditor, the City Council shall, correct an adopted budget
which contains a clerical, mathematical, or accounting error which does not
affect the total amount budgeted by more than 1% or increase the amount
required from property taxes. No public hearing shall be required for such a
correction. After correction, the City Council shall file a copy of the
corrected budget with the Clerk and with the Auditor. The City Council may then
issue warrants in payment for expenditures authorized by the budget.
(Prior Code, § 35.22)
§ 35.23 REAPPROPRIATION OF UNEXPENDED BALANCES.
   (A)   At the time of making the annual appropriation bill, the Mayor and
Council may, if notice shall have been given in the annual estimate or yearly
budget, reappropriate any unexpended balance in any fund mentioned in §
35.01 for the use of some other fund if there be no outstanding bonds,
warrants, or claims against such fund whose unexpended balance or portion
thereof is sought to be reappropriated.
   (B)   No sinking funds or interest funds on outstanding bonds or moneys in
any fund required to meet depreciation, replacements or betterments reasonably
contemplated shall ever be reappropriated. In the event that no reappropriation
of funds is authorized, unexpended balances shall be carried forward and placed
to the credit of the funds to which they belong when the books of the Treasurer
are opened at the commencement of each fiscal year on October 1.
(Prior Code, § 35.23)
§ 35.24 EMERGENCY EXPENDITURES.
   (A)   Neither the Mayor and Council nor any department of the city shall add
to the corporate expenditures in any one year anything over and above the
amount provided for in the annual appropriation bill for that year except, as
herein otherwise specifically provided. No expenditures for any improvement, to
be paid out of the General Fund of the city shall exceed in any one year, the
amount provided for such an improvement in the annual appropriation bill;
provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall prevent the Council from
ordering, by a two-thirds’ vote, the repair or restoration of any improvement,
the necessity for which is caused by any casualty or accident happening after
such annual appropriation is made.
   (B)   The Council may, by a two-thirds’ vote of the members, order the Mayor
and the Audit Committee to borrow a sufficient sum to provide for the expense
necessary to be incurred in making any repairs or restorations of improvements,
the necessity of which has arisen, as mentioned in this section, for a space of
time not exceeding the close of the next fiscal year, which sum, and the
interest, shall be added to the amount authorized to be raised in the next
general tax levy, and embraced therein.
(Prior Code, § 35.24)
TAXES
§ 35.35 CERTIFICATION OF TAX LEVY.
   The Mayor and Council shall annually, on or before October 1, certify to the
County Clerk, the several amounts which are shown by the assessment roll for
the year, including all amounts due upon legal and valid bonds outstanding
against such corporation. The certificate shall contain the percentage or
number of mills on the dollars of tax levied for all city purposes on the
taxable property within the corporation for the year ensuing, as shown by the
assessment roll for the year, including all special assessments and other taxes
authorized by law. The amount of other taxes which may be certified, assessed,
and collected shall not exceed five mills on the dollar to defray the general
and incidental expenses thereof, together with any special assessments or
special taxes, or amounts which may be assessed as taxes according to law, and
such sum as may be authorized by law for the payment of outstanding bonds and
debts.
(Prior Code, § 35.40)
§ 35.36 SALES AND USE TAX.
   (A)   No reductions or elimination of other taxes or fees is contemplated.
   (B)   Revenues from the increased sales and use tax are to be used for the
following public infrastructure projects as are allowed pursuant to Neb. RS 77-
27,142: only for public infrastructure projects including municipal roads,
streets, sidewalks, curbs, and gutters; wastewater collection facilities,
including water mains and their appurtenances, water distribution facilities,
including, but not limited to, mains and their appurtenances.
   (C)   The City and the Community Redevelopment Authority of the city have
entered into an interlocal agreement which created a separate administrative
entity (the city’s Community Infrastructure Cooperative) for purposes of the
interlocal agreement, related to public infrastructure projects. The interlocal
agreement contains provisions, including benchmarks, relating to the long-term
development of unified governance of public infrastructure projects with
respect to the parties.
   (D)   The increased sales and use tax shall terminate no more than ten years
after the effective date of the increased sales and use tax or, if bonds are
issued and the local option sales and use tax revenue is pledged for payment of
such bonds, upon payment of such bonds and any refunding bonds, whichever date
is later, except that the portion of the rate greater than 1.5% imposed for the
purpose of the interlocal agreement referred to above (rounded to the next
higher 0.25%) shall not terminate.
(Ord. 2110, passed 5-23-2022)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES, GENERALLY
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   SEWER
      
53.   SOLID WASTE
      
54.   ELECTRIC
      
55.   STORMWATER
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES, GENERALLY
Section
   
50.01   Denial of service; when prohibited
   
50.02   Utility bills; collection
   
50.03   Discontinuance of service; notice procedure
   
50.04   Diversion of services, meter tampering, unauthorized reconnection,
prohibited; evidence
   
50.05   Diversion of services; civil action
   
50.06   Delinquent utility charges; lien; civil action
§ 50.01 DENIAL OF SERVICE; WHEN PROHIBITED.
   No applicant for the services of a public or private utility company
furnishing water, natural gas, or electricity at retail in the city shall be
denied service because of unpaid bills for similar service which are not
collectible at law because of statutes of limitations or discharge in
bankruptcy proceedings.
(Neb. RS 70-1601)
§ 50.02 UTILITY BILLS; COLLECTION.
   Charges for electric, water, and sewer utility services as well as
sanitation and stormwater service provided by or through the city shall be
billed jointly on a monthly basis. The Electric Superintendent and Public Works
Director shall read, or cause to be read, water and electric meters on or
around the first day of each month. Utility bills shall be mailed before the
end of each month, and shall be due upon receipt and payable by the tenth day
of the following month. Bills paid after the tenth day of each month shall be
deemed delinquent and have a penalty charge of 10% of said services added
thereto. The city may discontinue service two weeks after the delinquent date
pursuant to §
50.03. Once discontinued, service shall not be recommenced except upon payment
of a reconnection fee in an amount set by ordinance of the City Council. The
city may also take any action authorized by law to effect collection of the
delinquent charges.
(Ord. 2122, passed - -2023)
§ 50.03 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; NOTICE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The municipality shall have the right to discontinue water and
electrical services and remove its properties if the charges for such services
are not paid within two weeks (including Saturday and Sunday) after the date
that the charges become delinquent. Before any termination, the municipality
shall first give notice by first-class mail, electronic mail, or in person to
any domestic subscriber whose service is proposed to be terminated. If notice
is given by first-class mail, such mail shall be conspicuously marked as to its
importance.
   (B)   The notice shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The reason for the proposed disconnection;
      (2)   A statement of the intention to disconnect unless the domestic
subscriber either pays the bill or reaches an agreement with the municipality
regarding payment of the bill;
      (3)   The date upon which service will be disconnected if the domestic
subscriber does not take appropriate action;
      (4)   The name, address, and telephone number of the employee or
department to whom the domestic subscriber may address an inquiry or complaint;
      (5)   The domestic subscriber’s right, prior to the disconnection date,
to request a conference regarding any dispute over such proposed disconnection;
      (6)   A statement that the municipality may not disconnect service
pending the conclusion of the conference;
      (7)   A statement to the effect that disconnection shall be postponed or
prevented upon presentation of a duly licensed physician’s, physicians
assistant’s, or advanced practice registered nurse’s certificate which shall
certify that the domestic subscriber or a resident within such subscriber’s
household has an existing illness or handicap which would cause such subscriber
or resident to suffer an immediate and serious health hazard by the
disconnection of the municipality’s service to that household. Such certificate
shall be filed with the municipality within five days of receiving notice under
this section, excluding holidays and weekends, and will prevent the
disconnection of the municipality’s service for a period of at least 30 days
from such filing. Only one postponement of disconnection shall be required
under this subsection for each incidence of non-payment of any past-due
account;
      (8)   The cost that will be borne by the domestic subscriber for
restoration of service;
      (9)   A statement that the domestic subscriber may arrange with the
municipality for an installment payment plan;
      (10)   A statement to the effect that those domestic subscribers who are
welfare recipients may qualify for assistance in payment of their utility bill
and that they should contact their caseworker in that regard; and   
      (11)   Any additional information not inconsistent with this section
which has received prior approval from the City Council.
   (C)   The city shall make the service termination information required under
this chapter readily accessible to the public on the website of the city and
available by mail upon request.
   (D)   A domestic subscriber may dispute the proposed discontinuance of
service by notifying the municipality with a written statement that sets forth
the reasons for the dispute and the relief requested. If a statement has been
made by the subscriber, a conference shall be held before the municipality may
discontinue services.
   (E)   The procedures adopted by the City Council for resolving utility
bills, three copies of which are on file in the office of the Clerk, are hereby
incorporated by reference in addition to any amendments thereto and are made a
part of this section as though set out in full.
   (F)   This section shall not apply to any disconnections or interruptions of
services made necessary by the municipality for reasons of repair or
maintenance or to protect the health or safety of the domestic subscriber or of
the general public.
(Ord. 2122, passed - -2023)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 70-1605, 70-1606, 70-1609, and 70-1615
§ 50.04 DIVERSION OF SERVICES, METER TAMPERING, UNAUTHORIZED
RECONNECTION, PROHIBITED; EVIDENCE.
   (A)   It is an offense for any person to do any of the following:
      (1)   To connect any instrument, device, or contrivance with any wire
supplying or intended to supply electricity or electric current or to connect
any pipe or conduit supplying gas or water, without the knowledge and consent
of any city utility supplying such products or services, in such a manner that
any portion thereof may be supplied to any instrument by or at which
electricity, electric current, gas, or water may be consumed without passing
through the meter made or provided for measuring or registering the amount or
quantity thereof passing through it;
      (2)   To knowingly use or knowingly permit the use of electricity,
electric current, gas, or water obtained unlawfully pursuant to this section;
      (3)   To reconnect electrical, gas, or water service without the
knowledge and consent of any city utility supplying such service if the service
has been disconnected pursuant to Neb. RS 70-1601 through 70-1615 or §
50.02; or
      (4)   To willfully injure, alter, or by any instrument, device, or
contrivance in any manner interfere with or obstruct the action or operation of
any meter made or provided for measuring or registering the amount or quantity
of electricity, electric current, gas, or water passing through it, without the
knowledge and consent of any city utility supplying the electricity, electric
current, gas, or water passing or intended to pass through the meter.
   (B)   Proof of the existence of any wire, pipe, or conduit connection or
reconnection or of any injury, alteration, interference, or obstruction of a
meter is prima facie evidence of the guilt of the person in possession of the
premises where that connection, reconnection, injury, alteration, interference,
or obstruction is proved to exist.
(Neb. RS 28-515.02)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.05 DIVERSION OF SERVICES; CIVIL ACTION.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, the definitions found in Neb. RS 25-
21,275 shall apply.
   (B)   (1)   The city utility may bring a civil action for damages against
any person who commits, authorizes, solicits, aids, abets, or attempts
bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering, when that act results in
damages to the utility. A city utility may bring a civil action for damages
pursuant to this section against any person receiving the benefit of utility
service through means of bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering.
      (2)   In any civil action brought pursuant to this section, the city
utility shall be entitled, upon proof of willful or intentional bypassing,
tampering, or unauthorized metering, to recover as damages:
         (a)   The amount of actual damage or loss if the amount of the damage
or loss is susceptible of reasonable calculation; or
         (b)   Liquidated damages of $750 if the amount of actual damage or
loss is not susceptible of reasonable calculation.
      (3)   In addition to damage or loss under division (B)(2)(a) or (B)(2)(b)
above, the utility may recover all reasonable expenses and costs incurred on
account of the bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering including, but
not limited to, disconnection, reconnection, service calls, equipment, costs of
the suit, and reasonable attorneys’ fees in cases within the scope of Neb. RS
25-1801.
(Neb. RS 25-21,276)
   (C)   (1)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a tenant or
occupant at any premises where bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering
is proven to exist caused or had knowledge of that bypassing, tampering, or
unauthorized metering if the tenant or occupant:
         (a)   Had access to the part of the utility supply system on the
premises where the bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering is proven to
exist; and
         (b)   Was responsible or partially responsible for payment, either
directly or indirectly, to the utility or to any other person for utility
services to the premises.
      (2)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a customer at any
premises where bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering is proven to
exist caused or had knowledge of that bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized
metering if the customer controlled access to the part of the utility supply
system on the premises where the bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering
was proven to exist.
(Neb. RS 25-21,277)
   (D)   The remedies provided by this section shall be deemed to be
supplemental and additional to powers conferred by existing laws. The remedies
provided in this section are in addition to and not in limitation of any other
civil or criminal statutory or common-law remedies.
(Neb. RS 25-21,278)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.06 DELINQUENT UTILITY CHARGES; LIEN; CIVIL ACTION.
   (A)   All water rates, taxes, or rent assessed by the City Council shall be
a lien upon the premises or real estate, upon or for which the same is used or
supplied; and such taxes, rents, or rates shall be paid and collected and such
lien enforced in such manner as the Council shall, by ordinance, direct and
provide.
   (B)   All sewer charges established by the City Council shall be a lien upon
the premises or real estate for which the same is used or supplied. Such lien
shall be enforced in such manner as the Council provides by ordinance.
   (C)   If the service charge established by the City Council for the use of
any city sewage disposal plant and sewerage system is not paid when due, such
sum may be recovered by the city in a civil action or it may be certified to
the County Assessor and assessed against the premises served and collected or
returned in the same manner as other city taxes are certified, assessed,
collected, and returned.
(Neb. RS 18-503)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Contract
   
51.002   Application
   
51.003   Water; when turned on
   
51.004   Water not to be supplied to others by consumer
   
51.005   Fires; water use during
   
51.006   Boilers; city not liable for damages
   
51.007   Turning water on after shut off
   
51.008   Right of entry
   
51.009   Limitations on water use; hoses
   
51.010   Hydrants; fountains
   
51.011   Fire mains; individual
   
51.012   Contamination prohibited
   
51.013   Nonliability of city
   
51.014   Complaints by consumers
   
51.015   Reservations; alterations
Connections
   
51.030   Connections to main
   
51.031   Meters; deposit; testing
   
51.032   Deposit fund
   
51.033   Service pipe specifications
   
51.034   Depth of trench
   
51.035   Stop cocks
   
51.036   Stop and waste
   
51.037   Excavations; requirements
   
51.038   Excavations; permit
   
51.039   Water extension
   
51.040   New subdivisions
   
51.041   Connection outside city limits
Rates and Charges
   
51.055   Accounts
   
51.056   Deposits
   
51.057   Water rates and connection fees
   
51.058   Meter in disrepair
   
51.059   Lien
   
51.060   Fire prevention outside city; water provided for
   
51.061   Availability of service fee
Cross-Connection Control Devices
   
51.075   Purpose
   
51.076   Definitions
   
51.077   Implementation
   
51.078   Survey and investigations
   
51.079   Discontinuance for noncompliance
   
51.080   Restoration of service; conditions of
   
51.081   Designated responsible party
   
51.082   Interpretation; appeal; procedure
   
51.083   City employees; liability limited
Backflow Prevention
   
51.095   Cross-connections prohibited
   
51.096   Hose bid vacuum breakers; where required
   
51.097   Installation
   
51.098   Conditions where required
   
51.099   Facilities where required
   
51.100   Other circumstances where required
   
51.101   Type of protection required
   
51.102   Atmospheric vacuum breaker; where permissible
   
51.103   Existing backflow prevention devices
   
51.104   Strainers; when required
   
51.105   Booster pumps; low pressure cutoff; required
   
51.106   Yard hydrants
   
51.107   Underground sprinklers
   
51.108   Fire suppression systems
Water Conservation, Drought and Emergency Contingency Plan
   
51.120   Purpose
   
51.121   Class of uses of water established
   
51.122   Definitions
   
51.123   Water plan established
   
51.124   Administrative enforcement provisions
   
51.125   Emergency termination
   
51.126   Exemptions by permit
Wellhead Encroachment Area
   
51.140   Intent
   
51.141   Definition
   
51.142   Designation
   
51.143   Permitted principal uses and structures
   
51.144   Permitted accessory uses and structures
   
51.145   Exceptions
   
51.146   Prohibited uses and structures
   
51.147   Minimum lot requirements
   
51.148   Minimum yard requirements
   
51.149   Maximum lot coverage
   
51.150   Maximum height
   
51.151   Sign regulations
   
51.152   Existing facilities
   
   
51.999   Penalty
Appendix
   Table I:    Cross-Connections Rated by Degree of Hazard
   Table II:    Permitted Backflow Assemblies, Devices, and Methods
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 CONTRACT.
   The rules and regulations and water rates hereinafter named shall be
considered a part of the contract with every person who is supplied with water
through the waterworks of the city, and every such person, by taking water
shall be considered and held to be bound thereby; and whenever any of the rules
of this chapter, or such other rules as the city or its Public Works Director
may hereafter adopt, are violated, the water shall be cutoff from the building
or place of such violation, even though two or more parties may receive water
through the same pipe, and shall not be let on again except by order of the
Public Works Director, and on payment of the expense of shutting it off and
turning it on again; and after the cause for such suspension has been removed,
and upon such other terms as the Public Works Director shall determine, and a
satisfactory understanding with the parties that no further cause of complaint
shall arise. In case of such violation, the city shall have the right to
declare payment made for the water by the person committing such violation to
be forfeited, and the same shall thereupon be forfeited.
(Prior Code, § 51.001)
§ 51.002 APPLICATION.
   Every person desiring a supply of water must make application therefor to
the water office upon blanks to be supplied by the city for that purpose. The
application must state truly and fully for what purpose and all uses to which
the water is to be applied and no different or additional use will be allowed
except by permission of the Public Works Director. Not more than one house
shall be supplied from one tap except by special permission.
(Prior Code, § 51.002)
§ 51.003 WATER; WHEN TURNED ON.
   Water will not be turned on in any house or private service pipe except upon
the order of the Public Works Director or his or her duly authorized agent, nor
until the applicant shall have paid the water rent, if any, due for the current
term. Plumbers are strictly prohibited from turning the water into any service
pipe, except on the order or permission of the Public Works Director or his or
her duly authorized agent. This rule shall not be construed to prevent any
plumber admitting water to test pipes, and for that purpose only.
(Prior Code, § 51.003)
§ 51.004 WATER NOT TO BE SUPPLIED TO OTHERS BY CONSUMER.
   No consumer shall supply water to other families or suffer them to take or
in any manner use the same off his or her premises. After water has been
introduced into any building or upon any premises, no person shall make or
employ any plumber or other person to make any tap or connection with the pipe
upon the premises for alteration, extension, or attachment, without the
permission of the Public Works Director. It is hereby declared unlawful for any
person not a consumer of the water system of the city habitually to take or
draw water for domestic use from taps or facilities not his or her own.
(Prior Code, § 51.004) Penalty, see §
51.999 
§ 51.005 FIRES; WATER USE DURING.
   All persons using water shall keep the hydrant, hose, water closets,
urinals, fountains, baths, and all other fixtures allotted to their use, closed
during fire, and shall be responsible for any damage or injury that may result
to others from the improper use of the water.
(Prior Code, § 51.005)
§ 51.006 BOILERS; CITY NOT LIABLE FOR DAMAGES.
   (A)   All house boilers shall be constructed with one or more air holes near
the top of the inlet pipe and sufficiently strong to bear the pressure of the
atmosphere under vacuum. The stop cocks and other appurtenances must be
sufficiently strong to bear the pressure and run off the water in the mains.
All persons taking water shall keep their own service pipes, stop cocks, and
apparatus in good repair and protect them from frost at their own expense, and
shall prevent all unnecessary waste of water.
   (B)   It is stipulated by the city and Public Works Director that no claim
shall be made against them, by reason of the breaking of any service cock, or
if from any cause the supply of water fails, or from damage arising from
shutting off water to repair mains, making connections, extensions, or from any
other purpose that may be deemed necessary, and the right is hereby reserved to
cut off the supply of water at any time, any permit granted to the contrary
notwithstanding.
(Prior Code, § 51.006)
§ 51.007 TURNING WATER ON AFTER SHUT OFF.
   (A)   When the water has been turned off from any consumer, he or she shall
not turn it on, or permit it to be turned on, without the written consent of
the Public Works Director or his or her authorized agent.
   (B)   Whenever any water shall have been shut off by reason of the non-
payment of water rent, or from any other violation of this chapter, the same
shall not be turned on again until payment has been made of all rent due, or
until the removal of the cause for which the water was shut off, and the
further payment to the city as a fee for turning the water on again as adopted
by the City Council and on file with the Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 51.007)
§ 51.008 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Everyone using the water system of the city shall permit the Public Works
Director or his or her duly authorized agent, at all hours of the day between
7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to enter his or her premises or buildings to examine
the pipes and fixtures, and the manner in which the water is used, and must at
all times, frankly and without concealment, answer all questions relative to
consumption of water.
(Prior Code, § 51.008)
§ 51.009 LIMITATIONS ON WATER USE; HOSES.
   Hoses larger than three-fourths’ inch will not be permitted. No hose shall
be used unless water is furnished through a meter. The right is reserved to
suspend the use of fountains and hoses for sprinkling yards and gardens
whenever in the opinion of the Public Works Director, the public exigency may
require.
(Prior Code, § 51.009)
§ 51.010 HYDRANTS; FOUNTAINS.
   No hydrants, except for public drinking fountains, shall be placed within
the limits of any street, and no drinking fountain shall be erected for general
use which has openings by which it can be used as a source of domestic supply;
provided, the city may place fire hydrants at such points in streets and other
public areas as the Mayor and Council deem necessary.
(Prior Code, § 51.010) Penalty, see §
51.999 
§ 51.011 FIRE MAINS; INDIVIDUAL.
   If proprietors of lumber yards, manufactories, halls, stores, elevators,
warehouses, hotels, or public buildings, regular consumers of water from the
water system, wish to lay large pipes with hydrants and hose couplings to be
used only in case of fire, they will be permitted to connect with street mains
at their own expense upon application to the Council and Public Works Director,
and under his or her directions, and will be allowed the use of water for fire
purposes only, free of charge.
(Prior Code, § 51.011)
§ 51.012 CONTAMINATION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall place in or near the waterworks system of the city any dirt,
filth, or impure substance whatever, or any substance or fluid by which the
water shall be rendered impure, unpalatable or dangerous for human or animal
consumption. No abandoned well shall hereafter be used as a cesspool. Any
cesspool contaminating the water supply shall be cleaned out, filled up, and
discontinued upon ten days’ notice in writing served upon the owner or occupant
by the Chief of Police pursuant to order of the Mayor and Council.
(Prior Code, § 51.012) Penalty, see §
51.999 
§ 51.013 NONLIABILITY OF CITY.
   The city shall in no manner be liable for any damages caused by shutting off
the supply of water of any consumer while the system or any part thereof is
undergoing repairs, or caused by the freezing of the main or the breaking of
any pipe or service cock, or by a shortage of water due to accident, to
circumstances over which the city has no control, or to an act of God.
(Prior Code, § 51.013)
§ 51.014 COMPLAINTS BY CONSUMERS.
   Any consumer feeling himself or herself aggrieved by reason of any
controversy with the Public Works Director or cashier may appear before the
Mayor and Council and present his or her grievance. Any consumer who considers
himself or herself aggrieved by being required to pay the charge demanded for
the use of water, or for the resumption of water service after the same shall
have been shut off, shall pay such charge under protest, in which event the
Public Works Director or Cashier shall write on the receipt given such consumer
the words “Paid Under Protest.” Such consumer may then present verified claim
in the manner provided for presenting claims to the Mayor and Council for a
refund of the amount so paid under protest. Such claims shall then be
considered by the Mayor and Council in the same manner as other claims against
the city.
(Prior Code, § 51.014)
§ 51.015 RESERVATIONS; ALTERATIONS.
   The Mayor and Council reserve the right at all times to shut off the water
for necessary repairs or extensions, and the right to amend or alter these
rules and regulations when by them deemed advisable.
(Prior Code, § 51.015)
CONNECTIONS
§ 51.030 CONNECTIONS TO MAIN.
   (A)   Application required; fees.
      (1)   Before any residential or commercial property is connected to a
water main of the city, application must be made by the owner, or his or her
agent, of the property on which such water is to be used, giving the location
of the property and the size of tap and service line required. Before any tap
is authorized, the applicant shall pay a fee according to the following
schedule:
 
Inside corporate limits: residential and No fee
commercial premises
Outside corporate limits: residential    An amount as set by the City Council
and commercial premises                  from time to time
 
      (2)   For service lines and/or meters outside the corporate limits and
larger than one-inch, the Mayor and Council shall fix the application fees.
Nothing herein shall be construed to obligate the city to furnish water service
to non-residents.
   (B)   Service line installation: meter pits; responsibility; cost.
      (1)   City responsibility. The city will tap the water main, furnish and
install a corporation and service pipeline to the right-of-way line where the
city will install a curb stop and box. The consumer shall pay to the city the
reasonable cost as determined by the city, for the materials, equipment, and
labor furnished by the Water Department to install the service lines; including
the removal and replacement of boring any paving curb, gutter, sidewalk, or
other improvements.
      (2)   Applicant responsibility. The applicant, at his or her own expense,
shall connect to the city’s curb stop and install the water service line from
the curb stop in and upon his or her premises. When meters are not set in
basements, a meter pit shall be constructed by the applicant or consumer at his
or her own expense at a point near the property line, and shall be in
accordance with city standards and approved by the city prior to meter
installation.
(Prior Code, § 51.030) (Ord. 1476, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 1624, passed 9-28-
1998)
§ 51.031 METERS; DEPOSIT; TESTING.
   (A)   Meters.
      (1)   All water service connected with the water system of the city shall
have placed thereon a water meter with a remote reading device. The city will
furnish to the user a five-eighths’ inch water meter with a remote reading
device and meter setter, or in the event a larger meter is requested by the
user, then the user will pay to the city the difference in cost between the
five-eighths inch meter and the meter size requested. The meter and remote
shall remain the property, at all times, of the city, and will not be removed
from the premises except by employees of the city.
      (2)   New customers shall pay to the city the reasonable cost for meter
setter with valve, meter with remote and miscellaneous materials, equipment,
and labor associated with the installation of the metering system.
      (3)   No person other than the city or a duly licensed and registered
plumber shall be allowed to set meters and make connections to the water
service of the city. The meters hereafter placed, replaced or repaired shall be
connected with the mains by copper service and no other materials shall be used
in making the connection. In the event a meter larger than five-eighths’ inch
is installed at the request of the user, the amount of the difference in cost
shall be assessed to the user for the larger meter, and will not be refundable
in the event that the meter is removed.
   (B)   Customer deposits. The city, when application for water service is
made, shall require applicant to pay a fee, which is adopted by the City
Council and on file with the Clerk, as a service deposit to protect the city
from loss arising out of water service furnished; the city is hereby empowered
to demand and collect the service deposit from any consumer at any time.
   (C)   Remote reading device required; cost.
      (1)   All water meters installed for new water services connected to the
water system of the city shall have installed as part thereof, a remote reading
device which will allow the meter to be read from the outside of the building
or premises. The remote reading device shall be furnished by the city along
with the five-eighths’ inch water meter. The cost of the remote reading device
shall be collected at the time the service deposit is collected.
      (2)   Consumers having water meters without remote reading devices shall
be required to have such a device installed upon receiving written notice by
the city. The city shall furnish and install the reading devices at a fee which
is adopted by the City Council and on file with the Clerk, the fee may be paid
by the consumer upon installation of the reading device or the fee shall be
billed on the consumer’s monthly water use bill. Failure to pay the fee may
result in the same discontinuance of water service as provided for in failure
to pay a water use bill.
   (D)   Testing; repair; replacement. All meters and remote reading devices so
set and installed will be kept in repair at the expense of the city unless the
damage done was caused by the negligence or the willful conduct or the act of
the user. When the meters or remote meter readers shall be entirely worn out,
they will be replaced by the city. Hereafter, all meters shall be sealed in
three places, once on the burr connection on each side and on the cover of the
registering dial, and no person shall deface, injure or break the seal unless
authorized to do so by the city. All water meters may be tested at the expense
of the city at any reasonable time. Remote reading devices shall be the
property of the city and shall not be removed from the premises by the owner of
the premises. The requirement of remote meter reading devices shall apply to
all existing meters and all future installations.
(Prior Code, § 51.031) (Ord. 1121, passed 12-11-1978; Ord. 1476, passed 6-8-
1992) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.032 DEPOSIT FUND.
   Service deposits when received by the Treasurer from the cashier shall be
held separate and apart in a fund to be known as “Water Service Deposit Fund,”
which is in the nature of a trust fund. When for any reason water service is no
longer required, the service deposit shall, upon demand, be returned to the
customer with proper deductions, if any, for unpaid rentals, or arrearages due
the water system and reasonable depreciation on the meter surrendered, as fixed
by the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director or cashier shall give
each applicant or consumer separate receipt for all service deposits received
by him or her and the receipt shall be surrendered for cancellation by the
consumer when seeking repayment of the service deposit. The funds shall be put
out at interest and the income therefrom shall be expended solely for the
repair and the testing of water meters and for the purchase of new water
meters.
(Prior Code, § 51.032)
§ 51.033 SERVICE PIPE SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   All service pipes from the point of union with the commercial main to
the meter shall be of copper of such strength and quality as prescribed by the
Public Works Director. Should any such consumer fail, neglect or refuse to
replace his or her service pipe with copper pipe after ten days’ notice in
writing to do so, such service pipe may be cut off at the corporation cock
until the copper service pipe is installed. Copper service pipe shall not be
less than 16 gauge whether three-fourths’ inch or one inch pipe is laid.
   (B)   Every copper service pipe must be sufficiently waving to allow not
less than one foot extra length, and laid in such manner as to prevent rupture
by settling.
   (C)   In lieu of copper pipe, 200 PSI-SDR9 polyethylene or better, will be
allowed, with the following conditions:
      (1)   Copper pipe O.D. size only no insert fitting size; or
      (2)   One pipe size larger than copper pipe or other material specified
in the most current adopted edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code.
   (D)   Water service lines shall be a minimum of three-fourths’ inch Type K
copper line.
(Prior Code, § 51.033) (Ord. 1447, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 1531, passed 6-13-
1994)
§ 51.034 DEPTH OF TRENCH.
   All service pipe must be laid as much under the surface of the ground as the
main in the street, unless otherwise ordered by the Public Works Director and
in all cases be so protected so as to prevent rupture by freezing.
(Prior Code, § 51.034)
§ 51.035 STOP COCKS.
   (A)   Every pipe must be provided with a stop cock for each consumer, easily
accessible and so situated that the water can be conveniently shut off, stop
cocks to be known as inverted key Minneapolis pattern round way curved stops,
“Mueller’s,” or any other equally as good, to be determined by the Public Works
Director.
   (B)   Unless otherwise permitted, stop cocks shall be placed over the
service pipe near the curb line, and protected by a standard stop box,
Minneapolis pattern, or other equally as good, to be determined by the Public
Works Director, the same to screw to curb cock. The stop box shall reach from
the top of the ground to the stop cock in the service pipe and shall be of
suitable size to admit a stop key for turning on and off the stop. The stop box
shall be equipped with a cast iron covering having the word “Water” or the
letter “W” marked thereon, and shall be adjustable to regulate distance from
curb cock to the top of the stop box, and shall be so placed as to be level
with the top cover of the meter box, and shall in each instance be placed
uniformly at a point at or near the curb line.
(Prior Code, § 51.035)
§ 51.036 STOP AND WASTE.
   There shall be a stop and waste cock attached to every supply pipe at a
point in the building so as to admit water being shut off in frosty weather and
the pipes being emptied.
(Prior Code, § 51.036)
§ 51.037 EXCAVATIONS; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   In making excavations in streets or highways for the laying of service
pipes or making repairs, the planks or paving, stones, and earth removed must
be deposited in a manner that will occasion the least inconvenience to the
public and provide for passage of water along gutters.
   (B)   No person shall leave any excavation made in a street or highway open
at any time without barricade, and during the night, warning lights must be
maintained at such excavation.
   (C)   After service pipes are laid, in filling the opening, the earth must
be laid in layers of not more than nine inches in depth, and each layer shall
be thoroughly tamped and puddled. The streets, sidewalks, and pavements must be
restored to as good condition as previous to making the excavation. All dirt,
stones, and rubbish must be removed immediately after completion of the work.
If an excavation in any street, alley, or highway shall be left open or
unfinished for the space of 24 hours, or if the work shall be improperly done,
or if the rubbish shall not be removed, the Public Works Director shall have
the right to finish or correct the work, and the expenses incurred shall be
charged to the consumer and shall be paid by the plumber, drain layer, or other
person authorized by the consumer to do the excavating work or by the consumer
before the water is turned on. No main shall be tapped or connections made when
the ground is frozen, except by special permission of the Public Works
Director.
(Prior Code, § 51.037) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.038 EXCAVATIONS; PERMIT.
   Excavations in streets or alleys of the city in connection with its
waterworks system shall be made only by bonded and registered plumbers after
issuance to them of written permits by the Public Works Director or cashier and
bookkeeper of the Water and Electric Department upon written application for
water service.
(Prior Code, § 51.038)
§ 51.039 WATER EXTENSION.
   Extension of commercial mains into unsupplied territory within the corporate
limits may be made by means of Water Extension Districts, as provided by law,
by resolution of the Mayor and Council.
(Prior Code, § 51.039)
§ 51.040 NEW SUBDIVISIONS.
   The city may require the subdivision developer or owner in a new subdivision
to furnish and install service lines to the property line (including curb stop
and box) at the time of the water main installation. When such service line is
installed to the property line by the developer or owner, the service line fee
set forth in §
51.057 will not be assessed to the property.
(Prior Code, § 51.040) (Ord. 1531, passed 6-13-1994)
§ 51.041 CONNECTION OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   (A)   Permit. Persons desiring to connect to the sewer or water system of
the city outside the corporate limits of the city shall make application
therefor to the Engineer in writing. Such application shall state the location
of the proposed connection and the size of pipe used in making such connection.
Upon payment of the fees for such connection, the Engineer may, if he or she
approves such proposed connection, issue a permit therefor. No connection shall
be made until such permit is issued.
   (B)   Cost. All costs of construction and connection to either sewer or
water system shall be borne by the person desiring such connection.
   (C)   Area. No connection shall be made to either sewer or water system of
the city except in the industrial site north of the city limits, except
connections may be made outside the city limits outside the industrial area
where the property lies adjacent to the city limits and circumstances exist so
that the Mayor and Council do not deem it advisable to annex the property to
the city; and in the case of any proposed connection, the connection will not
be made until special permission to connect has been granted by the Mayor and
Council meeting in a regular meeting or a special meeting called for that
purpose.
   (D)   Limitations on use. No more than one property owner shall be connected
to the sewer or water lines of the city for each sewer or water line connected.
Homeowners shall not be granted a permit to connect if the home is located
outside the city limits, except in cases where the home owners are able to
qualify under the provisions of division (C) above when the Mayor and Council
grant special permission because the property is adjacent to the city limits
but it is not deemed advisable to annex the property to the city.
   (E)   Fees. Fees for connection outside the city limits shall be as set by
the City Council from time to time. Copies of the fees shall be available for
public inspection at the City Clerk’s office.
(Prior Code, § 51.041) (Ord. 318, passed 2-20-1951) Penalty, see §
51.999 
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 51.055 ACCOUNTS.
   When the city shall enter upon any contract as provided in §
51.001 and water is supplied to such applicant thereunder, it shall be the duty
of the Public Works Director, or the cashier and bookkeeper of the Water and
Electric Department under the direction of the Public Works Director, to keep a
separate, detailed, and accurate account of all water rents and charges due
from each consumer with all debits and credits, as the case may be.
(Prior Code, § 51.060)
§ 51.056 DEPOSITS.
   (A)   When application for water service is made, the city shall require the
applicant to pay a minimum deposit or fee which is adopted by the City Council
and on file with the Clerk, as a service deposit to protect the city from
losses arising out of water services furnished.
   (B)   The city may demand and collect a service deposit from any consumer at
any time regardless of the length of time water services have been furnished;
provided, however, no such deposit shall exceed the above amount.
(Prior Code, § 51.061) (Ord. 1531, passed 6-13-1994; Ord. 1961, passed 9-24-
2012; Ord. 1986, passed 9-22-2014)
§ 51.057 WATER RATES AND CONNECTION FEES.
   Water rates, charges and connection fees shall be as set by the City Council
from time to time. Copies of the rates, charges and connection fees shall be
available for public inspection at the City Clerk’s office.
(Prior Code, § 51.062) (Ord. 1624, passed 9-28-1998; Ord. 1673, passed 9-25-
2000; Ord. 1690, passed 9-24-2001; Ord. 1740, passed 9-22-2003; Ord. 1781,
passed 9-27-2004; Ord. 1947, passed 10-24-2011; Ord. 1961, passed 9-24-2012;
Ord. 1986, passed 9-22-2014; Ord. 2035, passed 9-26-2016; Ord. 2082, passed 9-
30-2019; Ord. 2091, passed 9-28-2020; Ord. 2106, passed - -2021; Ord. 2114,
passed - -2022; Ord. 2135, passed - -2023; Ord. 2140, passed 11- -2023; Ord.
2148, passed - -2024; Ord. 2161, passed - -2025)
§ 51.058 METER IN DISREPAIR.
   When for any reason a water meter is not registering accurately the volume
of water passing through it, the consumer shall be charged for the month or
months in which the meter is inaccurate a sum equal to the charge for the
amount of water used on the premises during the corresponding period for the
preceding year; provided, that if no basis for such comparison exists, or if in
the opinion of the Public Works Director such basis is unfair, the consumer
shall pay such reasonable sum for water rent during such period as the Public
Works Director shall fix.
(Prior Code, § 51.063)
§ 51.059 LIEN.
   (A)   If a consumer shall for any reason order the service discontinued, or
shall remove from the premises, or for any reason shall be indebted to the city
for water service furnished, such amount due under the terms of this chapter,
together with any rents and charges in arrears shall be considered as
delinquent water rent, which is hereby declared to be a lien upon the premises
or real estate for which or upon which the same was used or supplied, and upon
the refusal of the consumer to pay the delinquent water rents, they shall be
collected by being placed upon the assessment roll and tax books for collection
like other taxes.
   (B)   All accounts due from water consumers for water rent shall be a lien
upon the premises or real estate upon which or for which the same was used or
supplied from and after the time the amounts become due for water rent, as
hereinbefore provided, are delinquent and from and after the date the owner
shall have been notified in writing of such delinquency by the city. It shall
be the duty of the Clerk on the June 1 of each year to report to the Council a
list of all unpaid accounts due for water together with a description of the
premises or real estate, upon or for which the same was used or supplied. The
report shall be examined, and if approved by the Council, shall be certified by
the Clerk to the County Clerk, giving the amounts due and the description of
the premises or real estate upon or for which water from the waterworks system
of the city was used or supplied, the same to be collected as other taxes, by
the County Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 51.064)
§ 51.060 FIRE PREVENTION OUTSIDE CITY; WATER PROVIDED FOR.
   (A)   There is hereby established rates and regulations relating to the
delivery of water by the city for the purpose of fire protection outside the
city limits thereof. There is established connection charges for connecting any
fire prevention water line to the water mains of the city outside the city
limits which is adopted by the City Council and on file with the Clerk.
   (B)   In addition to the foregoing connection charge, any consumer using
water for fire prevention purposes as aforesaid shall pay a fee which is
adopted by the City Council and on file with the Clerk for each fire hydrant
maintained or operated by the person on the line connected to the water mains
of the city, which sum shall become due and payable upon the installation of
the fire hydrants and each year thereafter on the same date.
   (C)   In addition to the charges, there is hereby established the rates for
the use of water through the connections for the fire prevention purposes which
is adopted by the City Council and on file with the Clerk.
   (D)   For each consumer of water for fire prevention purposes as aforesaid,
the city shall furnish and install a water meter which shall be and remain the
property of the city. All other materials including fire hydrants and all
expenses in connection with installation, except the installation of such meter
shall be furnished by the customer.
   (E)   This section shall not affect the right of the city to contract with
any person to supply water for fire prevention purposes at other or different
rates for the purpose of securing an easement or right-of-way through or upon
the lands of such person.
(Prior Code, § 51.065) (Ord. 237, passed 9-16-1941)
§ 51.061 AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE FEE.
   (A)   Division (B) below shall apply if all of the following conditions are
met: premises abuts a street or alley in which the water is located; premises
have not previously been included within a district created for the purpose of
construction of the water; no part of the cost of construction of the water has
been paid by the owner or previous owners) of the premises (the cost of
construction shall not include the furnishing of a right-of-way or payment of
general taxes or water charges; and the cost, or a part of the cost, has been
paid by the city (to include non payment of water district assessments).
   (B)   No permit shall be issued until for water constructed between January
1, 1970 and December 31, 1999, until there is paid a fee of $4 per running foot
of the premises abutting the street or alley in which the water is located.
This fee shall be in addition to the connection fees. No permit shall be issued
for water constructed after December 31, 1999, until there is paid a fee, in an
amount as set by the City Council from time to time, per running foot of the
premises abutting the street or alley in which the water is located. This fee
shall be in addition to the connection fees. All amounts paid pursuant to this
section shall be placed in the water fund of the city and shall not be
refundable.
(Prior Code, § 51.066) (Ord. 1573, passed 9-23-1996; Ord. 1809, passed 9-26-
2005)
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICES
§ 51.075 PURPOSE.
   This section is intended to protect the public water supply system of the
city from the possibility of contamination by isolating real or potential
sources of contamination or pollution which may backflow into the public water
supply system, in accordance with Title 179, Neb. Admin. Code, Ch. 2.
(Prior Code, § 51.080) (Ord. 1493, passed 1-25-1993)
§ 51.076 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR GAP SEPARATION. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the lowest opening of any pipe or faucet supplying water to
a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the
receptacle. An approved air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the
supply pipe, measured vertically, above the top of the rim of the receptacle
and, in no case less than one inch.
   ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER. A device which restricts the backflow of water
into a potable water system by a simple check valve. The vacuum is broken by
allowing air to enter upstream of the check valve.
   APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A backflow prevention device that has
been manufactured in full conformance of standards established by the American
Water Works Association and by the American Society of Sanitary Engineers, and
tested by the Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research,
University of California Los Angeles, California.
   AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM. Any water supply system available to the premises
other than the public water supply system and includes the water supplied by
such system. These AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEMS may include water from another
consumer’s public water supply system; polluted or contaminated water, process
fluids; used water; or other sources of water which the consumer of the public
water supply system does not have sanitary control.
   BACKFLOW. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into
the water distribution system from any other source than the intended source of
the potable water supply.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Any device, method or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system.
   CONSUMER. The owner or person in control of any premises supplied by or in
any manner connected to a public water supply system.
   CONSUMER’S WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. Any water supply system, located on the
consumer’s premises, supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water
supply system. A household plumbing system is considered to be a CONSUMER’S
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. A fire suppression system is also considered a CONSUMER’S
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water by sewage, or waste
to a degree which could cause an actual hazard to the public health through
poisoning or through spread of disease by exposure.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any arrangement whereby contamination due to backflow or
back-siphonage can occur.
   DEGREE OF HAZARD. A term derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to
health and the adverse effects upon the potable water system.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of two single,
independently acting, check valves including 100% closing shutoff ball valves
or resilient seat gate valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable
connections for testing the water-tightness of each check valve.
   HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition, device, or practice in a water system or its
operation that creates a real or potential danger to the health and well-being
of the consumer.
   LICENSED PLUMBER. A person which has obtained the appropriate license from
the city.
   PLUMBING HAZARD. A plumbing type cross-connection in a consumer’s potable
water system that has not been properly protected by air-gap separation or
backflow prevention devices.
   POLLUTION. The presence in water of any foreign substance (organic,
inorganic, or biological) that degrades the quality of water to a degree which
does not necessarily cause an actual hazard to the public health but which does
adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for any desired use.
   POLLUTION HAZARD. A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable
or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or the consumer’s water supply system.
   POTABLE WATER. Water which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary, and
domestic purposes and meets the requirements of the State Department of Health
and Human Services Regulation and Licensure.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. A water supply system designed and intended to
provide potable water to designated customers. The water supply shall include
the water supply source and distribution piping network.
      (1)   The WATER SUPPLY SOURCE is defined as any artificial or natural
accumulation of water used to supply the potable water system.
      (2)   The DISTRIBUTION PIPING NETWORK includes all piping, plumbing,
pumping and treatment devices used to convey an adequate quality and quantity
of potable water to the consumers property line where a curb stop is normally
located.
   REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A device containing a
minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an automatically
operated pressure differential relief valve located between two check valves.
During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between
these two checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of
either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the check
valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include 100% closing
shutoff ball valves or resilient seat gate valves located at each end of the
device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The end of the public water system. The service
connection is the property line.
   SYSTEM HAZARD. A condition posing an actual or potential threat of damage to
the physical properties of the public or the consumer’s water supply system.
   USED WATER. Any water supplied by the public water supply system to a
consumer’s water supply system after it has passed through the service
connection and is no longer under the sanitary control of the city.
(Prior Code, § 51.081) (Ord. 1493, passed 1-25-1993)
§ 51.077 IMPLEMENTATION.
   (A)   (1)   The city shall be responsible for the implementation of this
subchapter. If the city determines that an approved backflow prevention device
is required for the safety of the public water supply system, then the city
shall give notice in writing to the consumer to install the device at each
designated location.
      (2)   The city shall inspect and approve all installations of the
required backflow prevention devices. The costs of purchasing, installing,
testing, and maintaining a backflow prevention device shall be the
responsibility and sole expense of the consumer. The installation of backflow
prevention devices, except for hose bibb vacuum breakers, shall be by a
licensed plumber. Annual testing of pressure vacuum breakers, double check
valves, and reduced pressure zone devices shall be performed by a certified
backflow tester (approved by the state and the city). If the city determines
that maintenance or repairs are necessary, the consumer shall be contacted and
issued an order to make all necessary repairs or maintenance. The consumer
shall complete all installation, maintenance or repairs within 30 days after
being ordered to do so. Any consumer who fails to comply with such an order
shall be considered in violation of this section and will be subject to
disconnection of service as provided in this section.
   (B)   The city shall keep a current list of all supplies of approved
backflow prevention devices and an appropriate list of makes and models of
backflow prevention devices which meet the requirements of this section.
(Prior Code, § 51.082) (Ord. 1493, passed 1-25-1993)
§ 51.078 SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the consumer to conduct or cause to
be conducted, periodic surveys of water use practices on his or her premises as
necessary to determine whether there are actual or potential cross-connections
in the consumer’s water supply system. The city shall have the authority to
conduct or cause to be conducted periodic surveys and investigations, of a
frequency as determined by the city, of water use practices within a consumer’s
premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross-connections
to the consumer’s water supply system through which contaminants or pollutants
could backflow into the public water supply system. The city may conduct these
surveys to provide information in determining what level of protection will be
necessary to protect the public health and safety.
   (B)   On request by the city, the consumer shall furnish the city
information on water use practices within the consumer’s premises. If the
consumer within a reasonable time refuses to submit the proper information or
to cooperate in obtaining the proper information, the city shall treat the
premises as if no appropriate cross-connection survey has been completed. In
such event, the consumer shall be required to install an approved backflow
prevention device within the time stipulated by the city.
   (C)   The city shall have the right to enter a premises served by the public
water supply system at all reasonable times for the purpose of making surveys
and investigations of water use practices within the premises. In order to
inspect such premises, the city shall give notice setting forth a proposed date
and time to the consumer at least ten days in advance. If the consumer cannot
make the premises available for inspection at the proposed date and time, the
consumer shall contact the city and arrange for another date and time for the
inspection. If the city and the consumer cannot agree on a date and time, then
the city shall treat the premises as if no appropriate cross-connection survey
has been completed. In such event, the consumer shall be required to install an
approved backflow prevention device as required in this section or water
service shall be discontinued by the city.
(Prior Code, § 51.083) (Ord. 1493, passed 1-25-1993)
§ 51.079 DISCONTINUANCE OF NONCOMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The city may discontinue, seven days after mailing written notice to
the consumer thereof, the water service to any premises where:
      (1)   Any backflow prevention device required by this section is not
installed or maintained in a manner which complies with the terms of this
section;
      (2)   It is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or
by-passed;
      (3)   An unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises;
      (4)   A low pressure cut-off required by the city is not installed and
maintained in working order; or
      (5)   The city is denied entry to determine compliance with this section.
   (B)   The city shall immediately discontinue, without notice to the consumer
thereof, the water service to any premises where a cross-connection exists
which constitutes and immediate threat to the safety of the public water
system. Within 24 hours after such discontinuation, the city shall send to the
consumer by certified mail notice of the discontinuation.
(Prior Code, § 51.084) (Ord. 1493, passed 1-25-1993)
§ 51.080 RESTORATION OF SERVICE; CONDITIONS OF.
   Where water service has been discontinued as provided in §
51.079, it shall not be restored until the consumer has corrected or eliminated
such conditions or defects in conformance with such section to the satisfaction
of the city and paid a reconnect fee.
(Prior Code, § 51.085) (Ord. 1493, passed 1-25-1993)
§ 51.081 DESIGNATED RESPONSIBLE PARTY.
   (A)   If requested by the city, the consumer shall designate an individual
or individuals who shall be responsible for contact and communications with the
city in matters relating to the system alteration and construction monitoring
and sampling, maintenance, operation, record keeping, and reporting, as
required by law and this section.
   (B)   Any change in assigned responsibilities or designated individuals
shall be promptly reported to the city.
(Prior Code, § 51.086) (Ord. 1493, passed 1-25-1993)
§ 51.082 INTERPRETATION; APPEAL; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, whenever the city is to make a
decision or interpretation, or whenever reference is made to the fact that the
city is to exercise judgment, such decision, interpretation, or judgment shall
be in accordance with the provisions of this section, and any other applicable
provisions of the municipal code, and state and federal law.
   (B)   Any consumer aggrieved by any decision or action of the city may
request a hearing before the License Examining Board. Such request must be in
writing and shall be delivered to the City Clerk not more than ten days after
the decision or action in question. A request for a hearing shall stay all
orders and actions until the conclusion of the hearing, except a
discontinuation of water service under §
51.079(B). At such hearing, the action or order of the city shall have the
burden of establishing the contrary. After such hearing, the License Examining
Board may modify or affirm the decision of the city.
(Prior Code, § 51.087) (Ord. 1493, passed 1-25-1993)
§ 51.083 CITY EMPLOYEES; LIABILITY LIMITED.
   All city employees shall be relieved from personal liability for acts taken
under this section. The city shall hold harmless all city employees when acting
in good faith and without malice, from all personal liability for any damage
that may occur to any person or property as a result of any act required or
authorized by this section, or by reason of any act or omission of any city
employee in the discharge of his or her duties hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 51.088) (Ord. 1493, passed 1-25-1993)
BACKFLOW PREVENTION
§ 51.095 CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall install or maintain a water service connection containing
cross-connections to a public water supply system or a consumers’ potable water
supply system unless such cross-connections are abated or controlled in
accordance with this section, and as required by the laws and the state and the
regulations of the State Department of Health and Human Services Regulation and
Licensure.
(Prior Code, § 51.100) (Ord. 1493, passed 1-25-1993) Penalty, see §
51.999 
§ 51.096 HOSE BID VACUUM BREAKERS; WHERE REQUIRED.
   All premises served by the public water supply shall have installed approved
hose bib (connection) vacuum breakers on all fixtures that are threaded to
accept standard garden hose fittings. These include all outside sill cocks,
utility sink faucets, and fixtures that are determined to be a potential hazard
by the city.
(Prior Code, § 51.101) (Ord. 1493, passed 1-25-1993)
§ 51.097 INSTALLATION.
   Any approved backflow prevention device required by the city shall be
installed at a location and in a manner approved by the city. The consumer, at
his or her sole expense, shall obtain and install the approved backflow
prevention device(s) within 30 days of notice and as directed by the city.
(Prior Code, § 51.102) (Ord. 1493, passed 1-25-1993)
§ 51.098 CONDITIONS WHERE REQUIRED.
   Backflow prevention devices shall be required under the following
conditions:
   (A)   Where a substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual
or potential hazard to a public water supply system. This shall include
premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from a public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the city;
   (B)   Where internal cross-connections are not correctable in the judgment
of the city, or there exists intricate plumbing arrangements which make it
impracticable to determine whether or not cross-connections exist;
   (C)   Where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or
restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross-
connection survey;
   (D)   Where cross-connections have been established or reestablished within
the preceding three years; and/or
   (E)   There is more than one customer service connection which could
constitute a potential cross-connection.
(Prior Code, § 51.103) (Ord. 1493, passed 1-25-1993)
§ 51.099 FACILITIES WHERE REQUIRED.
   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service
line to a customer’s water supply system serving the following types of
facilities unless the city determines that no health, pollution, or system
hazard to the public water supply system exists (see Appendix, Table II):
   (A)   Hospitals, mortuaries, dental clinics, nursing and convalescent homes,
medical buildings;
   (B)   Testing laboratories, film laboratories, film development facilities;
   (C)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, or stormwater
pumping stations;
   (D)   Food or beverage processing plants;
   (E)   Chemical plants;
   (F)   Metal de-greasing, plating industries, machine tool plants, dye and
metal processing or productions;
   (G)   Chemical and petroleum processing or storage plants;
   (H)   Car washes, automobile servicing facilities;
   (I)   Lawn irrigation systems and swimming pools;
   (J)   Laundries and dry cleaners;
   (K)   Packing houses;
   (L)   Power plants;
   (M)   Premises having radioactive materials such as laboratories,
industries, hospitals;
   (N)   Rendering plants;
   (O)   Premises having water recirculating system as used for boilers or
cooling systems and water softeners; softeners may be isolated with a double
check valve assembly, or factory manufactured internal backflow protection, and
approved by the city;
   (P)   Veterinary establishments, kennels, feedyards, stables, rodeo grounds,
stockyards, pet grooming salons;
   (Q)   Beauty salons, barbershops, massage parlors, health clubs;
   (R)   Fire suppression systems;
   (S)   Multi-storied buildings greater than three stories in height;
   (T)   Schools, universities, colleges; and
   (U)   Other commercial or industrial facilities which may constitute
potential cross-connection.
(Prior Code, § 51.104) (Ord. 1493, passed 1-25-1993)
§ 51.100 OTHER CIRCUMSTANCES WHERE REQUIRED.
   In all situations for which no special provision has been made in this
section, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed between the
service connection and the point of potential backflow into a consumer’s water
supply system when in the judgment of the city, a health, plumbing, pollution,
or system hazard exists.
(Prior Code, § 51.105) (Ord. 1493, passed 1-25-1993)
§ 51.101 TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED.
   The type of protection required under this section shall depend on the
degree of hazard that exists as follows (see
Appendix, Table II):
   (A)   An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where a public water
supply system may be contaminated with any substance that could cause a system
hazard or health hazard;
   (B)   An approved double check valve assembly shall be installed where a
public water supply system may be contaminated with any substance that could
cause a pollution hazard;
   (C)   An approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device
shall be installed at the service connection where there exists a plumbing
hazard; and
   (D)   In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or
other prohibitions it is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross-
connection survey of the consumer’s potable water system, a reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device shall be installed at the service
connection.
(Prior Code, § 51.106) (Ord. 1493, passed 1-25-1993)
§ 51.102 ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER; WHERE PERMISSIBLE.
   An approved atmospheric vacuum breaker may be used as a backflow prevention
device where it is not subject to back pressures. This device shall not be used
for applications where water flow is expected to be continuous for 12 or more
hours. The device shall be installed ahead of the potential source of
contamination on the discharge side of the last control valve. It shall be
placed at least six inches above the highest point reached by any water passing
through the potential source of contamination.
(Prior Code, § 51.107) (Ord. 1493, passed 1-25-1993)
§ 51.103 EXISTING BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the city prior to the
effective date of this rule and which are properly installed and maintained
shall, except for inspection, testing, and maintenance requirements, be
excluded from the requirements of this section but only if the city determines
that the devices will satisfactorily protect the public water supply system.
One-hundred-percent closing shut off ball valves or resilient seat gate valves
for testing shall be provided on existing backflow prevention devices, if
deemed necessary for proper testing by the city. If the city determines that an
existing backflow prevention device requires replacement, it shall be replaced
with an approved backflow prevention device.
(Prior Code, § 51.108) (Ord. 1493, passed 1-25-1993)
§ 51.104 STRAINERS; WHEN REQUIRED.
   The city may require a strainer of approved type and size to be installed in
conjunction with required backflow prevention devices. The strainers shall be
installed in such a manner as to preclude the fouling of the backflow
prevention device(s) due to such circumstances as water main repairs, water
main breaks, fires and periodic cleaning and flushing of mains.
(Prior Code, § 51.109)
§ 51.105 BOOSTER PUMPS; LOW PRESSURE CUTOFF; REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall install or maintain a water service connection to any
premises where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within such premises, unless such booster pump is equipped with a low pressure
cutoff designed to shut-off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to 20 pounds per square inch gauge
or less.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the water customer to maintain the low
pressure cut-off device in proper working order.
(Prior Code, § 51.110) (Ord. 1493, passed 1-25-1993) Penalty, see §
51.999 
§ 51.106 YARD HYDRANTS.
   Yard hydrants or hose bibs which would be used by the consumer to provide
water to mix pesticides, fertilizer, or other chemicals, for direct use or
aerial application to surface areas shall be equipped with an atmospheric
vacuum breaker.
(Prior Code, § 51.111) (Ord. 1493, passed 1-25-1993)
§ 51.107 UNDERGROUND SPRINKLERS.
   All underground lawn and garden sprinklers shall be equipped with an
approved backflow prevention device.
(Prior Code, § 51.112) (Ord. 1493, passed 1-25-1993)
§ 51.108 FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   All proposed installations of fire suppression systems shall be
reviewed by the city to determine the appropriate type of backflow prevention
device(s) required.
   (B)   All proposed fire suppression systems requiring an antifreeze solution
shall use pharmaceutical grade antifreeze. The consumer shall provide to the
city a certification identifying the type of pharmaceutical grade antifreeze
which shall be used. Any reduced pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention
device shall be installed in an approved manner.
   (C)   A double check valve of an approved type shall be installed on all
proposed fire suppression systems not utilizing antifreeze, but this may be
done only when there are no other cross-connections. An inspection by a
certified fire suppression specialist shall be done prior to installation.
   (D)   (1)   All existing fire suppression systems shall meet the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   In the event cross-connections, such as those found in using
auxiliary water supply systems or in providing other water additives such as
foaming agents are necessary for the proper operation of the fire suppression
system, then a reduced pressure zone backflow prevention device shall be
installed in an approved manner.
(Prior Code, § 51.113) (Ord. 1493, passed 1-25-1993)
WATER CONSERVATION, DROUGHT, AND EMERGENCY CONTINGENCY PLAN
§ 51.120 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this plan is to:
      (1)   Keep water use within pumping capacity and delivery capability,
based on recommendations of the city’s water system;
      (2)   Define procedures to be used when water pumping and delivery
capability cannot be met;
      (3)   Familiarize citizens, businesses, and industry with procedures
which may be implemented when voluntary or mandatory water restrictions are
required; and
      (4)   Adopt a plan for the declaration of a water supply watch, warning,
or emergency and the implementation of voluntary and mandatory water
conservation measures throughout the city in the event such a watch, warning,
or emergency is declared.
   (B)   Said plan shall be named the city’s Water Conservation, Drought, and
Emergency Contingency Plan.
(Prior Code, § 51.125) (Ord. 1969, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 51.121 CLASS OF USES OF WATER ESTABLISHED.
   The following classes of water use are hereby established for users of water
on the city water system:
   (A)   Class 1. Water used for outdoor watering; either public or private,
for gardens, lawns, trees, shrubs, plants, fountains, parks, golf courses,
playing fields, swimming pools, or other recreational areas; or the washing of
motor vehicles, trucks, boats, trailers, sidewalks, driveways, or the exterior
of any building or structure;
   (B)   Class 2. Water used for any commercial or industrial, including
agricultural purpose, except water actually necessary to maintain the health
and personal hygiene of bona fide employees while such employees are engaged in
the performance of their duties at their place of employment; and
   (C)   Class 3. Domestic usage, other than that which would be included in
either Class 1 or Class 2. Water necessary only to sustain human life and the
lives of domestic pets and maintain standards of hygiene and sanitation.
(Prior Code, § 51.126) (Ord. 1969, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 51.122 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSUMER. The customer of record using water for any purpose from the city
distribution system and for which either a regular charge is made or, in the
case of coin sales, a cash charge is made at the site of delivery.
   DRAWDOWN. The distance between the static water level and the pumping water
level.
   PLAN. The plan refers to the city’s Water Conservation, Drought and
Emergency Contingency Plan.
   PUMPING WATER LEVEL. The level of water in a well when the pump is pumping.
   STATIC WATER LEVEL. The level of water in a well when the pump is not
pumping.
   TRIGGERS. Significant events which indicate the implementation of the
different stages of this plan.
   WASTE OF WATER. Includes but is not limited to:
      (1)   Permitting water to escape down a gutter, ditch, or other surface
drain;
      (2)   Failure to repair a controllable leak of water due to defective
plumbing; or
      (3)   As determined by the Water System Operator.
   WATER. Water available to the city by virtue of its water introduced by the
city into its water distribution system including water offered for sale at any
coin-operated site.
   WATER SYSTEM CAPACITY. For the purposes of this plan, WATER SYSTEM CAPACITY
is determined by the total production of all wells in gallons per minute and
the total pumping capacity of the Central Plant Pumping Station times 60
minutes in an hour times 24 hours per day.
   WATER SYSTEM DEMAND. Each water meter at the Central Plant Pumping Station
shall be read daily. Daily consumption is calculated by subtracting the each
water meters previous day reading from the current day and added together.
   WELLFIELD CAPACITY. Each well’s water meter shall be read daily. The well
field capacity is determined by total production of all wells in gallons per
minute times 60 minutes in an hour times 24 hours per day.
(Prior Code, § 51.127) (Ord. 1969, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 51.123 WATER PLAN ESTABLISHED.
   In order to ensure the continued supply of safe drinking water to the
citizens of the city, the City Council adopts the following plan addressing
conservation, drought, and emergency contingencies. The plan is based upon
demand on the system and implements a series of stages depending upon the
severity of the demand.
   (A)   Stage 1: Water Watch.
      (1)   Triggers. This stage is triggered by any of the following
conditions:
         (a)   When the calculated water system demand equals 60% of the
calculated water system capacity for three consecutive days;
         (b)   When the wellfield supply is reduced to less than 75% of total
pumping capacity;
         (c)   When the drawdown of the wells is more than normal for that time
of the year as determined by the Water Operator;
         (d)   When the system storage reservoirs cannot be filled to 90% of
capacity by 2:00 a.m. each morning; and/or
         (e)   When the City Administrator or Director of Public Works deems it
appropriate, using best professional judgment and considering weather
conditions, weather forecasts, river flow conditions, and water system
operations.
      (2)   Goals. The goals of this stage are to heighten awareness of all
consumers on water conditions and to maintain the integrity of the water supply
system and to reduce overall weekly consumption by 10%.
      (3)   Education actions.
         (a)   The city may make occasional news releases to the local media,
as well as posting at City Hall, describing present conditions and indicating
the regulatory action.
         (b)   The triggers necessitating the Stage 1: Water Watch may also be
made available to the news media along with an explanation of terms.
      (4)   Management action.
         (a)   The city will ascertain that each well is operating at peak
efficiency.
         (b)   Leaks detected will be repaired within 48 hours.
         (c)   The city shall curtail weekly use of Class 1 uses by 10%.
      (5)   Regulatory action. The consumers may be asked to voluntary reduce
the use of water as defined in Class 1.
      (6)   Declaration of a Water Watch. Whenever the City Administrator or
Director of Public Works finds that conditions exist as described in the Plan
under Stage 1: Water Watch triggers, the City Administrator or Public Works
Director shall declare a Stage 1: Water Watch, and implement the steps outlined
under this section. The implementation declaring the existence and end of a
Stage 1: Water Watch shall be effective upon issuing of news releases and
posting at City Hall.
      (7)   Termination of a Water Watch. The City Administrator or Director of
Public Works shall declare the end of a Stage 1: Water Watch.
   (B)   Stage 2: Water Warning.
      (1)   Triggers. This stage is triggered by any of the following
conditions:
         (a)   When the calculated water system demand equals 70% of the
calculated water system capacity for three consecutive days;
         (b)   When the wellfield supply is reduced to less than 70% of total
pumping capacity;
         (c)   When the drawdown of the wells increases significantly over and
above the level determined in Stage 1;
         (d)   When the system storage reservoirs cannot be filled to 85% of
capacity by 2:00 a.m. each morning; and/or
         (e)   When the City Administrator or Director of Public Works deems it
appropriate, using best professional judgment and considering weather
conditions, weather forecasts, river flow conditions, and water system
operations.
      (2)   Goals. The goal of this stage is to reduce overall weekly
consumption by 20%.
      (3)   Education actions.
         (a)   The city may make weekly news releases to the local media and by
posting, describing present conditions and projecting the outlook for the
coming week.
         (b)   The triggers necessitating the Stage 2: Water Warning may also
be made available to the consumers through news releases and posting at City
Hall along with an explanation of terms.
         (c)   Water conservation articles may be provided to the local
newspaper and posted at City Hall.
      (4)   Management actions.
         (a)   The city will continue to monitor water supplies on a daily
basis.
         (b)   Leaks shall be repaired within 48 hours or a violation notice
shall be issued.
         (c)   The city shall curtail weekly use of Class 1 by 15%.
         (d)   The city may terminate its usage of water classified in Class 1
and Class 2.
      (5)   Regulation action. Water classified as Class 1 shall be terminated
except as follows.
         (a)   An odd/even lawn watering system will be imposed on all city
residential, commercial and industrial users. Consumers with odd numbered
address will water on odd days; even numbered addresses will water on even
days, such as 1025 P Street will water on odd-numbered days and 1020 P Street
will water on even-numbered days.
         (b)   Outdoor water use. including lawn watering and home car washing
will be restricted to before 11:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m.
         (c)   Waste of water is strictly prohibited.
      (6)   Declaration of a Water Warning.
         (a)   Whenever the governing body of the city finds that conditions
exist as described in this plan under Stage 2: Water Warning, triggers, it
shall be empowered to declare, by resolution, that a Stage 2: Water Warning
exists and implement the steps outlined under this Plan.
         (b)   The resolution declaring the existence of a Stage 2: Water
Warning shall be effective upon news release and/or posting at City Hall.
         (c)   In the event of a partial system failure, or natural disaster
the City Administrator or Director of Public Works shall have the authority to
declare a Stage 2: Water Warning. As soon as practical the City Council shall
declare, by resolution, that a Stage 2: Water Warning exists.
      (7)   Termination of a Water Warning. The City Administrator or Director
of Public Works shall declare the end of a Stage 2: Water Warning.
   (C)   Stage 3: Water Emergency.
      (1)   Triggers. This stage is triggered by any one of the following
conditions:
         (a)   When the calculated water system demand equals 80% of the
calculated water system capacity for three consecutive days;
         (b)   When the wellfield supply is reduced to less than 65% of total
pumping capacity;
         (c)   When the drawdown of the wells increases significantly over and
above the level determined in Stage 2;
         (d)   When the system storage reservoirs cannot be filled to 80% of
capacity by 2:00 a.m. each morning; and/or
         (e)   When the City Administrator or Director of Public Works deems it
appropriate, using best professional judgment and considering weather
conditions, weather forecasts, river flow conditions, and water system
operations.
      (2)   Goals. The goals of this stage are to reduce the overall weekly
consumption by a minimum of 50% and maintain the integrity of the system.
      (3)   Education actions.
         (a)   The city may make weekly news releases to the local media and by
posting, describing present conditions and projecting the outlook for the
coming week.
         (b)   The triggers necessitating the Stage 3: Water Emergency may also
be made available to the public through news releases and posting at City Hall
along with an explanation of terms.
         (c)   Water conservation articles may be provided to the local
newspaper and posted.
         (d)   The city may conduct public meetings to discuss the emergency;
the status of the city water supply and further actions, which may needed to be
taken.
      (4)   Management actions.
         (a)   The city water supplies shall be monitored daily.
         (b)   Leaks shall be repaired within 24 hours.
         (c)   The city may seek additional emergency supplies from other
sources.
      (5)   Regulation actions.
         (a)   Uses of water in Class 1 and Class 2 are prohibited.
         (b)   Waste of water shall be prohibited.
      (6)   Declaration of a Water Emergency. Whenever the governing body of
the city finds that conditions exist as described in this Plan under Stage 3:
Water Emergency, triggers, it shall be empowered to declare, by resolution,
that a Stage 3: Water Emergency exists and implement the steps outlined under
this Plan. The resolution declaring the existence of a Stage 3: Water Emergency
shall be effective upon news release and/or posting at City Hall. In the event
of a system failure, or natural disaster the City Administrator or Director of
Public Works shall have the authority to declare a Stage 3: Water Emergency. As
soon as practical the City Council shall declare, by resolution, that a Stage
3: Water Emergency exists.
      (7)   Termination of a Water Emergency. The City Administrator or
Director of Public Works shall declare the end of a Stage 3: Water Emergency.
(Prior Code, § 51.128) (Ord. 1969, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 51.124 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Turning off water for failure to observe restrictions. The city may
turn off the water supplied to the consumer who, after having been notified of
the imposition of such water restrictions on the use of water, disregards such
restrictions, and such supply of water shall not again be turned on until the
cost for turning the water off and turning the water on has been paid to the
city.
   (B)   Warning. The City Administrator or Director of Public Works or his or
her agent can issue a written warning to any consumer violating Stage 2: Water
Warning and Stage 3: Water Emergency. Such warning shall advise the consumer
that a seconded violation at the same premises within a six-month period shall
result in the termination of water service to the premises as described herein.
   (C)   Notice of termination of service. The City Administrator or Director
of Public Works or his or her agent shall issue a written notice of termination
of service to any consumer violating Stage 2: Water Warning and Stage 3: Water
Emergency for failure to observe restrictions and after the consumer was
previously issued a warning.
(Prior Code, § 51.129) (Ord. 1969, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 51.125 EMERGENCY TERMINATION.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall limit the ability of the City Administrator
or Director of Public Works from terminating the supply of water to any or all
consumers upon the determination of said officials that emergency termination
of water service is required to protect the health and safety of the public.
(Prior Code, § 51.130) (Ord. 1969, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 51.126 EXEMPTIONS BY PERMIT.
   (A)   For Stage 2: Water Warning only, customers may apply for and be
granted permits for:
      (1)   New turf sod application for up to four weeks;
      (2)   New grass seed application for up to four weeks. However the city
strongly discourages planting new grass seed between July 1 and August 15;
      (3)   Commercial nurseries are exempt from Stage 2: Water Warning, but
are requested to curtail all non-essential out door water use;
      (4)   Landscape in large common or public areas that, because of
irrigation system limitations, cannot be sustained by following mandatory
drought restrictions in this subchapter; and
      (5)   Golf course greens.
   (B)   The city does not have the authority to regulate the use of private
wells. An exemption permit is not needed for the use of private wells. The city
strongly recommends private well users follow the requirements of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 51.131) (Ord. 1969, passed 3-11-2013)
WELLHEAD ENCROACHMENT AREA
§ 51.140 INTENT.
   The WEA Wellhead Encroachment Area District is designed to designate a
wellhead encroachment area for the city for the purpose of protection of the
public water supply system. This district is created to be appended to any
district as provided for by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 51.140) (Ord. 1933, passed 3-14-2011)
§ 51.141 DEFINITION.
   For purposes of this subchapter the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   WELLHEAD ENCROACHMENT AREA. The surface and subsurface area surrounding
municipal water wells, through which contaminants are reasonably likely to move
toward and reach such water or water wells.
(Prior Code, § 51.141) (Ord. 1933, passed 3-14-2011)
§ 51.142 DESIGNATION.
   (A)   (1)   The city designates a wellhead encroachment area for the purpose
of protection of the public water supply system.
      (2)   The boundaries of the wellhead encroachment area are listed
following and the 500-foot and 1,000-foot distances are delineated on Map A,
which is incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
   (B)   Within the designated wellhead encroachment area, the city shall not
issue any permit to operate any of the below described facilities within the
indicated number of horizontal feet from the city municipal water wells.
   (C)   Any well drilled within the wellhead encroachment area for monitoring
and dewatering of groundwater shall meet the Nebraska Title 178 regulations
found at 178 Neb. Admin. Code.
   (D)   Private wells for domestic, commercial, industrial and agricultural
use shall not be drilled within the wellhead encroachment area. However, the
above restrictions do not apply to dewatering and groundwater monitoring wells
which are allowed within WEA Wellhead Encroachment Area District.
Category Feet
Category                                                            Feet
Chemical or petroleum product storage                               500
Corral                                                              500
Feedlot or feedlot runoff                                           1,000
Land application of municipal/industrial waste material             1,000
Pit toilet/vault toilet                                             500
Sanitary landfill/dump                                              500
Sanitary sewer connection                                           100
Sanitary sewer line                                                 50
Sanitary sewer manhole                                              100
Sewage lagoon                                                       1,000
Sewage treatment plant                                              500
Sewage wet well                                                     500
Underground disposal system (septic system, cesspool, and the like) 500
Wastewater holding tanks                                            500
Water well                                                          1,000
 
(Prior Code, § 51.142) (Ord. 1933, passed 3-14-2011)
§ 51.143 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Any permitted principal use and structure in the parent district to which
the WEA Wellhead Encroachment Area District is made a part.
(Prior Code, § 51.143) (Ord. 1933, passed 3-14-2011)
§ 51.144 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Any permitted principal use and structure in the parent district to which
the WEA Wellhead Encroachment Area District is made a part.
(Prior Code, § 51.144) (Ord. 1933, passed 3-14-2011)
§ 51.145 EXCEPTIONS.
   After the provisions of this subchapter relating to exceptions have been
fulfilled, the City Planning Commission may permit conditional uses permitted
as exceptions in the parent district of which the WEA Wellhead Encroachment
Area District is made a part.
(Prior Code, § 51.145) (Ord. 1933, passed 3-14-2011)
§ 51.146 PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   All uses prohibited in the parent district of which the WEA Wellhead
Encroachment Area District is made a part shall be prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 51.146) (Ord. 1933, passed 3-14-2011) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.147 MINIMUM LOT REQUIREMENTS.
   The lot requirements of the parent district of which the WEA Wellhead
Encroachment Area District is made a part shall be the minimum yard lot
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 51.147) (Ord. 1933, passed 3-14-2011)
§ 51.148 MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   The yard requirements of the parent district of which the WEA Wellhead
Encroachment Area District is made a part shall be the minimum yard
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 51.148) (Ord. 1933, passed 3-14-2011)
§ 51.149 MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE.
   The lot coverage requirements of the parent district of which WEA Wellhead
Encroachment Area District is made a part shall be the maximum lot coverage
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 51.149) (Ord. 1933, passed 3-14-2011)
§ 51.150 MAXIMUM HEIGHT.
   The height requirements of the parent district of which the WEA Wellhead
Encroachment Area District is made a part shall be the maximum height
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 51.150) (Ord. 1933, passed 3-14-2011)
§ 51.151 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   The sign regulations of the parent district of which the WEA Wellhead
Encroachment Area District is made a part shall be the minimum requirements for
sign regulations subject to additional requirements as prescribed by the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 51.151) (Ord. 1933, passed 3-14-2011)
§ 51.152 EXISTING FACILITIES.
   The city recognizes that this subchapter conflicts with existing facilities
within the Wellhead Encroachment Area. The city will allow these facilities to
continue use of their current facilities, if the existing conflicting
facilities close for over 60 days, the pre-existing right is permanently lost
and the facility shall comply with this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 51.152) (Ord. 1933, passed 3-14-2011)
§ 51.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
other specific penalty is provided shall be subject to §
10.99
   (B)   Any consumer who shall violate or refuse to comply with any of the
provisions of §§
51.120 through
51.126 shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined not more than $250 for each offense. A new violation shall be deemed
to have been committed every 24 hours of such failure to comply.
(Prior Code, § 51.999) (Ord. 1969, passed 3-11-2013)
APPENDIX
Table
   
I.   Cross-connections rated by degree of hazard
   
II.   Permitted backflow assemblies, devices and methods
TABLE I. CROSS-CONNECTIONS RATED BY DEGREE OF HAZARD.
Direct or Indirect Potable Water Connections Hazard
                                             High Low
Direct or Indirect Potable Water Connections                                           Hazard
                                                                                       High Low
I.   Subject to back pressure
   A.   Pumps, tanks, and lines handling:
      1.   Sewage                                                             X
      2.   Toxic substances                                                   X
      3.   Nontoxic substances                                                     X
   B.   Water connection to steam and steam boiler:
      1.   Boiler or steam connection to toxic substances                     X
      2.   Boiler or steam connection to nontoxic substances (boiler blownoff throuXh
air gap)
II.   Not subject to back pressure
   A.   Sewer-connected water line (not subject to waste stoppages)              X
   B.   Low inlets to receptacles containing:
      1.   Toxic substances                                                   X
      2.   Nontoxic substances                                                     X
   C.   Coils or jackets used as heat exchangers in compressors in lines carrying:
      1.   Sewage                                                             X
      2.   Toxic substances                                                   X
      3.   Nontoxic substances                                                     X
   D.   Flush value toilets or urinals                                           X
   E.   Toilet, urinal tanks and approved bathtubs                                    X
   F.   Bidets, sitz tanks, or spas, therapy and roman pools not otherwise isolatXd by
design or backflow protectors
   G.   Trough urinals                                                                X
   H.   Valved outlets or fixtures with hose attachments that may constitute a cross-
connection to:
      1.   Toxic substances                                                   X
      2.   Nontoxic substances                                                     X
I.   Aspirators that may continue a cross-connection to:
      1.   Toxic substances                                                   X
      2.   Nontoxic substances                                                     X
III.   Other equipment and facilities subject to a variety of backflow conditions
   A.   Lawn sprinkling systems that may constitute a cross-connection to:
      1.   Toxic substances including lawn chemicals                          X
      2.   Nontoxic substances                                                     X
   B.   Fire suppression systems employing toxic chemicals                       X
   C.   Soft drink dispenser or bar carbonators                                  X
   D.   Radiological, photographic, dental, medical, biological or chemical      X
laboratories or facilities
   E.   Swimming pools                                                           X
   F.   Tank truck loading station                                               X
 
TABLE II. PERMITTED BACKFLOW ASSEMBLIES, DEVICES AND METHODS.
Assembly,  Degree of Hazard
Device, or Low                     High                         Installation
Method     Back-     Back Pressure Back-siphonage Back Pressure
           siphonage
Assembly,    Degree of Hazard
Device, or   Low                     High                    Installation
Method       Back-     Back Pressure Back-     Back Pressure
             siphonage               siphonage
                                                             Shall be a
                                                             minimum of one
                                                             inch but not
                                                             less than two
                                                             times the
                                                             diameter of
                                                             the effective
                                                             spout opening
                                                             when not
                                                             affected by
                                                             side walls,
                                                             and eight
                                                             times the
                                                             diameter of
                                                             the effective
Air gap      X         X             X         X             opening when
                                                             affected by
                                                             side walls.
                                                             Side walls
                                                             will be
                                                             assumed to not
                                                             affect air
                                                             gaps when they
                                                             are spaced
                                                             horizontally a
                                                             distance
                                                             greater than
                                                             four times the
                                                             effective
                                                             opening from
                                                             the spout
                                                             opening.
                                                             Upright
                                                             position. No
                                                             valves
                                                             downstream.
                                                             Minimum of six
Atmospheric                                                  inches or
vacuum       X                       X                       listed
breaker                                                      distance above
                                                             all downstream
                                                             piping and
                                                             flood level
                                                             rim of
                                                             receptor.
                                                             Horizontal
                                                             unless
                                                             otherwise
                                                             listed.
                                                             Requires one
                                                             foot below and
                                                             sufficient
                                                             side and head
                                                             room for
                                                             testing and
                                                             maintenance
Double check                                                 within a
valve        X         X                                     maximum of
assembly                                                     five feet
                                                             above the
                                                             ground, work
                                                             floor, or a
                                                             permanently
                                                             installed
                                                             working
                                                             platform with
                                                             stairs or
                                                             ladder
                                                             affixed. Does
                                                             not discharge
                                                             water.
                                                             Upright
                                                             position. May
                                                             have valves
                                                             downstream.
Pressure                                                     Minimum of 12
vacuum                                                       inches above
breaker      X                       X                       all downstream
assembly                                                     piping and
                                                             flood level
                                                             rim of
                                                             receptor. May
                                                             discharge
                                                             water.
                                                             Same as Double
                                                             Check Valve
                                                             Assembly above
                                                             except may
                                                             discharge
Reduced                                                      water and
pressure                                                     wherever
principle    X         X             X         X             installed;
backflow                                                     provision for
prevention                                                   draining away
assembly                                                     at least two
                                                             times the
                                                             rated gallons
                                                             per minute of
                                                             the device
                                                             shall be made.
NOTE:   Atmospheric
         Hose bib vacuum breaker: non-removable or integral, frost-proof,
self-draining, not subject to continuous operating pressure (12 hours of 24
hours)
         Cash-Acme Type VB 222 or approved
 
CHAPTER 52: SEWER
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   Use of public sewers required
   
52.03   Private wastewater disposal
   
52.04   Sanitary sewers, building sewers and connections
   
52.05   Prohibited discharges
   
52.06   Damage to sewage works prohibited
   
52.07   Inspectors; powers and authority
Rates and Charges
   
52.20   Definitions
   
52.21   User charges; proceeds
   
52.22   Funds; use of
   
52.23   User rates
   
52.24   Availability of service fee
   
52.25   Sewer system investment fee
   
52.26   Billing procedures
   
52.27   Review
 
   
52.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20ºC, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the sewer service line,
beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The inspector of buildings for the city or his or her
duly authorized agent or representative.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or
surface water.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and serving of foods.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any contributor to the city’s treatment works with an
average daily waste volume greater than 10,000 gallons and a waste strength
greater than or equal to 170 mg/l BOD and 185 mg/l suspended solids.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or
groundwater.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution.
Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of seven and a hydrogen ion
concentration of 10-7.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public
utility.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, government and commercial buildings, industrial plants, and
institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface
waters that are not admitted intentionally.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
   SEWER SERVICE LINE. The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration
or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection
system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works.
   STORM DRAIN. A drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface
water, or unpolluted water from any source.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of Wastewater Treatment Works and Water
Facilities of the city, or his or her authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   TREATMENT WORKS. Any devices and systems for the storage and treatment of
municipal, domestic, or industrial wastewater. These include intercepting
sewers, outfall sewers, and their appurtenances; extension improvements,
remodeling, and additions; and site acquisition of the land that will be an
integral part of the treatment process; or any other method or system for
preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating, or disposing of
municipal waste or industrial waste, including waste in combined stormwater and
sanitary sewer systems.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. The water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently.
(Prior Code, § 52.01)
§ 52.02 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
   (D)   The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of
the city, is hereby required at the owner’s expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and at owner’s expense to connect such facilities directly
with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
within 30 days after date of official notice in writing to do so; provided,
that the public sewer is within 300 feet of the property line. No privy vault,
water closet, cesspool, or septic tank shall hereafter be built, constructed,
repaired or allowed to remain on the premises after the notice in writing as
aforesaid shall have been given to the owner. In case the property owner on
whose property is located any privy vault, water closet, cesspool, or septic
tank in violation of this section shall neglect or refuse to fill up and
discontinue the privy vault, water closet, cesspool, or septic tank and
properly connect with the sewer main, as required in the notice, the Mayor and
Council shall have the power to cause the privy vault, water closet, cesspool,
or septic tank to be filled up or removed from the premises, the cost of which
shall be a lien upon the premises and real estate of the property, and if not
paid when due, such charge shall be certified to the City Treasurer and may be
recovered by the city in an action at law from the owner or it may be certified
to the tax assessor and assessed against the premises served and collected or
returned in the same manner as other municipal taxes are certified; assessed,
collected and returned. Services of the notice herein required shall be either
by registered mail or by publication one time in a legal newspaper published in
or of general circulation in the city.
(Prior Code, § 52.02) Penalty, see §
52.99 
§ 52.03 PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of §
52.02(D), the sewer service line shall be connected to a private wastewater
disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal
system, the owner(s) shall first obtain a written building permit signed by the
city. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the
city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and
other information as are deemed necessary by the city. A permit and inspection
fee shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed.
   (C)   A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall be allowed to inspect the work
at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit
shall notify the Building Inspector when the work is ready for final
inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection
shall be made within 24 hours of the receipt of notice by the Building
Inspector.
   (D)   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater
disposal system shall comply with all requirements of the State Department of
Environment and Energy and County Department of Health. Where requirements of
the two agencies differ, the most stringent requirement shall apply. No permit
shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface
soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than one acre or
where the absorption facility is within 100 feet of a municipal or private
water well. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any
natural outlet.
   (E)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in division (D) above, a
direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 30 days in
compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar
private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled
with suitable material.
   (F)   The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the
city.
(Prior Code, § 52.03) Penalty, see §
52.99 
§ 52.04 SANITARY SEWERS, BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or
open into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
   (B)   Sewer service line building permits shall be obtained by the owner by
making application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city. A permit and
inspection fee shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed.
   (C)   All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of
the sewer service line shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall
indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the sewer service line.
   (D)   A separate and independent sewer service line shall be provided for
every building except where more than one building stands on an interior lot
and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to any building through
an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway. In this case, the sewer service
line may be extended to the other building and the whole considered as one
sewer service line, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or
responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single
connection aforementioned.
   (E)   Old sewer service lines may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found, on examination and tested by the Building Inspector
to meet all requirements of this chapter.
   (F)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of all sanitary
sewers including sewer service lines, and the methods to be used in excavating,
placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city and the state. In the absence of
suitable code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the most current adopted
edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code shall apply.
   (G)   Whenever possible, the sewer service line shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer.
   (H)   No person shall engage in or conduct business of sewer connections, or
excavate any trenches for sewer pipe, or open, uncover, or in any manner make
connection with, or lay any sewer or drain, or attach to, modify or repair any
appurtenances to sewer connections in streets or alleys, or other grounds of
the city or with any private sewer or drain without being properly registered
for such work and without holding a license. The connection of the sewer
service line into a public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing code or other applicable rules of the State Department of
Environment and Energy. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed
procedures and materials must be approved by the city before installation.
   (I)   The applicant for the sewer service line permit shall notify the
Building Inspector when the service line is ready for inspection and connection
to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the
supervision of the Building Inspector or his or her representative.
   (J)   All excavations for sewer service line installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in
the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
Building Inspector at the owner’s expense.
   (K)   Sewer service lines shall not connect directly into a manhole of the
treatment works without prior written permission from the city.
(Prior Code, § 52.04) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.05 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any sewer
unpolluted waters such as stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, or cooling water, except stormwater runoff from limited
areas which may be polluted at times, to be discharged to the sanitary sewer
without prior permission of the city.
   (B)   Stormwater other than that exempted under division (A) above, and all
other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to natural
outlet approved by the city. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process
waters may be discharged, on approval of the city, to a storm sewer, combined
sewer, or natural outlet.
   (C)   No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described water or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas;
      (2)   Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases
in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to
contaminate the sludge of any municipal system, to injure or interfere with any
sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a
public nuisance, or create any hazard in or have an adverse effect on the
waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works. Each user which
discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing
the effluent or the sludge of the city’s treatment works shall pay for such
increased costs; and
      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
   (D)   The following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes shall
be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities
which will not harm either the sewers, the sludge of any municipal system, the
wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on
the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public
property, or constitute a nuisance. The city may set limitations lower than the
limitations established in the regulations below if, in his or her opinion,
such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In
forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability, the city will give
consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to
flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers,
the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment
plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on
materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary
sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the city are as follows:
      (1)   Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150ºF;
      (2)   Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of
petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin;
      (3)   Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat,
or grease;
      (4)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see §
52.01). Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes,
hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or
similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in
kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by
caterers;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and
similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material
received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds
the limits established by the city for such materials;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding
limits which may be established by the city;
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
      (8)   Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a
“slug” as defined herein;
      (9)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters; and/or
      (10)   Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or
wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended
solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition
deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
   (E)   (1)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in division (D) above, and which in the judgment
of the city, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities,
processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard
to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may:
         (a)   Reject the wastes;
         (b)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
         (c)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/
or
         (d)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions
of division (K) below.
      (2)   If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the city and State Department of Environment and
Energy.
   (F)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts as specified in
division (D)(3) above, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the city and the American National Standards Institute
Uniform Plumbing Code, ASME A112.14.3 and ASME A112.14.4 and shall be located
as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the
maintaining of these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the
proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captivated material and
shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to
review by the city.
   (G)   Where pretreatment or flow-equalization facilities are provided or
required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner(s) at his or her expense.
   (H)   When required by the city, the owner(s) of any property serviced by a
sewer service line carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
sewer service line to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of
wastes. Such structures, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The
structure shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense, and shall be
maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times to the
city.
   (I)   The city may require a user of sewer services to provide information
needed to determine compliance with this chapter. These requirements may
include:
      (1)   Wastewater’s discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time
period;
      (2)   Chemical analyses of wastewaters;
      (3)   Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality;
      (4)   Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent,
or other materials important to sewer use control;
      (5)   A plot plan of sewers of the user’s property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location;
      (6)   Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities; and/or
      (7)   Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials
through spills to the municipal sewer.
   (J)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association and
shall be paid for by the owner. Sampling methods, location, times, durations,
and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval
by the city.
   (K)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the city for treatment.
(Prior Code, § 52.05) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.06 DAMAGE TO SEWAGE WORKS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person(s) shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance,
or equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities.
   (B)   Any person(s) violating this provision shall be subject to immediate
arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
(Prior Code, § 52.06) Penalty, see §
52.99 
§ 52.07 INSPECTORS; POWERS AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing pertinent to discharge to the community system in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees are authorized
to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection
system. The industry may withhold information considered confidential. The
industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information in
question might result in an advantage to competitors.
   (C)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in division (A) above, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the
city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by
the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to city
employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to
its property by the city employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the company growing out of
the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence
or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in §
52.05(H).
   (D)   (1)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the
city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement
for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities
lying within the easement.
      (2)   All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be
done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
(Prior Code, § 52.07)
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 52.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20ºC, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   COMMERCIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTRIBUTOR. Any contributor not defined in
definitions RESIDENTIAL CONTRIBUTOR and INDUSTRIAL CONTRIBUTOR in this section.
   INDUSTRIAL CONTRIBUTOR. Any contributor to the city’s treatment works with
an average daily waste volume greater than 10,000 gallons and a waste strength
greater than or equal to 170 mg/l BOD and 185 mg/l suspended solids.
   MEASUREMENTS and TESTS. Determined in accordance with the latest edition of
Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater published by the
American Public Health Association.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER. Wastewater that has a BOD concentration of less
than 170 mg/l and a suspended solids concentration of less than 185 mg/l.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. All expenditures during the useful life of the
treatment works for materials, labor, utilities, and other items which are
necessary for managing and maintaining the sewage works to achieve the capacity
and performance for which such works were designed and constructed.
   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE includes
REPLACEMENT.
   RESIDENTIAL CONTRIBUTOR. Any contributor to the city’s treatment works whose
lot, parcel of real estate, or building is used for domestic dwelling purposes
only.
   SS (SUSPENDED SOLIDS). Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   TREATMENT WORKS. Any devices and systems for the storage and treatment of
municipal, domestic, or industrial wastewater. These include intercepting
sewers, outfall sewers, lift stations and treatment equipment and their
appurtenances; extension improvements, remodeling, and additions; and site
acquisition of the land that will be an integral part of the treatment process;
or any other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing,
treating, separating, or disposing of municipal waste or industrial waste,
including waste in combined stormwater and sanitary sewer systems.
   USEFUL LIFE. The estimated period during which a treatment works will be
operated.
   USER CHARGE. The total wastewater service charge which is levied in a
proportional and adequate manner for the cost of operation, maintenance,
replacement, and debt retirement of bonded capital.
   WATER METER. A water volume measuring and totalizing device furnished and/or
installed by the city.
(Prior Code, § 52.20)
§ 52.21 USER CHARGES; PROCEEDS.
   (A)   It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the
protection of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the city to
collect charges from all users who contribute wastewater to the city’s
treatment works.
   (B)   The proceeds of such charges so derived will be used for the purpose
of operating, maintaining, and retiring the debt for such public wastewater
treatment works.
(Prior Code, § 52.21)
§ 52.22 FUNDS; USE OF.
   (A)   The user charge system shall generate sufficient annual revenues to
pay all costs of annual operation and maintenance including replacement and
costs associated with debt retirement of bonded capital for financing the
treatment works which the city may by ordinance designate to be paid by the
user charge system. The total user charge collected shall be recorded in the
Sanitary Sewer Fund.
   (B)   Fiscal year-end balances in the Sanitary Sewer Fund shall be carried
over to the same fund in the subsequent fiscal year, and shall be used for no
other purposes than those designated for the fund. Monies which have been
transferred from other sources to meet temporary shortages in the fund shall be
returned to their respective accounts upon appropriate adjustment of the user
charge rates. The user charge rate(s) shall be adjusted such that the
transferred monies will be returned to their respective accounts within the
fiscal year following the fiscal year in which the monies were borrowed.
(Prior Code, § 52.22)
§ 52.23 USER RATES.
   Sewer rates, charges, and connection fees shall be as set by the City
Council from time to time. Copies of the rates, charges, and connection fees
shall be available for public inspection at the City Clerk’s office.
(Prior Code, § 52.23) (Ord. 1466, passed 12-21-1991; Ord. 1674, passed 9-25-
2000; Ord. 1691, passed 9-24-2001; Ord. 1739, passed 9-22-2003; Ord. 1780,
passed 9-27-2003; Ord. 1940, passed 9-26-2011; Ord. 1972, passed 9-23-2013;
Ord. 1985, passed 9-22-2014; Ord. 2011, passed 9-28-2015; Ord. 2036, passed 9-
26-2016; Ord. 2051, passed 9-25-2017; Ord. 2105, passed - -2021; Ord. 2107,
passed - -2021; Ord. 2115, passed - -2022; Ord. 2116, passed - -2022; Ord.
2136, passed - -2023; Ord. 2149, passed - -2024; Ord. 2155, passed - -2025)
§ 52.24 AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE FEE.
   (A)   Division (B) below shall apply if all of the following conditions are
met: premises abuts a street or alley in which the sewer is located; premises
have not previously been included within a district created for the purpose of
construction of the sewer; no part of the cost of construction of the sewer has
been paid by the owner or previous owner(s) of the premises (the cost of
construction shall not include the furnishing of a right-of-way or payment of
general taxes or sewer charges); and the cost, or a part of the cost, has been
paid by the city (to include non-payment of sewer district assessments).
   (B)   No permit shall be issued for sewers constructed between January 1,
1970 and December 31, 1999, until there is paid a fee of $4 per running foot of
the premises abutting the street or alley in which the sewer is located. This
fee shall be in addition to the connection fees. No permit shall be issued for
sewers constructed after December 31, 1999, until there is paid a fee, in an
amount as set by the City Council from time to time, per running foot of the
premises abutting the street or alley in which the sewer is located. This fee
shall be in addition to the connection fees. All amounts paid pursuant to this
section shall be placed in the sewer fund of the city and shall not be
refundable.
(Prior Code, § 52.24) (Ord. 1140, passed 1-14-1991; Ord. 1811, passed 9-26-
2005)
§ 52.25 SEWER SYSTEM INVESTMENT FEE.
   Before a sewer tap permit shall be issued, the owner of the premises shall
pay to the Utility Office for each connection a tap fee which is adopted by the
City Council and on file with the Clerk and a sewer system investment fee which
is adopted by the City Council and on file with the Clerk for each connection/
service line.
(Prior Code, § 52.25) (Ord. 1140, passed 1-14-1991)
§ 52.26 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   All user charges provided for by this chapter shall be billed and
collected at the same time and in the same manner and by the same employees as
water charges are billed and collected by the city.
   (B)   All sewer use charges prescribed by the ordinance shall be a lien upon
the premises and real estate for which the sewer service is supplied and used,
and if not paid when due, such charge shall be certified to the City Treasurer
and may be recovered by the city in an action at law from the owner or the
person requesting the service or it may be certified to the tax assessor and
assessed against the premises served and collected or returned in the same
manner as other municipal taxes are certified, assessed, collected, and
returned. Bills for the sewer use charges made by this chapter shall be
rendered at the same time that bills are rendered for water service of the city
and all sewer use charges levied by this chapter which are not paid at or
before water service charges of the city are required to be paid, shall be
deemed to be delinquent and water service of such consumer may be discontinued.
(Prior Code, § 52.26)
§ 52.27 REVIEW.
   The city will review the user charge system at least every two years and
revise user charge rates as necessary to ensure that the system generates
adequate revenues to pay the costs of operation and maintenance including
replacement and that the system continues to provide for the proportional
distribution of operation and maintenance including replacement costs among
users and user classes.
(Prior Code, § 52.27) (Ord. 1267, passed 8-9-1982)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
other specific penalty is provided shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter
except §
52.06 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations.
      (2)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in division (B)(1) above shall be guilty of an offense, and on
conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not exceeding $100 for each
violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed
a separate offense.
      (3)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the
city by reason of such violation.
(Prior Code, § 52.99) (Ord. 1268, passed 8-9-1982)
CHAPTER 53: SOLID WASTE
Section
General Provisions
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   City sanitation landfill
   
53.03   Solid waste collection franchise
Rates and Charges
   
53.15   Sanitation service, fees, collection of fees, deposit, and exemption
   
53.16   Licensed required; fees
   
53.17   Single-stream recycling program
Solid Waste Landfill Disposal Regulations
   
53.30   Landfill site
   
53.31   Containers; specifications
   
53.32   Waste; care and disposal
   
53.33   Burnable; incineration regulations
   
53.34   Yard waste; care and disposal
   
53.35   Alleys; use of
   
53.36   Special provisions; districts and areas without alleys
   
53.37   Special refuse; care and disposal
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Definitions herein shall be the same as the state’s Department of
Environment and Energy (NDEE) Title 132 Neb. Admin. Code, Ch. 1.
(Prior Code, § 53.01) (Ord. 1525, passed 4-25-1994)
§ 53.02 CITY SANITATION LANDFILL.
   The Mayor and Council shall, from time to time, by resolution or order,
designate, regulate, and control the landfill, either within or without the
corporate limits of the city, upon which shall be dumped at the city sanitary
landfill. The city will follow the state’s Department of Environment and Energy
(NDEE) Title 132 Neb. Admin. Code, Ch. 1, approved permit.
(Prior Code, § 53.02)
§ 53.03 SOLID WASTE COLLECTION FRANCHISE.
   SANITATION CONTRACTOR shall mean the city designated Sanitation Contractor.
The terms and conditions of the Sanitation Contractor are listed in the Request
for Proposal of May 1996 and the Associated Agreement, which are incorporated
by reference. The city has granted an exclusive franchise for solid waste
collection and roll-off containers for special collection within the city
planning jurisdiction; generally two miles from the city limits and shown on
the official planning jurisdiction map.
(Prior Code, § 53.03) (Ord. 1604, passed 1-26-1998)
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 53.15 SANITATION SERVICE, FEES, COLLECTION OF FEES, DEPOSIT, AND EXEMPTION.
   (A)   Fee schedule. The following schedule of fees for sanitation services
shall be, to wit:
      (1)   Minimum billing: an amount as set by the City Council from time to
time per month residential;
      (2)   Single family residence: an amount as set by the City Council from
time to time per month;
      (3)   Multiple unit dwellings: such as houses with basements or upstairs
apartments, duplexes and triplexes, when all units are charged to the owner or
manager on a single bill, and not more than three separate households are
maintained in the units, an amount as set by the City Council from time to time
per month for the first unit and an amount as set by the City Council from time
to time per month for each additional unit up to a total of three; and
      (4)   Multiple unit dwellings housing four or more separately maintained
households and billed to the owner or manager on a single bill shall be deemed
commercial units, and shall be included in the commercial rate structure.
   (B)   Commercial/business rates. The monthly charges for collection and
disposal of solid waste for commercial, business establishments shall be based
upon volume and service. This includes all structures or parts thereof not
included as a residential or multiple residential units. The existing
commercial/business rates are based upon a rate for a three cubic yard
container per month for once-a-week collection. Additional pick-ups are in an
amount as set by the City Council from time to time each. A tabular form
summarizing rates to be effective for all billings shall be as follows:
      (1)   Commercial/business units that share a common container shall have
the above rates prorated as determined by the city;
      (2)   The minimum shall be an amount as set by the City Council from time
to time for shared containers; and
      (3)   Commercial roll-out carts (90-gallon) are an amount as set by the
City Council from time to time per month, one pick up per week minimum (only
allowed when alley access or access to three cubic yard container is not
available).
   (C)   When due. Charges for regular sanitation services shall be due and
payable on or before the tenth day of each month, payable at the city’s
business office.
   (D)   Outside city limits. The monthly customer fee for sanitation customers
outside the city limits shall be 50% higher than in city limit rates.
(Prior Code, § 53.20) (Ord. 1538, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 1604, passed 1-26-1998;
Ord. 1692, passed 9-24-2001; Ord. 1738, passed 9-22-2003; Ord. 1779, passed 9-
27-2004; Ord. 1973, passed 9-23-2013; Ord. 1987, passed 9-22-2014; Ord. 2010,
passed 9-28-2015; Ord. 2034, passed 9-26-2016; Ord. 2113, passed 9- -2022; Ord.
2134, passed 9- -2023; Ord. 2147, passed - -2024)
§ 53.16 LICENSED REQUIRED; FEES.
   (A)   Deposits. No person shall deposit any material at the city landfill
facility without first obtaining a license or franchise for said purpose from
the city, or by paying the applicable disposal fees as provided by the City
Council from time to time.
   (B)   Fees. The following fees shall be collected by the city’s agent at the
city landfill facility and shall be applicable to loads of solid waste, as
herein defined; provided, however, the rates shall not apply to persons or
corporations who are under contract with the city or as a franchise refuse
collector who collects refuse within the city utility service area/the city
zoning jurisdiction.
      (1)   The city requires all loads going to the solid waste facility to be
tarped or secured. The city reserves the right to assess a 50% surcharge on any
unsecured solid waste material being hauled for disposal:
         (a)   Minimum gate fee: an amount as set by the City Council from time
to time; and
         (b)   Rates at scale facility: an amount as set by the City Council
from time to time.
      (2)   The city reserves the right to adjust the tonnage rate to customers
under contract for special conditions.
 
Miscellaneous Rates
Appliance, water heater (residential) An amount as set by the City Council from
                                      time to time
Tires (each):                          
   Car                             An amount as set by the City Council from
                                      time to time
   Tractor                         An amount as set by the City Council from
                                      time to time
   Truck                           An amount as set by the City Council from
                                      time to time
Note to table: Additional charges may be assessed.
 
   (C)   Roll-offs.
      (1)   The fees for solid waste collection and disposal from an open top
roll-off container for construction waste shall be as follows:
         (a)   Temporary weekly roll-off box charge: an amount as set by the
City Council from time to time per haul charge with a one haul minimum per
week;
         (b)   Temporary monthly roll-off box charge: an amount as set by the
City Council from time to time per haul charge with a one haul minimum per
month;
         (c)   Additional charges: an amount as set by the City Council from
time to time per ton of waste in box;
         (d)   Permanent roll-off box charges: an amount as set by the City
Council from time to time per haul charge with at one haul minimum per month,
no tonnage fee apply; and
         (e)   Delivery: The city reserves the right to add a delivery fee for
roll-off containers over 15 miles outside of the city service area.
      (2)   Additional items that can’t be landfilled, that are removed out of
the waste stream will be charged based on current rates schedule.
      (3)   Banned items will not be accepted.
      (4)   Fee is based upon monthly pick up, thus a monthly minimum. The city
may negotiate other than monthly fees depending upon availability of containers
and/or scheduled usages above the monthly minimum.
   (D)   Residential construction container. 
      (1)   The fees for solid waste collection and disposal from a three-yard
construction container for construction waste shall be as follows:
         (a)   Three-yard construction container charges: an amount as set by
the City Council from time to time per month with a one-haul minimum per week;
         (b)    Maximum of four-week rental;
         (c)   Additional items that can’t be landfilled, that are removed out
of the waste stream will be charged based on current rates schedule; and
         (d)   Banned items will not be accepted.
      (2)   Fee is based upon weekly pick up, thus a monthly minimum. The city
may negotiate other than monthly fees depending upon availability of containers
and/or scheduled usages above the monthly minimum.
   (E)   Fuel surcharge. The city reserves the right to add a fuel surcharge
for roll-off containers over 15 miles outside of the city service area.
   (F)   Compactors.
      (1)   Compactors will be charged on a per pull fee based on signed
agreements with the city based upon a minimum of once a month pull.
      (2)   All rates will be reviewed annually.
   (G)   Special waste. Special waste fees are as set by the City Council from
time to time.
   (H)   Hazardous waste unacceptable. No hazardous wastes identified and
contained in the RCRA regulations may be disposed of at the city landfill.
   (I)   Monthly billings. Individuals or corporations will be permitted to
arrange for monthly billing in advance of entry through the City Treasurer. All
other entries not arranged for in advance for monthly billings shall be on a
cash basis, to be collected by the city’s agent at the sanitary landfill.
   (J)   All other requirements. All other licenses, fees, terms and conditions
for the use of the city landfill shall be established by the Mayor and Council
of the city by resolution or by staff in the case of special waste.
   (K)   Deposit. The city reserves the right to request a deposit on account
prior to opening a charge account.
(Prior Code, § 53.21) (Ord. 1470, passed 4-13-1992; Ord. 1513, passed 9-27-
1993; Ord. 1738, passed 9-22-2003; Ord. 1779, passed 9-27-2004; Ord. 1973,
passed 9-23-2013; Ord. 1987, passed 9-22-2014; Ord. 2010, passed 9-28-2015;
Ord. 2104, passed 9- -2021; Ord. 2113, passed 9- -2022; Ord. 2134, passed 9- -
2023; Ord. 2147, passed - -2024)  Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 53.17 SINGLE-STREAM RECYCLING PROGRAM.
   The following service fees for the city’s single-stream recycling program
are hereby established, ratified as to prior customer participation, and in
effect as the date of adoption of this section, to wit:
   (A)   Single-stream recycling.
      (1)   The monthly customer fee for participation in the single-stream
recycling program will be as set by the City Council from time to time.
      (2)   Pickup of single-stream recyclable material will be collected in a
container approved by the city’s Sanitation Department.
      (3)   Pickup of single-stream recyclable material and operation of the
city’s single-stream recycling program will occur in accordance with procedures
adopted by the city’s Sanitation Department.
      (4)   The monthly customer fee for participation in the single-stream
recycling program for customers outside the city limits shall be 30% higher
than in city limit rates.
   (B)   Cardboard recycling.
      (1)   The monthly customer fee for participation in the cardboard
recycling program will be as set by the City Council from time to time.
      (2)   Pickup of cardboard recyclable material will be collected in a
container approved by the city’s Sanitation Department.
      (3)   Pickup of cardboard recyclable material and operation of the city’s
recycling program will occur in accordance with procedures adopted by the
city’s Sanitation Department.
      (4)   The monthly customer fee for participation in the cardboard
recycling program for customers outside the city limits shall be 50% higher
than in city limit rates.
(Ord. 2113, passed 9- -2022; Ord. 2134, passed 9- -2023; Ord. 2147, passed - -
2024)
SOLID WASTE LANDFILL DISPOSAL REGULATIONS
§ 53.30 LANDFILL SITE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful, except as set forth herein, to unload or deposit
any solid waste, yard waste hauled from any premises within the corporate
limits of the city, and destined for disposal within the state, at any place
other than the city landfill or baler building.
   (B)   The operator of the city landfill shall, at his or her sole and
absolute discretion, have the right to refuse disposal if in his or her
judgment the material to be disposed of will create potential problems. (Prior
Code, § 53.40) (Ord. 1604, passed 1-26-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 53.31 CONTAINERS; SPECIFICATIONS.
   Approved containers shall mean the solid waste container(s) provided by the
city.
(Prior Code, § 53.41) (Ord. 1604, passed 1-26-1998)
§ 53.32 WASTE; CARE AND DISPOSAL.
   Residential and commercial waste shall be deposited in the container
designated for such, the containers to be located in the alley behind and
adjacent to the premises served, or in such other place as may be designated by
the Sanitation Department. As a rule, four residential homes per one to three
cubic yard brown container for solid waste and six residential homes per one to
three cubic yard green container for yard waste. Containers damaged due to the
customer’s neglect or loss will be charged for repairs or replacement.
(Prior Code, § 53.42) (Ord. 1525, passed 4-25-1994) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 53.33 BURNABLE; INCINERATION REGULATIONS.
   All State Department of Environment and Energy (NDEE) requirements must be
met and will have to be inspected and obtain a permit from the City Fire
Marshal. Customers will be required to renew the permit yearly.
(Prior Code, § 53.43) (Ord. 1238, passed 4-13-1981) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 53.34 YARD WASTE; CARE AND DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Yard waste shall be deposited in the green colored container marked
“yard waste only” or “yard debris only.”
   (B)   The city operates a composting facility for yard waste. The only
materials allowed are grass and leaves to be disposed in the green yard waste
containers.
(Prior Code, § 53.44) (Ord. 1525, passed 4-25-1994) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 53.35 ALLEYS; USE OF.
   Alleys are public thoroughfares and are to be kept clear of obstructions at
all times. Containers must be placed in such a way that it will not obstruct
the use of the alley as a public thoroughfare at any time, and provided that no
permanent bases or foundations for such containers be permitted in the city
alleys or street. If other collection facilities are to be used, they must be
placed within the boundary of the private property, and immediately adjacent to
the alley used by the Sanitation Contractor for pick-up service. It shall be
the duty of the property owner adjacent to the alley to keep the alley clear of
weeds, and to prevent obstruction of the alley by overhanging shrubs and trees.
(Prior Code, § 53.45)
§ 53.36 SPECIAL PROVISIONS; DISTRICTS AND AREAS WITHOUT ALLEYS.
   In districts or areas where there are no alleys behind or adjacent to
premises served, all collection containers must be placed next to the curb on
the scheduled day or days of collection only.
(Prior Code, § 53.46)
§ 53.37 SPECIAL REFUSE; CARE AND DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Special refuse must not be placed or piled in the streets or alleys of
the city, but must be kept on the premises of the person responsible for the
refuse until it can be properly hauled away. Such refuse must be kept piled as
neatly as possible, and under no circumstances be allowed to blow or scatter
over adjacent areas. Extra pick-ups will be collected within 48 hours of
request. Waste must be placed into solid waste containers. Materials larger
than what will fit in trash containers must be hauled directly to the landfill
and pay disposal fees at the gate, or contract the Sanitation Department and
rent a roll-off box.
   (B)   Special refuse must not be permitted to accumulate over long periods
of time. The Police Department will notify the owner of such refuse by regular
mail to remove the refuse. Upon receipt of such notice, the owner shall be
given 72 hours to remove the refuse. If the refuse is not removed at the end of
this period, the city shall issue orders to hire a contractor to remove the
refuse, and the owner will be billed by the city for the cost of such services.
Special refuse as defined in division (C) below and § 
53.01 may be hauled, collected, and/or disposed of by private persons or
companies. If this is done, it shall be covered with a tarp to ensure there is
no scattering or blowing of refuse while it is being hauled to the ultimate
place of disposal.
   (C)   SPECIAL REFUSE is considered to be all manner of waste materials
which, due to weight, bulk, quantity, or composition of the material renders it
impractical or impossible to handle in the garbage packer trucks. Some examples
of SPECIAL REFUSE are: building materials waste such as lumber, plaster,
concrete, stone, brick, and tile; large metal objects such as car bodies or
stoves; limbs, branches, or tree trunks over two and one-half inches in
diameter; sod, dirt, and all other refuse when the quantity exceeds 100 pounds
at any one pick up or where dimensions exceed four feet in length or two feet
in girth, regardless of weight.
(Prior Code, § 53.47) (Ord. 1831, passed 8-14-2006) Penalty see §
10.99
CHAPTER 54: ELECTRIC
Section
General Provisions
   
54.01   Contract
   
54.02   Contracts not transferable
   
54.03   Application for service; deposit
   
54.04   Connections; by whom made
   
54.05   Meters
   
54.06   Electric Commissioner; access to premises
   
54.07   Trees near lines
   
54.08   Destruction of property
   
54.09   Installation of apparatus
   
54.10   Underground service; installation; costs
   
54.11   City not guarantor of delivery
Rates and Charges
   
54.25   Rates
   
54.26   Meters in disrepair; charges
   
54.27   Accounts kept by cashier
   
54.28   Electric Fund
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 54.01 CONTRACT.
   The city shall furnish electric current for light, heating, cooking, and
power purposes to persons whose premises abut on any supply wire of the
distributing system of the city. The rules and regulations and rates for
electric service, hereinafter named, shall be considered a part of the contract
with every person who is supplied with electric service through the electric
distribution system of the city and every such person by taking electric
service therefrom shall be considered and held to consent to be bound thereby,
and whenever any of such rules and regulations are violated, or such other as
the city may hereafter adopt, the electric current shall be cut off from the
building or place of such violation, even though two or more parties may
receive current through the same line, and shall not be turned on again except
by order of the city, and on payment of the fee for shutting off and turning
on, and upon such other terms as the city shall determine, and upon a
satisfactory understanding with the party that no further cause for complaint
shall arise and in case of violation, the city shall have the right to declare
any payment made for electric current by the person committing such violation
forfeited and the same shall thereupon be forfeited.
(Prior Code, § 54.01) (Ord. 337, passed 3-18-1952)
§ 54.02 CONTRACTS NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   Contracts for electric service are not transferable. Any person wishing to
change from one location to another shall make a new application and sign a new
contract. If any consumer shall sell, dispose of, or remove from the premises
where service is furnished, he or she shall at once so inform the city, who
shall cause the electric current to be shut off from the premises. If such
consumer shall fail to give notice, he or she shall be charged for all electric
current used on the premises until the city is otherwise advised of such
change.
(Prior Code, § 54.02)
§ 54.03 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE; DEPOSIT.
   (A)   Every person desiring a supply of electric current must make
application therefore to the city office, which application shall be on
designated forms to the utility office at City Hall. The application must state
truly and fully all the uses to which the electric current is to be applied and
no additional use will be allowed except by permission of the city.
   (B)   When such application shall be made for electric services to the
utility office, the city will run or cause to be run, supply wires or wires to
the buildings of the consumer, if the same are located on premises abutting the
distribution system of the city.
   (C)   New applicants for electric service shall be required to accompany
their application with a service deposit in an amount set by City Council.
   (D)   All meters required for providing applicant with electric service
shall be furnished, shall be set in place, and shall remain the property of the
city. All service deposits shall be refunded to the consumer when service is no
longer desired subject to the conditions as hereinafter provided. All such
supply wires shall be considered the property of the city. Not more than one
house or building shall be supplied from one connection except by special
permission. No consumer shall be permitted to take current for residence or
commercial electric purposes at power rates, nor shall any electrical apparatus
be attached or suffered to remain attached to any power meter. It shall be
unlawful for any person to employ any scheme, device, or contrivance for the
purpose of evading the proper service and registration for any meter or to
employ any scheme or device whereby he or she may obtain current which does not
pass through the meter furnished him or her by the city. Finding electrical
apparatus attached to a power meter or any device in or near any meter which
causes the same to register incorrectly shall be prima facie evidence of the
intent of the occupier of the premises, or of the consumer, to convert electric
current to his or her own use, which is hereby declared unlawful, and the
person convicted of a violation of the same shall be punished as hereinafter
provided; and, in it shall appear to the Electric Commissioner that any
electrical meter shall have been tapped or tampered with, he or she is hereby
empowered to install or cause to be installed, at the consumer’s expense, a
meter installed in iron conduit mechanically sealed in closed meter box
accessible only to the Electric Commissioner or his or her agents.
(Prior Code, § 54.03) (Ord. 626, passed 3-24-1969; Ord. 1530, passed 6-13-1994;
Ord. 1737, passed 9-22-2003)
§ 54.04 CONNECTIONS; BY WHOM MADE.
   No person, except those authorized by the Mayor and Council, shall connect
or make any changes in the switches, motors, meters, wire or wiring, or any
electrical apparatus of any description where the electrical current is used,
or in any way interfere with or injure same, or any connection, when the same
are connected with the supply wires of the electric distribution system of the
city. The city reserves the right to cut off or disconnect the supply or
electric current to any consumer, without any preliminary notice, for any
violation of the rules and requirements.
(Prior Code, § 54.04) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 54.05 METERS.
   (A)   All electric current furnished consumers by the electric distribution
system of the city shall be measured by meters furnished and set by the city.
No person except an authorized agent of the city, shall be allowed to set
meters or make connections to the electric service of the distribution system
of the city. The city will furnish all necessary meters to consumers under the
conditions prescribed in §
54.03, and will keep all meters clean and in repair at the expense of the city.
The owner or tenant of premises where a meter is located shall provide ready
and convenient access to the meter so that it may easily be examined and read
by authorized agents of the city. Any consumer of current from the electric
distribution system of the city shall have the right to request the Electric
Commissioner to test, a reasonable number of times, his or her current meter
which the consumer may have reason to believe is not registering the true
amount of current. It shall be the duty of the Electric Commissioner to test
the meter as requested and any other meter which needs to be tested.
   (B)   All meters now in use or hereafter installed in connection with the
electric light plant and system of the city, shall be and remain the property
of the city. When a meter is entirely worn out and a replacement is necessary,
a new meter will be furnished and set by the city for such consumer at the
expense of the city; provided, however, in cases where meter repair or meter
replacements are made necessary on account of the wilful neglect or
recklessness on the part of consumer, then the city shall require the customer
to pay for installing the new meter or making the repairs and collect the same
as for light service furnished.
(Prior Code, § 54.05) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 54.06 ELECTRIC COMMISSIONER; ACCESS TO PREMISES.
   The Electric Commissioner or the authorized agent of the Mayor and City
Council shall have access at all reasonable hours to premises in which electric
light, power or current is being used to determine if it is being carried,
distributed, and used in the proper manner.
(Prior Code, § 54.06)
§ 54.07 TREES NEAR LINES.
   (A)   Any person desiring to cut or remove trees or branches thereof, or to
fell same, in close proximity to the lines of the electric distribution system
of the city, and which the work might cause injury or damage to the lines
thereof, shall, before doing the work, give reasonable written notice to the
city, and shall secure a permit in writing from the Electric Commissioner so to
do and shall seek the assistance of the city to do the work so that electric
service shall not be interrupted or damage done to the lines or property of the
city.
   (B)   Any person felling or removing such trees, or branches of trees,
resulting in the interruption of electric service or damage to the lines or
property of the city, without having given notice to the city, as aforesaid,
and without having received the permit in writing from the Electric
Commissioner so to do, as aforesaid, shall be guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 54.07) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 54.08 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   No person shall wilfully or carelessly break, injure, or deface, interfere
with, or disturb any building, machinery, apparatus, insulator, transformer,
fixture, attachment, appurtenance, electrolier, white-way pole, suspension
lights, or light globes in the street lighting system of the electric light
plant or of the distribution system of the city, and if any person shall do any
of the acts herein prohibited, he or she shall be deemed guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 54.08) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 54.09 INSTALLATION OF APPARATUS.
   (A)   All poles, overhead wires, transformers and other aerial construction,
equipment or apparatus shall hereafter be erected in a substantial manner and
shall be placed in the alleys of the city insofar as it is practical to do so.
   (B)   All wires shall be erected and maintained at such height as shall
interfere as little as possible with other wires or business interests and all
such wires shall be placed so as not to interfere with the common, ordinary
public travel upon the streets and alleys.
(Prior Code, § 54.09) (Ord. 337, passed 3-18-1952)
§ 54.10 UNDERGROUND SERVICE; INSTALLATION; COSTS.
   (A)   When an underground electrical service is to be constructed within the
city electrical distribution system, it is hereby declared that the following
is city policy.
      (1)   The city shall calculate the actual cost of construction of an
overhead primary electrical service of sufficient capacity for the reasonably
projected requirements of the area to be served. The actual cost of the
installation of the underground primary system shall be calculated, and the
difference in cost of the underground primary system over and above what the
actual costs of the overhead primary system would have been, shall be paid by
the developer (or owner) of the area benefitted by the underground primary
service. Thereafter, it will be the responsibility of the city to maintain the
underground primary service so installed. It shall be the responsibility of the
developer (or owner) to install the underground service from the transformer or
pedestal to the mater loop or service entrance of the building to be served.
The city shall make all connections at the transformer or pedestal and
thereafter it will be the responsibility of the owner to maintain that part of
the underground service installed from the transformer or pedestal.
      (2)   The developer (or owner) shall furnish the city permanent right of
ingress at all times for construction and maintenance of the underground
facilities, including, individual customer services. All areas shall be brought
to final grade before the underground facilities are installed. In the event a
change in grade is made after the start of placing underground facilities, then
such changes will be an additional cost to developer (or owner).
      (3)   Construction power will be supplied from the underground system and
if overhead power is required, such will be furnished at the total expense to
the owner.
      (4)   Individual customer services shall not cross the side lot line of
ten adjacent lots and shall be of size to conduct 200 amps at 120/240 volts.
      (5)   Telephone lines, television cable lines, and other services, if
any, may use the same underground trench for their services at a cost to be
agreed upon between the parties.
      (6)   The cost as set forth above (on construction or materials by the
city) shall be paid one-half before the beginning of construction and the
balance shall be paid upon completion.
      (7)   All installation, construction, modification, or repairs of the
systems above described that are the responsibility of the developer (or owner)
are of the owner or developer. This will all be done subject to prior, in the
course of, and subsequent approval by inspectors authorized and/or employed by
the city.
   (B)   The city will require that all new residential additions or present
residential additions which have not been hooked up to the electrical system
will be constructed with an underground electrical distribution system.
(Prior Code, § 54.10) (Ord. 1001, passed 2-14-1977; Ord. 1062, passed 10-24-
1977)
§ 54.11 CITY NOT GUARANTOR OF DELIVERY.
   (A)   The city does not guarantee the delivery of electric current over the
lines of its distribution system at any time, to any person, except when its
power and connections are in good parking order, and it has sufficient power,
current, equipment and machinery so to do.
   (B)   The city expressly reserves the right to disconnect or discontinue
such service for any of the following reasons: for repairs necessary to be made
on any part of its plant, powerhouse, equipment, system, or distribution
system; for non-payment of bills when due; for fraudulent representations in
regard to the consumption of current for light, cooking, heat, and power; for
the protection of persons or property for violation of any of the rules and
requirements of this chapter, of the subsequent amendments thereto. The city
shall use due and reasonable diligence to provide and supply uninterrupted
service to consumers, but shall not be liable for damages resulting from
interruption of service due to causes over which the city has no control, and
the city expressly reserves the right to discontinue or disconnect consumer’s
service without any preliminary notice.
(Prior Code, § 54.11)
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 54.25 RATES.
   (A)   Electrical rates, generally. 
      (1)   Schedule. As a tariff of rates based on monthly consumption by each
consumer of electricity from the electrical distribution system of the city,
the following schedule of rates is established.
         (a)   Summer. The summer rate shall apply to the customer bills due on
July 1, August 1, September 1, and October 1.
         (b)   Winter. The winter rate shall apply to the customer bills due on
November 1 through June 1.
      (2)   All electric. Where both water and space heating are permanently
installed, in regular use and in accordance with terms and conditions as set
forth by the city, the winter rate schedule may apply (application by the
customer required) during summer months (residential accounts only).
   (B)   Residential rate.
      (1)   Availability. This rate is available within the corporate limits of
the city.
      (2)   Applicability. This rate is applicable to single-family residences
and individually metered apartments for all domestic purposes, including space
heating, all service shall be supplied through a single meter per building.
      (3)   Character of service. The character of such service shall be 60
cycle, AC, single-phase, 120/240 volt, three wire (optional with the system).
      (4)   Rates. Rates for this service are as follows.
 
Charge                             Summer  Winter
Minimum monthly bill               $29.70  $29.70
Rate:
   Balance KWH used per month   $0.1310 $0.1020
   The first 50 KWH used per mon$0.5940 $0.5940
   The next 100 KWH used per mon$0.1970 $0.1540
   The next 500 KWH used per mon$0.1370 $0.1250
 
      (4)   Terms of payment. Bills are due and payable upon receipt and
delinquent if not paid in ten days.
      (5)   Terms and conditions. Service will be furnished under the city’s
general terms and conditions.
   (C)   Commercial service.
      (1)   Availability. This service is available within the corporate limits
of the city.
      (2)   Applicability. This service is applicable to any customer whose
monthly consumption does not exceed 15,000 KWH per month or whose monthly peak
demand does not exceed 70 KW for three consecutive months.
      (3)   Character of service. This single phase, or three phase if
available, alternating current, electric service will be supplied at the
system’s standard voltages with all customers’ services being metered at one
location through one meter.
      (4)   Rates. Rates for this service are as follows.
 
Charge                               Summer    Winter
Minimum monthly bill                 $34.50    $30.30
Rate:
   Balance KWH used per month     $ 40.1300 $0.1080
   The first 100 KWH used per mont$0.3450   $0.3030
   The next 400 KWH used per month$0.2350   $0.2060
   The next 2,500 KWH used per mon$0.1510   $0.1280
 
      (5)   Fluctuating loads.
         (a)   Customers operating equipment having a highly fluctuating or
large instantaneous demand such as welders and x-ray machines shall be required
to pay all non-betterment costs of isolating the load from the balance of the
city’s system so that the load will not unduly interfere with service on the
city’s lines.
         (b)   In addition, customers who fail to provide adequate corrective
equipment shall be required to own and maintain their own transformers.
      (6)   Terms of payment. Bills are due and payable upon receipt and
delinquent if not paid in ten days.
      (7)   Terms and conditions. Service will be furnished under the city’s
general conditions for service under this schedule.
   (D)   Industrial rate.
      (1)   Availability. This rate is available within the corporate limits of
the city.
      (2)   Applicability. This rate is applicable to any customer whose
monthly consumption exceeds 15,000 kilowatt-hours per month or whose monthly
peak demand exceeds 70 kilowatts for three consecutive months.
      (3)   Character of service. The customer service must be three phase and
will be supplied at the systems standard voltages with all the customers
services located at one metering point where possible.
      (4)   Rates. Rates for this service are as follows.
         (a)   Demand charge winter rates: $15.99 per kilowatt of maximum
billing demand shall apply to the customer bills due on November 1 through June
1.
         (b)   Demand charge summer rates: $18.92 per kilowatt of maximum
billing demand shall apply to the customer bills due on July 1, August 1,
September 1, and October 1.
         (c)   In addition to the demand charges described in divisions (D)(4)
(a) and (D)(4)(b) above, the following charges apply.
Charge Amount
Charge                                        Amount
Energy charge (year round):
   Balance KWH used per month              $0.0590
   The first 2,000 KWH or less used per mon$0.1020
   The next 3,000 KWH used per month       $0.0940
   The next 20,000 KWH used per month      $0.0810
   The next 25,000 KWH used per month      $0.0740
Minimum monthly bill:
   Summer                                  $1,528.65
   Winter                                  $1,325.62
 
      (5)   Determination of maximum demand. The maximum demand for any billing
period shall be the highest integrated kilowatt load during any 15 minute
period occurring in the billing period for which the determination is made.
      (6)   Rate classification. When the monthly energy consumption or peak
demand qualifies a customer for the industrial rate, the customer shall be
billed on the industrial rate for the next 12 consecutive months.
      (7)   Fluctuating loads. Customers operating equipment having a highly
fluctuating or large instantaneous demand such as welders and x-ray machines
shall be required to pay all non-betterment costs of isolating the load from
the balance of the city’s system so that the load will not unduly interfere
with service on the city’s lines. In addition, customers who fail to provide
adequate corrective equipment shall be required to own and maintain their own
transformers.
      (8)   Power factor adjustment. At the option of the city, power factor
adjustments may be made when the power factor, as determined by test, at the
time of the customer’s maximum use is less than 92%. If a power factor of 92%
or higher is not maintained, the customer will be billed via a KVA-KVAH meter.
      (9)   Terms of payment. Bills are due and payable upon receipt and
delinquent if not paid in ten days.
      (10)   Terms and conditions. Service will be furnished under the system’s
general terms and conditions for service under this schedule.
      (11)   Fuel adjustment. At the option of the city, the above rates and
bills may be adjusted from month to month for fuel cost adjustments charged by
the city’s supplier.
   (E)   Rural rates. This schedule is applicable to rural residents, farm
service, and commercial and industrial service outside the corporate limits of
the city for lighting, heating, and power.
   (F)   Residential. Power served under this schedule will be single phase (or
three phase where such service can be extended) at approximately 120-240 volts
measured by metering equipment installed at one point. Single phase motors will
not exceed five horsepower individual rating.
Charge Summer Winter
Charge                               Summer  Winter
Customer charge per month: no energy
   Single phase                   $21.79  $21.79
   Three phase                    $29.07  $29.07
Rate:
   Balance KWH used per month     $0.1980 $0.1620
   The first 250 KWH used per mont$0.2970 $0.2230
   The next 500 KWH used per month$0.2230 $0.1980
 
   (G)   Commercial. This rate is applicable to any customer whose monthly
consumption does not exceed 15,000 KWH per month or whose monthly peak demand
does not exceed 70 KW for three consecutive months (city plus 10%).
 
Charge                               Summer  Winter
Minimum monthly bill:                $37.10  $32.60
Rate:
   Balance KWH used per month     $0.1420 $0.1160
   The first 100 KWH used per mont$0.3710 $0.3260
   The next 400 KWH used per month$0.2530 $0.2230
   The next 2,500 KWH used per mon$0.1630 $0.1380
 
   (H)   Industrial.
      (1)   Applicability. This rate is applicable to any customer whose
monthly consumption exceeds 15,000 kilowatt-hours per month or whose monthly
peak demand exceeds 70 kilowatts for three consecutive months (city plus 10%).
      (2)   Rates. Rates for this service are as follows:
         (a)    Demand charge winter rates: $17.12 per kilowatt of maximum
billing demand shall apply to the customer bills due on November 1 through June
1.
         (b)   Demand charge summer rates: $19.98 per kilowatt of maximum
billing demand shall apply to the customer bills due on July 1, August 1,
September 1, and October 1.
         (c)   In addition to the charges described in divisions (H)(2)(a) and
(H)(2)(b) above, the following charges apply.
Charge Rate
Charge                                        Rate
Energy charge (year round):                    
   Balance KWH used per month              $0.0660
   The first 2,000 KWH or less used per mon$0.1100
   The next 3,000 KWH used per month       $0.1010
   The next 20,000 KWH used per month      $0.0890
   The next 25,000 KWH used per month      $0.0800
Minimum monthly bill:
   Summer                                  $1,618.81
   Winter                                  $1,419.09
 
      (3)   Terms of payment. Bills are due and payable upon receipt and
delinquent if not paid in ten days.
      (4)   Terms and conditions. Service will be furnished under the city’s
general terms and conditions and the following additional terms and conditions
pertaining to this schedule: The customer will furnish all interior wiring and
equipment for the use of the service of all poles, wires, and fixtures
necessary to distribute such service from the meter location to the various
buildings served.
   (I)   New business development rate.
      (1)   New businesses must meet the following qualifications for this
rate:
         (a)   New construction only, effective August 1, 1995;
         (b)   Industrial user: greater than 15,000 kwh/month or 50 kw of
demand for three consecutive months;
         (c)   Must be all electric;
         (d)   Tax increment financing;
         (e)   Allow city to install load management switches on air
conditioners and hot water    heaters;
         (f)   Limits are as follows:
             1.   Original owner only;
            2.   Maximum of 50,000 kwh/month. (Negotiate any usage over 50,000
kwh); and
            3.   Ends five years from date of occupancy.
         (g)   A power factor of 92% or higher will be maintained at all times
or the use of a KVA meter will be used to produce billing of KVAH and KVA
demand.
      (2)   Cost per kwh to customer:
         (a)   Total cost of city purchased power/kwh city purchased times
1.375 (i.e., 2013/2014);
            1.   $4,674,857 ÷ 76,007,881.00 kw = 0.06150;
            2.   0.06150 times 1.375 = $0.0846 cost per kwh; and
            3.   Rounds to four decimal places.
         (b)   Over 50,000 kwh, use 0.0660/kwh: low industrial rate plus
demand:
            1.   Summer: $19.98; and
            2.   Winter; $17.12.
   (J)   Combination commercial-industrial service rate.
      (1)   Users of this service must meet the following qualifications:
         (a)   Non-concurrent peak: city peaks normally June through August;
         (b)   Demand does not exceed 35 kw during June through August;
         (c)   Allow city to install load management devices on air
conditioners and hot water heaters; and
         (d)   Demand meter.
      (2)   Rate to be lesser of the commercial or industrial service rate.
   (K)   Area lighting service.
      (1)   Availability. This service is available to all in the city service
area.
      (2)   Applicability. This service is applicable to all size outdoor
lighting lamps.
      (3)   Rate.
 
Wattage         Monthly Charge
100 to 175 watt $23.66
250 watt        $31.83
400 watt        $47.07
1000 watt       $59.90
1500 watt       $63.64
Notes to table:
Monthly charge includes the fixture, lamp, and mounting brackets.
 
   (L)   Irrigation service.
      (1)   Availability. This service is available in the general area served
by the city’s Electric Department.
      (2)   Applicability. This service is applicable to year-around irrigation
service to customers who will contract for five horsepower or more and who may
be served from existing three-phase distribution line of 480 volts or less.
      (3)   Restrictions. Where the city does not have three-phase but has
single-phase service available, single-phase motors not to exceed 25 horsepower
rating may be connected under this schedule. No contract shall be less than
five horsepower.
      (4)   Rate.
         (a)   Fixed charge: $20.37 per horsepower connected per year, payable
with the first billing after April 1 of each year.
         (b)   Energy charge: $0.52 per KWH for the first 50 KWH and minimum
bill of $26 per month, $0.068 per KWH for all additional use.
         (c)   All irrigation service shall be interruptible and in accordance
with a written agreement between the city and customer. Installation of a load
control switch must be allowed by the customer.
      (5)   Determination of connected load. The city reserves the right at any
time to check the customer’s load for recalculation of the minimum bill.
      (6)   Power factor adjustment. The rates set forth in this schedule are
based on the maintenance by the customer of a power factor of not less than 92%
at all times. If it is determined by test that the power factor at the time of
the customer’s peak load is less than 92%, the city at its option may correct
the power factor of the customer’s load at the expense of the customer or bill
via a KVA-KVAH meter.
      (7)   Use of service for purposes other than irrigation. At locations
where the city has provided facilities for irrigation service, the customer may
use the facilities for purposes other than irrigation provided such service may
be supplied from the city’s facilities serving the irrigation pump.
   (M)   Application for service: deposit. 
      (1)   Every person desiring a supply of electric current must make
application to the city office, which application shall be made on designated
forms to the Utility Office at City Hall. The application must state truly and
fully all the uses to which said electric current is to be applied and no
additional use will be allowed except by permission of said city. When such
application shall be made for electric services to said utility office, the
city will run or cause to be run, supply wires or wires to the buildings of the
consumer, if the same are located on premises abutting the distribution system
of the city. New applicants for electric service shall be required to accompany
their application with a service deposit of $125 for residential and a higher
basic deposit rate will be required on all commercial and industrial accounts
to ensure the payment of electric bills and other charges; the city reserves
the right to require of users a service deposit sufficient to equal 45 days
estimated bills on the particular meter. (This will be estimated by multiplying
the highest monthly billing in the previous 24 months by 150% or in the case of
a new meter, a sum estimated to be 150% of the charge for that meter). All
meters required for providing applicant with electric service shall be
furnished, shall be set in place, and shall remain the property of said city.
      (2)   All service deposits shall be refunded to the consumer when service
is no longer desired subject to the conditions as hereinafter provided. All
such supply wires shall be considered the property of the city. Not more than
one house or building shall be supplied from one connection except by special
permission. No consumer shall be permitted to take current for residence or
commercial electric purposes at power rates, nor shall any electrical apparatus
be attached or suffered to remain attached to any power meter.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to employ any scheme, device or
contrivance for the purpose of evading the proper service and registration for
any meter or to employ any scheme or device whereby he or she may obtain
current which does not pass through the meter furnished him or her by the city.
      (4)   Finding electrical apparatus attached to a power meter or any
device in or near any meter which causes the same to register incorrectly shall
be prima facie evidence of the intent of the occupier of said premises, or of
said consumer, to convert electric current to his or her own use, which is
hereby declared unlawful, and the person convicted of a violation of the same
shall be punished as hereinafter provided; and, in it shall appear to the said
Electric Superintendent that any electrical meter shall have been tapped or
tampered with, he or she is hereby empowered to install or cause to be
installed, at the consumer’s expense a meter installed in iron conduit
mechanically sealed in closed meter box accessible only to the Electric
Superintendent or his or her agents.
   (N)   Service charges.
      (1)   Meter disconnect or reconnect charges are as follows.
 
At customer’s request          
   After business hours      $100 (call out fees)
   During normal business hou$50
For non-payment                  
   After business hours      $100
   During business hours (onl$50
 
      (2)   Reconnect service fees for non-payment are due in advance and are
to be paid although electric service may not actually be physically
disconnected.
      (3)   Read in and read out: no charge.
      (4)   Meter tests: Free if the city requests. A charge will apply if the
customer requests:
         (a)   Single phase electric: $50;
         (b)   Three phase electric: $50; and
         (c)   Hookup of temporary service pole: A service fee of $50 must be
paid before the city will hook up the temporary service pole. This fee is for
new construction only. Service fee for temporary service pole is $50.
   (O)   Tampering.
      (1)   Any customer who attempts to obtain current or alter city property
in the attempt of theft of services, to include: cutting meter seals;
connections around disconnect; removing locks placed by the city will be
charged a $150 fee in advance of reconnection.
      (2)   Immediate disconnect of electrical service shall be completed by
the city upon finding any of the above described activities. The city has no
liability for such action.
   (P)   Load management. At the option of the city, an energy load management
switch may be installed that enables the city to turn off air conditioners or
water heaters when there is an economic need to manage usage.
(Prior Code, § 54.30) (Ord. 1689, passed 9-24-1991; Ord. 1623, passed 9-28-
1998; Ord. 1655, passed 12-13-1999; Ord. 1672, passed 9-25-2000; Ord. 1737,
passed 9-22-2003; Ord. 1778, passed 9-27-2004; Ord. 1974, passed 9-23-2013;
Ord. 1943, passed 11-25-2013; Ord. 1984, passed 9-22-2014; Ord. 2012, passed 9-
28-2015; Ord. 2037, passed 9-26-2016; Ord. 5138, passed - -2023)  Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 54.26 METERS IN DISREPAIR; CHARGES.
   Should a consumer’s meter get out of repair or fail to register properly,
the consumer will be charged for electric current during the time such meter is
out of order or repair on the basis of monthly consumption during the same
month of the preceding year; provided, however, if no such basis for comparison
exists, then such consumer shall pay such amount as reasonably fixed by the
Electric Commissioner.
(Prior Code, § 54.31)
§ 54.27 ACCOUNTS KEPT BY CASHIER.
   The account of each patron of the lighting system shall be separately kept
by the Treasurer under the general supervision of the Mayor and Council, and
all monies paid on account in connection with the electric system shall be
receipted for by the employee receiving such payment and a duplicate of such
receipt shall be kept on file in the city utility office. The Treasurer shall
perform such other duties as the Mayor and Council may from time to time by
resolution prescribe. He or she shall be held responsible for all work so
assigned to him or her and shall be accountable to the Mayor and Council at all
times.
(Prior Code, § 54.32)
§ 54.28 ELECTRIC FUND.
   The funds received by the Treasurer from the utility office, as aforesaid,
arising out of income from the electric distribution system, shall be kept by
the Treasurer in a separate fund known as the “Electric Fund,” which shall be
allocated for accounting and other purposes as the Mayor and Council shall, by
resolution, from time to time direct.
(Prior Code, § 54.33)
CHAPTER 55: STORMWATER
Section
Administrative Provisions
   
55.01   Definitions
   
55.02   Purpose and intent
   
55.03   Applicability
   
55.04   Compatibility with other regulations
   
55.05   Responsibility for administration
   
55.06   Ultimate responsibility
General Provisions
   
55.15   Prohibition of illegal discharges
   
55.16   Prohibition of illicit connections
   
55.17   Industrial or construction activity discharges
   
55.18   Requirements to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by
the use of best management practices
   
55.19   Watercourse protection
   
55.20   Suspension of MS4 access
   
55.21   Access and inspection of properties and facilities
   
55.22   Notification of accidental discharges and spills
   
55.23   Notice of violation
   
55.24   Appeal of notice of violation
   
55.25   Enforcement measures after appeal
   
55.26   Cost of abatement of the violation
   
55.27   Injunctive relief
   
55.28   Alternative actions upon violation
   
55.29   Violations deemed a public nuisance
   
55.30   Criminal prosecution
   
55.31   Remedies not exclusive
   
55.32   Stormwater surcharge
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
   
55.50   Purpose/scope
   
55.51   Definitions
   
55.52   Relation to other laws
   
55.53   Exemptions
   
55.54   Manner of work
   
55.55   SWPPP performance standards
   
55.56   Application; fees
   
55.57   Permit application form
   
55.58   Stormwater pollution prevention plan
   
55.59   Permit required
   
55.60   Permit duration
   
55.61   Permit renewals/extensions
   
55.62   Permit denial
   
55.63   Conditions of approval
   
55.64   Requirements for utility construction
   
55.65   Liability
   
55.66   Responsibility of permittee
   
55.67   Permit authorization
   
55.68   Compliance
   
55.69   Action upon non-compliance
   
55.70   Changes to plans
   
55.71   Inspection and supervision
   
55.72   Changes during construction reports
   
55.73   Maintenance during and after construction
   
55.74   Security
   
55.75   Enforcement
   
55.76   Certification of completion
   
55.77   Notice of termination
 
   
55.99   Penalties
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
§ 55.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Wherever used in this chapter, the following terms shall bear the meanings
herein:
   ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE. A discharge prohibited by this chapter which occurs by
chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to
prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to storm
water, receiving water, or storm water conveyance systems. BMPs also include
treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site
runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to the NPDES construction permits.
Currently these include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of
one acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavation and demolition.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the
storm drain system, except as exempted in this chapter.
   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system
including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the
storm drain system and connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains
and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously
allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency or, any
drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the
storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent
records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 C.F.R., § 122.26(b)(14).
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT. A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated
pursuant to 33 U.S.C. 1342(B) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to
water of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual,
group, or general area-wide basis.
   NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is
not composed entirely of stormwater.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner's agent.
   POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. POLLUTANTS may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordinances, and accumulations, so the same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind. POLLUTANTS lead to the human-made or human-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of an aquatic
ecosystem.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.02 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety,
environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater
discharges to the city separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent
practicable required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes methods
for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements on the national
pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process. The objectives
of this chapter are:
   (A)   Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user.
   (B)   To prohibit illicit connection and discharges to the municipal
separate stormsewer system.
   (C)   Prevent non-storm water discharges, generated as a result of spills,
inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the city's separate storm sewer system.
   (D)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.03 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all water generated on any developed and
undeveloped lands entering the storm drain system unless explicitly exempted by
this municipal code or otherwise by the city.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.04 COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule,
regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in
addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule regulation, or other
provision of law. Where this chapter is in conflict with any other provision of
law, the provision which is more restrictive or imposes higher protective
standards for human health or the environment shall control.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.05 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The City Administrator shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. The City Administrator may delegate enforcement
powers to any employee of the city.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.06 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.
   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are
minimum standards; therefore this chapter is not to be interpreted as meaning
that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 55.15 PROHIBITION OF ILLEGAL DISCHARGES.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm
drain system or watercourses any materials other than stormwater, including but
not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standard. The
commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm
drain system is prohibited except as follows:
   (A)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this chapter: water line flushing or other potable water
sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising
ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped
groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater
dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs,
non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one part per million of
chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing
pollutants.
   (B)   Discharges specified in writing by the City Administrator as being
necessary to protect public health and safety.
   (C)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the City Administrator prior to the time of test.
   (D)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental
Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drain system.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.16 PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.
   The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any
illegal connection to the city's separate storm sewer system is prohibited.
   (A)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
   (B)   A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection
to continue.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.17 INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.
   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the city prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.18 REQUIREMENTS TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORMWATER POLLUTANTS BY
THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   The city will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for
any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution
or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the State
of Nebraska or the United States of America. The owner or operator of a
commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at the expense of the
owner or operator, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or
watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural best
management practices to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions
of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with
industrial the provisions of this subchapter. These best management practices
shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary
for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.19 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.20 SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.
   (A)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The city
may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or
to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United
States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an
emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the State of
Nebraska or the United States of America or to minimize danger to persons or
property.
   (B)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have his or her MS4
access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit
discharge. The city will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its
MS4 access. The violator may petition the City Administrator for a
reconsideration and hearing.
   (C)   A person commits an offense if that person reinstates MS4 access to
premises terminated pursuant to this subchapter, without the prior approval of
the City Administrator.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.21 ACCESS AND INSPECTION OF PROPERTIES AND FACILITIES.
   The City Administrator or designee may enter and inspect properties and
facilities at reasonable time as often as may be necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter.
   (A)   Employees of the city may enter and inspect facilities subject to
regulation under this chapter as often as may be necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   Facility operators shall allow authorized employees of the city ready
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an
NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and performance of any additional duties
as defined by state and federal law.
   (C)   The city may set up on any permitted facility such devices as are
necessary in the opinion of the City Administrator to conduct monitoring and/or
sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.
   (D)   The city may require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its
own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
   (E)   The temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced.
The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
   (F)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a permitted
facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this chapter. A
person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge
stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person
denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted
facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by
this chapter.
   (G)   If the representatives of the city have been refused access to any
part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged the city may seek
issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.22 NOTIFICATION OF ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES AND SPILLS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding other requirements of the law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility
or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or
pollutants discharging into stormwater, the city (MS4) separate storm sewer
system, waters of the State of Nebraska, or the waters of the United States of
America, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the
discharge.
   (B)   Said person shall notify the City Administrator or designee of the
City Administrator of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the
discharge within 24 hours. Notifications which are not in writing shall be
confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the City Administrator or
designee within three business days of the phone call or by personal
notification. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a
commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such
establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and
the action taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for
at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no
recurrence of the discharge or spill.
   (C)   In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency
response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately
notified.
   (D)   Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.23 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the City Administrator may order
compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such
notice shall be sent via regular U.S. mail or via hand delivery to the owner of
the property and to any licensee listed under a city business license for the
property. The notice shall include:
      (1)   The name and address of the parties listed above;
      (2)   The address when available or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred;
      (3)   A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
      (4)   A description of the remedial action:
      (5)   A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person or persons to whom the notice of violation is
directed; and
      (6)   A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the City Administrator by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of
service of notice of violation.
   (B)   In the event of a violation, the city may require:
      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
      (2)   The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections;
      (3)   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
      (4)   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
      (5)   Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs;
      (6)   The implementation of pollution prevention practices; and
      (7)   Such other action as may be reasonably necessary to accomplish the
purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.24 APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the city. The notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall be delivered to
the City Clerk within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing
on the appeal before the City Administrator shall take place within 15 days
from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The pendency of an appeal
shall not relieve the responsible person from complying with the requirements
of the notice of violation, unless the City Administrator otherwise consents in
writing.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.25 ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.
   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 15 days
of the decision of the City Administrator or designee, then representatives of
the city may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take
any measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It
shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any
premises to refuse to allow the city or designated city contractor to enter
upon the premised for the purposes set faith above.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.26 COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.
   (A)   Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the
property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative
costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the
assessment or to the amount of the assessment within 30 days of such notice. If
the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an
appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges
shall become a special assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation.
   (B)   The city may recover all attorney's fees, court costs and other
expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and
monitoring expenses.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.27 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated
or continues to violate the provisions of the chapter, the city may petition
for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from
activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to
perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.28 ALTERNATIVE ACTIONS UPON VIOLATION.
   In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties and remedies authorized by
this chapter, the city may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory
action, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance of compliance workshops,
waterway cleanup, or other community service work.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.29 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
the chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.30 CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.
   Any person, firm, corporation or agency acting as principal, agent, employee
or otherwise, who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter unless
otherwise specifically provided herein, shall be deemed guilty of an offense
and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the penalties described in §
10.99. A conviction pursuant to this chapter shall be a Class II violation of
the city code, and subject to fine in any sum not exceeding $1,000. A new
violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of failure to
comply with the provisions of this code.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.31 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the
discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.32 STORMWATER SURCHARGE.
   The city residential, commercial and industrial stormwater surcharge shall
be as set by the City Council from time to time.
(Ord. 2137, passed - -2023)
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN
§ 55.50 PURPOSE/SCOPE.
   The purpose and scope of this subchapter is to control land disturbances, or
eliminate soil erosion and sedimentation within the corporate limits of the
city. It establishes standards and specifications for conversion practices and
planning activities that minimize soil erosion and sedimentation. It further
provides the city with procedures for issuance, approval, admission and
enforcement of a permit.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.51 DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever used in this subchapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
given to them in this section:
   APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application to the city for a permit
pursuant to this chapter.
   ARCHITECT. A person duly registered or authorized to practice architecture
in the State of Nebraska.
   ASTM. The American Society for Testing Materials.
   BEDROCK. In place solid rock.
   BENCH. A relatively level step excavated into earth material on which fill
is to be placed.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP). Erosion and sediment control and water
quality management practices that are the most effective and practicable means
of controlling, preventing, and minimizing degradation of surface water,
including avoidance of impacts, construction-phasing, minimizing the length of
time soil areas are exposed, prohibitions, and other management practices
published by state or designated area-wide planning agencies.
   BORROW. Earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading
on a site.
   CITY. The City of Gering and only includes areas within its corporate
limits.
   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer of the City of Gering and his/her duly
authorized designees.
   CIVIL ENGINEER. A professional engineer registered in the State of Nebraska
to practice in the field of civil works.
   CIVIL ENGINEERING. The application of the knowledge of the forces of nature,
principles of mechanics and the properties of materials to the evaluation,
design and construction of civil works for the beneficial uses of mankind.
   CLEARING AND GRUBBING. Any activity that removes the vegetative surface
cover, including the cutting and removal of trees, shrubs, bushes, and other
vegetation including removal of tree stumps, roots and other remains in the
designated areas.
   CSW. The construction site to waters permit of the State of Nebraska.
   DEMOLITION. Any act or process of wrecking or destroying a building or
structure as defined in the city building code.
   DETENTION FACILITY. A temporary or permanent natural or man-made structure
that provides for the temporary storage of storm water runoff.
   DEVELOPER. Any person, firm, corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership,
state agency, or political subdivision thereof engaged in a land disturbance
activity.
   ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT. The department in the city that is responsible for
building inspections, code enforcement, community development, current and long
range planning, zoning, and permit coordination.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Stormwater Program Specialist of the city and
his/her duly authorized designees.
   EROSION. The wearing away of earth material as a result of the movement of
wind, water, ice, and/or land disturbance activities.
   EXCAVATION. The mechanical removal of earth material.
   FILL. A deposit of soil or other earth materials placed by artificial means.
   FINAL SWPPP (FINAL PLAN). A plan which includes permanent measures and best
management practices to control surface runoff and control sediment if not
included in the SWPPP (plan).
   FLOODPLAIN. The 100-year floodplain which is that area adjoining a
watercourse which could be inundated by a flood that has a 1% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year and is delineated on the Federal
Emergency Management Agency Floodway Maps for the city.
   GENERAL STORMWATER PERMIT. The Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality
(NDEQ) general national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES)
construction storm water permit covering anyone conducting a land disturbing
activity which disturbsone or more acres of total land area.
   GRADE. The vertical location of the ground surface.
      (1)   EXISTING GRADE is the grade prior to grading.
      (2)   ROUGH GRADE is the stage at which the grade approximately conforms
to the approved plan.
      (3)   FINISH GRADE is the final grade of the site which conforms to the
approved plan.
   ISSUING AUTHORITY. The Stormwater Program Specialist of the city and their
duly authorized designees.
   LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY. Any land change that may result in soil erosion
from wind, water and/or ice and the movement of sediments into or upon waters,
lands, or rights-of-way within the corporate limits of the city, including but
not limited to building demolition, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating,
transporting and filling of land. LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY does not include
the following:
      (1)   Minor land disturbance activities including, but not limited to,
underground utility repairs, home gardens, minor repairs, and maintenance work
which do not disturb more than one acre and is not part of a larger common plan
of development.
      (2)   Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and
other kinds of posts or poles.
      (3)   Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property and emergency
repairs. If the land disturbing activity would have required an approved SWPPP
except for the emergency, then the land area disturbed shall be shaped and
stabilized in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 24, Article 3.
      (4)   Agricultural and other activity related to the production and
management of crops for economic benefit.
   LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT. A person duly registered or authorized to practice
landscape architecture in the State of Nebraska.
   LARGER COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT. Part of a large set of plans if the
ultimate plan is larger than one acre then it is part of a larger common plan.
   MAINTENANCE PROJECT. A non-construction related activity.
   MEASURABLE STORM EVENT. Any precipitation measuring 0.5 inches or greater.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT. A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated
pursuant to 33 U.S.C. 1342(B) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to
water of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual,
group, or general area-wide basis).
   NOAA. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
   NDEQ. The Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality.
   NDOR. The Nebraska Department of Roads.
   NDOT. The Nebraska Department of Transportation.
   N.O.L. The document of notice of intent.
   N.O.T. The document of notice of termination.
   OUTFALL. The point of discharge to any watercourse from a public or private
stormwater drainage system.
   OWNER. Any person with a legal or equitable interest in the land for which
an erosion control permit has been issued.
   PERMITTEE. The applicant in whose name a valid permit is duly issued
pursuant to this chapter and his/her agents, employees, and others acting under
his/her direction.
   RETENTION FACILITY. A temporary or permanent natural or manmade structure
that provides for the storage of storm water runoff by means of a permanent
pool of water.
   RUNOFF. Rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the ground
surface.
   SEDIMENT. Soils or other surficial materials transported by surface water as
a product of erosion.
   SEDIMENTATION. The process or action of deposition sediment that is
determined to have been caused by erosion.
   SEDIMENTATION. The process or action of depositing sediment that it
determined to have been caused by erosion.
   SITE. The entire area of land on which the land disturbance activity is
proposed in the permit application.
   SITE PLAN. A plan or set of plans showing the details of any land
disturbance activity of a site including but not limited to the construction
of: structures, open and enclosed drainage facilities, stormwater management
facilities, parking lots, driveways, curbs, pavements, sidewalks, bike paths,
recreational facilities, ground covers, plantings, and landscaping.
   SLOPE. The incline of a ground surface expressed as a ratio of horizontal
distance to vertical distance.
   SOIL. Naturally occurring surficial deposits overlying bedrock.
   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A plan which includes a set of
best management practices or equivalent measure designed to control surface
runoff and erosion and to retain sediment on a particular site during the
period in which pre-construction and construction related land disturbances,
fills, and soil storage occur, and before final improvements are completed, all
in accordance with the specific requirements set forth in this chapter.
   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN INSPECTOR. An employee of the city that
has in his/her possession either of the following:
      (1)   Certification for erosion and sediment control for inspectors;
sponsored or endorsed by Nebraska Local Technical Assistance Program.
      (2)   Certification of preparer of stormwater pollution prevention plan
and certified compliance inspector of stormwater sponsored or endorsed by
Stormwater USA.
   STRIPPING. Any activity which removes or significantly disturbs the
vegetative surface cover including clearing, grubbing of stumps and root mat,
and topsoil removal.
   STRUCTURE. Anything manufactured, constructed or erected which is normally
attached to or positioned on land, including buildings, portable structures,
earthen structures, roads, parking lots, and paved storage areas.
   SURVEYOR. A person duly registered or authorized to practice land surveying
in the State of Nebraska.
   SWPPP. The stormwater pollution prevention plan which details sediment
erosion and control.
   TOPSOIL. The upper layer of soil.
   UTILITY. The owner/operator of any underground facility including an
underground line, facility, system, and its appurtenances used to produce,
store, convey, transmit, or distribute communications, data, electricity,
power, heat, gas, oil, petroleum products, water (including stormwater), steam,
sewage and other similar substances.
   WATERCOURSE. Any natural or improved stream, river, creek, ditch, channel,
canal, conduit, gutter, culvert, drain, gully, swale, or wash in which waters
flow either continuously or intermittently.
   WATERSHED. A region draining to a specific river, river system, or body of
water.
   WETLAND. A lowland area such as a marsh, which is saturated with moisture,
as defined in § 404, Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1987.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.52 RELATION TO OTHER LAWS.
   Neither this chapter nor any administrative decision made under it exempts
the permittee or any other person from procuring other required permits or
complying with the requirements and conditions of such permit, or limits the
right of any person to maintain, at any time, any appropriate action, at law or
in equity, for relief or damages against the permittee or any other person
arising from the activity regulated by this chapter.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.53 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following activities are exempt from obtaining a permit and from
following the procedures required in this subchapter:
   (A)   Cemetery graves.
   (B)   Emergencies posing an immediate danger to life or property, or
substantial flood or fire hazards.
   (C)   Those undertaken on agricultural land for the production and
management of crops for economic benefit.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.54 MANNER OF WORK.
   (A)   All land disturbing or land filling activities or soil storage,
whether pursuant to this subchapter or otherwise, shall be undertaken in a
manner designed to minimize surface runoff, erosion and sedimentation. Whenever
the issuing authority determines that any land disturbing activity on any
private property has become a hazard to life and limb, or endangers the
property of another, or adversely affects the safety, use, slope, or soil
stability of a public way, publicly controlled wetland, or watercourse, then
the owner of the property upon which the land disturbing activity is located,
or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in
writing from the issuing authority, shall within the period specified therein
repair or eliminate such conditions.
   (B)   Exempt activities under this chapter or the activities excluded under
the definition of land disturbance activities under this subchapter are also
subject to the provisions of this section. If the city incurs costs to enforce
the provisions of the subchapter because of any activity listed in this
chapter, reimbursement of city costs associated with the correction work
completed by the city must occur prior to the issuance of a letter certifying
completion, when required under this chapter.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.55 SWPPP PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   A construction project shall be considered in conformance with this chapter
if soils have been prevented from being deposited onto adjacent properties,
rights-of-ways, public storm system, or wetland or watercourse. The design,
testing, installation, and maintenance of erosion and sediment control
operations and facilities shall adhere to city approved design standards as
well as standards specifications in the most current authorization to discharge
under the national pollutant discharge elimination system general NPDES permit
for storm water discharges from construction sites to waters of the State of
Nebraska which shall be hereby incorporated into this chapter. In the event of
conflict, a copy of the NOI, SWPPP and the CSW shall be filed with the
Engineering Department of the city and Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
Inspector for the city.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.56 APPLICATION; FEES.
   All land disturbance activities require a stormwater permit issued by the
city. A written application for a permit from the owner of the site, or any
other authorized representative designated by the owner who has day-to-day
operational control and/or the ability to modify project plans with
specifications related to the SWPPP, in the form prescribed by in this chapter
shall be required for each permit. The fees for said permit shall be as
provided in § 150.021. Plans and specifications shall be prepared or approved
by a qualified person such as a civil engineer, surveyor, architect or
landscape architect.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.57 PERMIT APPLICATION FORM.
   The following information is required on the application:
   (A)   Name, address, and telephone number of owner.
   (B)   Name, address, and telephone number of applicant, if different than
owner.
   (C)   Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of any and all contractors,
subcontractors or persons actually doing the land disturbing or land filling
activities and their respective tasks.
   (D)   Name(s), address(es), and telephone number(s) of the person(s)
responsible for the preparation of the site map and grading plan.
   (E)   Name(s), address(es), and telephone number(s) of the person(s)
responsible for the preparation of the SWPPP.
   (F)   Address of site.
   (G)   Date of the application.
   (H)   Signature(s) of the owner(s) of the site or an authorized
representative.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.58 STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN.
   Before a stormwater permit will be issued by the city, a SWPPP shall be
submitted and approved by the city. The SWPPP shall be drawn to an appropriate
scale and shall include sufficient information to evaluate the environmental
characteristics of the affected areas, the potential impacts of the proposed
grading on water resources, and measures proposed to minimize soil erosion and
off-site sedimentation. The owner/developer shall perform all clearing,
grading, drainage, construction, and development in strict accordance with the
standards approved by the city and the approved SWPPP. In addition, the
following information shall be included in any plan where land disturbance
activity will be greater than one acre:
   (A)   A letter of transmittal, which includes a project narrative.
   (B)   An attached vicinity map showing the location of the site in
relationship to the surrounding area's watercourses, water bodies and other
significant geographic features, and roads and other significant structures.
   (C)   An indication of the scale used.
   (D)   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner and/or developer
of the property where the land disturbing activity is proposed.
   (E)   Suitable contours for the existing and proposed topography.
   (F)   The proposed grading or land disturbance activity including: the
surface area involved, excess spoil materials, use of borrow material, and
specific limits of disturbance.
   (G)   A clear and definite delineation of any areas of vegetation or trees
to be saved.
   (H)   A clear and definite delineation of any wetlands, natural or
artificial water storage detention areas, and drainage ditches on the site.
   (I)   A clear and definite delineation of any 100-year floodplain on or near
the site.
   (J)   Storm drainage system, including quantities of flow and site
conditions around all points of surface water discharge from the site.
   (K)   Erosion and sediment control provisions to minimize on-site erosion
and prevent off-site sedimentation, including provisions to preserve topsoil
and limit disturbance.
   (L)   Design details for both temporary and permanent erosion control
structures.
   (M)   A copy of the notice of intent (NOI) for the state permit will be
submitted.
   (N)   A chronological construction schedule and time frame including, as a
minimum, the following activities:
      (1)   Clearing and grubbing for those areas necessary for installation of
perimeter erosion control devices.
      (2)   Construction of perimeter erosion control devices.
      (3)   Remaining interior site clearing and grubbing.
      (4)   Installation of permanent and temporary stabilization measures.
      (5)   Road grading.
      (6)   Grading for the remainder of the site.
      (7)   Utility installation and whether storm drains will be used or
blocked after construction.
      (8)   Building, parking lot, and site construction.
      (9)   Final grading, landscaping or stabilization.
      (10)   Implementation and maintenance of final erosion control
structures.
      (11)   Removal of temporary erosion control devices.
   (O)   Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan Inspector may require any
additional information or data deemed appropriate and/or may impose such
conditions there to as may be deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the
provisions of the NOI, CSW, or the preservation of public health and safety.
   (P)   A description of, and specifications for, sediment retention
structures.
   (Q)   A description of, and specifications for, surface runoff and erosion
control devices.
   (R)   A description of vegetative measures.
   (S)   For land disturbance activities, for less than one acre:
      (1)   Project name and description.
      (2)   Project start date and estimated completion date.
      (3)   Control measures to be installed.
      (4)   Waste disposal practices.
      (5)   Concrete washout.
      (6)   Track-out prevention practices.
      (7)   A site map which must show the direction of stormwater flow, areas
to be disturbed, location of concrete washout, location of soil stock piles,
and location of control measures.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.59 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person may grade, fill,
excavate, store, stockpile or dispose of earth materials or perform any other
land disturbing or land filling activity within the corporate limits of the
city without first obtaining a stormwater permit from the city.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.60 PERMIT DURATION.
   Permits issued under this chapter shall be valid for the period during which
the proposed land disturbing or filling activities and soil storage takes place
or is scheduled to take place, whichever is shorter, but in no event shall such
a permit be valid for more than one year. The permittee shall commence
permitted activities within 180 days of the scheduled commencement date for
grading or the permittee shall resubmit all required application forms, maps,
plans, and schedules to the issuing authority, except where an item to be
resubmitted is waived by the issuing authority.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.61 PERMIT RENEWALS/EXTENSIONS.
   The permittee shall fully perform and complete all of the work required
according to standards approved by the city in the sequence shown on the plans
within the time limit specified in the permit. Prior to the expiration of a
SWPPP, the permittee may present a written request for an extension to the
Engineering Department of the city. If, in the opinion of the issuing
authority, an extension is warranted, a one time, no fee extension, not to
exceed 90 days, may be granted. The issuing authority may authorize additional
extensions not to exceed a total of one year at the rate of $75 per extension.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.62 PERMIT DENIAL.
   If the issuing authority determines that the SWPPP does not meet the
requirements of this chapter, he/she shall not issue a permit for the land
disturbing activity. Factors indicating the deficiencies and the procedure for
submitting a revised plan will be given to the applicant at the time of denial.
The SWPPP must be resubmitted for approval before the land disturbance activity
begins. All land use and building permits must be suspended until the permittee
has an approved SWPPP.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.63 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
   In granting any permit pursuant to this chapter, the issuing authority may
impose such conditions as may be reasonably necessary to prevent creation of a
nuisance or unreasonable hazard to persons or to a public or private property.
Such conditions shall include (even if not specifically written in the permit),
but need not be limited to:
   (A)   The granting (or securing from others) and the recording in county
land records of easements for drainage facilities, including the acceptance of
their discharge on the property of others, and for the maintenance of slopes or
erosion control facilities.
   (B)   Adequate control of dust by watering, or other control methods
acceptable to the issuing authority, and in conformance with standards approved
by the city.
   (C)   Improvements of any existing grading, ground surface or drainage
condition on the site (not to exceed the area as proposed for work or
development in the application) to meet the standards required under Chapter 24
and approved by the city for new grading, drainage and erosion control.
   (D)   Sediment traps and basins located within a densely populated area or
in the proximity of an elementary school, playground or other area where small
children may congregate without adult supervision may be requested to install
additional safety related devices.
   (E)   Solid waste, industrial waste, yard waste and any other pollutants or
waste on any construction site shall be controlled through the use of BMPs.
Waste or recycling containers shall be provided and maintained by the owner or
contractor on construction sites where there is the potential for release of
waste. Uncontained waste that may blow, wash or otherwise be released from the
site is prohibited. Sanitary waste facilities shall be provided and maintained
in a secured manner.
   (F)   Ready-mixed concrete, or any materials resulting from the cleaning of
vehicles or equipment containing such materials or used in transporting or
applying ready-mixed concrete, shall not be allowed to discharge from any
construction site.
   (G)   Cover or perimeter control shall be applied within 14 days to any soil
stockpiles, which will remain undisturbed for longer than 30 calendar days.
   (H)   Disturbed soil shall be managed with BMPs that are adequately
designed, installed, and maintained according to standards approved by the
city, specifications and guidance for the duration of the construction activity
to minimize erosion and contain sediment within the construction limits.
   (I)   Bulk storage structures for petroleum products and other chemicals
shall have adequate protection to contain all spills and prevent any spilled
material from entering the MS4 or waters of the state.
   (J)   Temporary BMPs shall be removed and disturbed areas shall be
stabilized with permanent BMPs at the conclusion of all approved construction
activity.
   (K)   Proposed conditions inspections must be conducted at least once every
14 calendar days, and within 24 hours of storms that have occurred in a 24 hour
period with an accumulation of precipitation that measures 0.5 inches or
greater. A rain gauge will be maintained on site to measure precipitation. A
description of the location of the rain gauge will be included in the SWPPP and
will be indicated on the site map.
   (L)   A copy of the SWPPP, including a copy of the permit, NOI, CSW, and the
letter from NDEQ notifying the receipt of the complete and accurate NOI, CSW
must be retained at the construction site. The SWPPP must be made available
upon request to federal, state, and local agencies, from the date of
commencement of construction activities to the date of final stabilization.
   (M)   A sign or other notice must be posted conspicuously near the main
entrance of the construction site. The sign must contain a copy of the
completed NOI, CSW as submitted to the NDEQ, the current location of the SWPPP
and name and telephone number of a contact person for scheduling viewing times
must be provided.
   (N)   Discharges from de-watering activities, including discharges from de-
watering of trenches and excavations, are prohibited unless managed by
appropriate controls.
   (O)   When discharging from basins and impoundments, utilize outlet
structures that would draw water from the surface, unless infeasible.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.64 REQUIREMENTS FOR UTILITY CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Utility agencies or their representatives shall develop and implement
BMPs to prevent the discharge of pollutants on any site of utility construction
within the city. The city may require additional BMPs on utility construction
activity. If the utility construction disturbs greater than one acre, the
utility agency must comply with the requirements of § 55.58 and § 55.59.
   (B)   Utility agencies or their representatives shall implement BMPs to
prevent the release of sediment from utility construction sites. Disturbed
areas shall be minimized, disturbed soil shall be managed and construction site
exits shall be managed to prevent sediment tracking. Sediment tracked onto
public right-of-way shall be removed immediately.
   (C)   Prior to entering a construction site or subdivision development,
utility agencies or their representatives shall obtain and comply with any
approved erosion and sediment control plans for the project. Any impact to
construction and post-construction BMPs resulting from utility construction
shall be evaluated prior to disturbance by the developer and utility company.
Repairs to the disturbed BMPs must be completed within 48 hours, by individuals
agreed upon during the design phase or at a pre- construction meeting.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.65 LIABILITY.
   The permittee is responsible for safely and legally completing the project.
Neither the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter, nor the
compliance with the provisions hereto or with any condition imposed by the
issuing authority, shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to
persons or property resulting there from, or as otherwise imposed by law, nor
impose any liability upon the city for damages to persons or property.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.66 RESPONSIBILITY OF PERMITTEE.
   The permittee shall maintain a copy of the permit, approved plans and
reports required under the permit on the work site and available for public
inspection during all working hours. The permittee shall, at all times, be in
conformity with the approved grading plan; SWPPP and also conform to the
following:
   (A)   General. Notwithstanding other conditions or provisions of the permit,
the standards approved by the city, or minimum standards set forth in Chapter
24, the permittee is responsible for the prevention of damage to adjacent
property. No person shall grade on land in any manner, or so close to the
property line as to endanger or damage any adjoining public street, sidewalk,
alley or any other public or private property without supporting and protecting
such property from settling, cracking, erosion, sedimentation or other damage
or personal injury which might result.
   (B)   Public ways. The permittee shall be responsible for the prompt removal
of, and the correction of damages resulting from any soil, miscellaneous debris
or other materials washed, spilled, tracked, dumped or otherwise deposited on
public streets, highways, sidewalks or other public thoroughfare, incident to
the construction activity, or during transit to and from the construction site.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.67 PERMIT AUTHORIZATION.
   The issuance of an SWPPP permit shall constitute an authorization to do only
the work described in the permit, or shown on the approved site plans and
specifications, all in strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter,
unless each and every modification or waiver is specifically listed and given
specific approval by the issuing authority.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.68 COMPLIANCE.
   The permittee, his/her agent, contractors and employees shall carry out the
proposed work in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, and in
compliance with all standards approved by the city and the requirements of the
permit.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.69 ACTION UPON NON-COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   In the event work does not conform to the permit or to the plans and
specifications or to any standards approved by the issuing authority, notice to
comply shall be given to the permittee in writing. After a notice to comply is
given, in the determination of the issuing authority, the permittee or his/her
contractor shall be required to make the corrections within the time period
determined by the issuing authority. If an imminent hazard exists, the issuing
authority may require that the corrective work begin immediately.
   (B)   If the issuing authority finds any existing conditions not as stated
in the application or approved plans, he/she may stop the work on the entire
project or any specified part thereof until a revised plan is submitted
conforming to the currently existing conditions.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.70 CHANGES TO PLANS.
   All changes or modifications to the approved SWPPP must adhere to the
following conditions:
   (A)   All proposals to modify the approved plans must clearly documented in
the SWPPP and available to the Stormwater Inspector during any inspection.
   (B)   The permittee shall submit requests for major revisions to approved
SWPPP, such as the addition or deletion of a sediment basin, to the Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan Inspector or his/her designee. This includes
revisions due to plan and site discrepancies and inadequacies at controlling
erosion and sediment as revealed through inspection.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.71 INSPECTION AND SUPERVISION.
   (A)   The contractor and/or their agents shall conduct a pre-construction
meeting on-site with the issuing authority on each site when it is determined
necessary by the City Inspector and/or their designated employee. After
commencing initial grading or land disturbing activities, the permittee shall
obtain written inspection approvals by the issuing authority at the following
stages in the development of the site, or of each subdivision thereof:
      (1)   Upon completion of installation of perimeter erosion and sediment
controls, prior to proceeding with any other land disturbance or grading. Other
building or grading inspection approvals may not be authorized until initial
approval by the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan Inspector or his/her
designee is made.
      (2)   Upon completion of final grading, permanent drainage and erosion
control facilities including established ground covers and planting, and all
other work of the permit.
   (B)   The issuing authority may require additional inspections as may be
deemed necessary. Work shall not proceed beyond the stages outlined above until
the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan Inspector or his/her designee inspects
the site and approves the work previously completed. Requests for inspections
shall be made at least 24 hours in advance (exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays,
and holidays) of the time the inspection is desired. Upon request for
inspections, the issuing authority shall perform the inspection within 48 hours
of request. In making application for a permit covered by this chapter, the
applicant or the landowner performing or allowing such work consents to the
issuing authority having the right to enter the site for the purpose of
inspecting compliance with the SWPPP or for performing any work necessary to
bring the site into compliance with the SWPPP. This does not include consent to
enter into any building which is completed and which has been secured, but does
include consent to inspect any area of the property where land disturbing
activity is occurring or is thought to be planned as a site of land disturbing
activity.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.72 CHANGES DURING CONSTRUCTION REPORTS.
   The permittee shall maintain records with the SWPPP under the following
circumstances along with recommendations for corrective measures, if deemed
necessary and appropriate.
   (A)   There are delays in obtaining materials, machinery, services or
manpower necessary to the implementation of the grading, or SWPPP as scheduled.
   (B)   There are delays in land disturbing or filling activities or soil
storage.
   (C)   The work is not being done in conformance with the approved grading,
or SWPPP.
   (D)   There are any departures from the approved grading plan which may
affect implementation of the SWPPP as scheduled.
   (E)   There are any delays in the implementation of the SWPPP plans.
   (F)   There are any other departures from implementation of the SWPPP.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.73 MAINTENANCE DURING AND AFTER CONSTRUCTION.
   On any property on which grading or other work has been done pursuant to a
permit granted under the provisions of this chapter the permittee or owner,
their agent, contractor, and employees shall, at a minimum, daily inspect,
maintain and repair all graded surfaces and erosion control facilities,
drainage structures or means and other protective devices, plantings, and
ground cover installed while construction is active. After construction is
complete, the owner or their agent shall continue to regularly inspect the
vegetation until adequate turf establishment or other suitable vegetative cover
is established.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.74 SECURITY.
   The issuing authority may require the posting of a surety bond in a form
approved by the City Attorney, when in the judgment of the issuing authority
the project provides potential for environmental damage. The bond shall be in
such form and amount as is necessary to assure that the work, if not completed
in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, will be corrected. In
lieu of a surety bond, with the approval of the issuing authority, the
applicant may file a cash bond or instrument of credit that has been approved
by the City Attorney in an amount equal to that which would be required in the
surety bond.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.75 ENFORCEMENT.
   The issuing authority shall be responsible for the enforcement of this
chapter.
   (A)   The issuing authority may post a stop-work order for the entire
project or any specified part thereof if any of the following conditions exist:
      (1)   Any land disturbance activity regulated under this chapter is being
undertaken without a permit.
      (2)   The SWPPP is not being fully implemented.
      (3)   Any of the conditions of the permit are not being met.
   (B)   For the purposes of this subchapter, a stop-work order is validly
posted by posting a copy of the stop-work order on the site of the land
disturbing activity in reasonable proximity to a location where the land
disturbing activity is taking place. Additionally, a copy of the order, in the
case of work for which there is a permit, shall be mailed by first class mail,
postage pre-paid, to the address listed by the permittee on the permit. In the
case of work for which there is no permit, a copy of the order shall be mailed
to the person listed as owner of the property by the Scotts Bluff County
Assessor on the homestead record, or if none, to the taxpayer shown by the
records of the Scotts Bluff County Assessor.
   (C)   If the permittee does not cease the activity or comply with the SWPPP
or permit conditions within one day, the issuing authority may revoke the
permit.
   (D)   If the owner or land user where no permit has been issued does not
cease the land disturbance activity, the issuing authority may request the City
Attorney to obtain injunctive relief
   (E)   The issuing authority may retract the revocation.
   (F)   Ten days after posting a stop-work order, the issuing authority may
issue a notice of intent to the permittee, owner, or land user of the issuing
authority's intent to perform work necessary to comply with this chapter. The
issuing authority may go on the land and commence work after 14 days from
issuing the notice of intent. The costs incurred by the issuing authority to
perform this work shall be paid by the owner or permittee out of the bond
referred to in this chapter, to the extent that the amount is covered thereby,
with the remainder being directly due and owing by the owner or permittee. In
the event no permit was issued or no bond was posted, the cost, plus interest
at the rate authorized by the issuing authority, plus a reasonable
administrative fee shall be billed to the owner. If in any event the amount due
is not paid, the Scotts Bluff County Assessor shall enter the amount due on the
tax roll and collect as a special assessment against the property using the
procedures for collecting the assessment, providing for the notice of
assessment.
   (G)   Compliance with the provisions of this chapter may also be enforced by
injunction.
   (H)   A notice of intent to perform work necessary to comply with this
chapter pursuant to division (F) may be served in the manner specified for a
stop-work order in division (B).
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.76 CERTIFICATION OF COMPLETION.
   Upon final inspection and/or upon otherwise determining that all work of the
permit has been satisfactorily completed in conformance with the city municipal
code, permittee will be eligible to obtain a certificate of occupancy from the
city.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.77 NOTICE OF TERMINATION.
   The permittee shall submit a N.O.T. after one or more of the following
conditions have been met; and must be submitted within 30 days of one
conditions, according to the CSW, have been met:
   (A)   Final stabilization has been achieved on all portions of the site for
which you are responsible.
   (B)   Another operator has assumed control according to part VI.D.6 of the
CSW over all areas of the site that have not been finally stabilized.
   (C)   Coverage under an individual or alternative general NPDES permit has
been obtained.
   (D)   For residential construction only, temporary erosion protection has
been completed and the residence has been reassigned to the homeowner.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
§ 55.99 PENALTIES.
   Any person, firm, corporation or agency acting as principal, agent, employee
or otherwise, who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter unless
otherwise specifically provided herein, shall be deemed guilty of an offense
and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the penalties described in §
10.99. A conviction pursuant to this chapter shall be a Class II violation of
the city code, and subject to fine in any sum not exceeding $1,000. A new
violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of failure to
comply with the provisions of this code.
(Ord. 2079, passed - -2019)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
75.   PARKING SCHEDULES
      
76.   EMERGENCY SNOW REMOVAL
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Motor vehicle liability certificate
   
70.03   Traffic control devices; arterial streets
   
70.04   Glass, nails and the like
   
70.05   Jaywalking
   
70.06   License plates
   
70.07   Operator’s license required
   
70.08   Front seat; number of persons allowed
Equipment
   
70.20   Equipment required
   
70.21   Lug wheels prohibited
   
70.22   Engine brakes; mufflers; unnecessary noise
   
70.23   Child restraint systems
   
70.24   Occupant protection systems
   
70.25   Projecting loads; lights required
Administration and Enforcement
   
70.40   Enforcement
   
70.41   Traffic citation; destruction of prohibited
   
70.42   Vehicle impoundment
   
70.43   Vehicle storage
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions and the other
definitions in Neb. RS 60-606 through 60-676 shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or
buildings and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic.
(Neb. RS 60-607)
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Such fire department vehicles, police
vehicles, rescue vehicles, and ambulances as are publicly owned, such other
publicly or privately owned vehicles as are designated by the Director of Motor
Vehicles, and such publicly owned military vehicles of the National Guard as
are designated by the Adjutant General pursuant to Neb. RS 55-133.
(Neb. RS 60-610)
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when
within any 600 feet along such highway there are buildings in use for business
or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks, office
buildings, railroad stations, or public buildings which occupy at least 300
feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of a
highway.
(Neb. RS 60-613)
   HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary limits of any street, road,
avenue, boulevard, or way which is publicly maintained when any part thereof is
open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
(Neb. RS 60-624)
   MANUAL. The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the
Department of Transportation pursuant to Neb. RS 60-6,118.
(Neb. RS 60-631)
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every self-propelled land vehicle, not operated upon rails,
except bicycles, mopeds, self-propelled chairs used by persons who are
disabled, and electric personal assistive mobility devices.
(Neb. RS 60-638)
   PEACE OFFICER. The Police Chief or other chief law enforcement official, any
city police officer, or any other person authorized to enforce city ordinances.
With respect to directing traffic only, PEACE OFFICER shall also include any
person authorized to direct or regulate traffic.
(Neb. RS 60-646)
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway
not comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a
distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.
(Neb. RS 60-654)
   ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes 2 or
more separate roadways, the term roadway shall refer to any such roadway
separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
(Neb. RS 60-656)
   SCHOOL CROSSING ZONE. The area of a roadway designated to the public by the
state Department of Transportation or City Council as a school crossing zone
through the use of a sign or traffic control device as specified by the City
Council in conformity with the Manual but does not include any area of a
freeway. A SCHOOL CROSSING ZONE starts at the location of the first sign or
traffic control device identifying the SCHOOL CROSSING ZONE and continues until
a sign or traffic control device indicates that the school crossing zone has
ended.
(Neb. RS 60-658.01)
   SHOULDER. The part of the highway contiguous to the roadway and designed for
the accommodation of stopped vehicles, for emergency use, and for lateral
support of the base and surface courses of the roadway.
(Neb. RS 60-661)
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, and vehicles and other
conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for purposes of
travel.
(Neb. RS 60-669)
   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE. Any sign, signal, marking, or other device not
inconsistent with the State Rules of the Road placed or erected by authority of
the City Council or any official having jurisdiction for the purpose of
regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
(Neb. RS 60-670)
   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Any signal, whether manually, electrically, or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
permitted to proceed.
(Neb. RS 60-671)
   TRAFFIC INFRACTION. The violation of any provision of the State Rules of the
Road or of any law, ordinance, order, rule, or regulation regulating traffic
which is not otherwise declared to be a misdemeanor or a felony or, in this
title, an offense.
(Neb. RS 60-672)
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway except devices moved solely by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Neb. RS 60-676)
§ 70.02 MOTOR VEHICLE LIABILITY CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   No motor vehicle may be operated within the corporate limits of the
city unless the operator can produce upon request a certificate of any
insurance carrier, duly authorized to do business in the state, certifying that
there is in effect a motor vehicle liability policy for the benefit of the
person required to furnish proof of financial responsibility. Such certificate
shall give the effective date of such motor vehicle liability policy, which
date shall be the same as the effective date of the certificate, and designate,
by explicit description or appropriate reference all motor vehicles covered
thereby unless the policy is issued to a person who is not the owner of the
vehicle.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of a motor vehicle licensed in the
state to operate that motor vehicle or allow any other person to operate the
motor vehicle unless the person at all times during operation of the vehicle
has current and effective proof of financial responsibility as required by Neb.
RS 60-302, or by any successor provisions. Any operator who shall be unable to
produce this proof upon the request of a law enforcement officer shall have ten
days from the date of such request to produce proof that such financial
responsibility was in effect at the time of the request.
(Prior Code, § 70.02) (Ord. 1666, passed 7-24-2000) Penalty, see §
70.99 
§ 70.03 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES; ARTERIAL STREETS.
   (A)   The following streets are designated as arterial streets:
      (1)   Seventh Street;
      (2)   Tenth Street;
      (3)   M Street;
      (4)   Q Street from 10th Street West to 20th Street;
      (5)   U Street from 10th Street West to the city limits; and
      (6)   Pacific Boulevard.
   (B)   Stop signs or other traffic control devices shall be erected at
intersections of arterial streets and all other streets.
(Prior Code, § 70.03) (Ord. 1110, passed 9-25-1978; Ord. 2065, passed 5- -2018)
§ 70.04 GLASS, NAILS AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall throw, cast, lay, or place upon any street within the city
any tacks, nails, glass, bottles, window glass, or other articles made of or
containing glass, and in case of an accident causing the breaking of any glass
upon any such street, the owner or person in charge of such glass, or the
person responsible for such breakage, shall at once remove, or cause the same
to be removed from the street.
(Prior Code, § 70.04) Penalty, see §
70.99 
§ 70.05 JAYWALKING.
   It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross any street at a place other
than a crosswalk, or cross any street intersection diagonally.
(Prior Code, § 70.05) Penalty, see §
70.99 
§ 70.06 LICENSE PLATES.
   (A)   All letters, numbers, printing, writing, and other identification
marks upon license plates and certificates shall be kept clear and distinct and
free from grease, dust, or other blurring matter, so that they shall be plainly
visible at all times during daylight and under artificial light in the
nighttime.
   (B)   If a plate or certificate of registration is lost or mutilated or has
become illegible, the person to whom such plate and certificate has been
furnished shall immediately apply to the County Treasurer or designated county
official as provided in Neb. RS 60-302 for a duplicate certificate or for new
license plates, accompanying his or her application with a fee of $1 for a
duplicate certificate and a fee of $2.50 for a duplicate or replacement license
plate.
(Prior Code, § 70.06) Penalty, see §
70.99 
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 60-324
§ 70.07 OPERATOR’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon any street or public highway
without first having registered the same and displaying said registration on
said vehicle or without first having obtained a motor vehicle operator’s
license and carrying said license on their person or in or upon the motor
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 70.07) (Ord. 1079, passed 2-27-1978; Ord. 2065, passed 5- -2018)
Penalty, see §
70.99 
§ 70.08 FRONT SEAT; NUMBER OF PERSONS ALLOWED.
   (A)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle when it is so loaded, or when
there is in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three, as to
obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or to
interfere with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of such vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such a position as to
interfere with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with the
driver’s control over the driving mechanism of such vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 70.08) Penalty, see §
70.99 
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,179
EQUIPMENT
§ 70.20 EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle while in use on the streets of the city shall be
adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold such vehicle,
including two separate means of applying the brakes, and shall be further
equipped with a good and sufficient horn in good working order or other
efficient signal devices, and shall have, from one-half hour after sunset until
one-half hour before sunrise, two or more whitish lights on the front thereof,
one on each side, which lights shall be plainly visible from the direction in
which such vehicle is proceeding; which lights and all other lighting devices
used on such vehicles shall be in compliance with the laws of the state.
   (B)   No person shall operate any vehicle which is equipped with electric
lights which give off light which confuses other motorists or pedestrians on
streets or crosswalks.
   (C)   Every vehicle having a width of 80 inches or more shall display
clearance lights as required by the laws of the state.
   (D)   All vehicle brakes shall be maintained in good working order.
   (E)   Vehicles while in operation between the hours of one-half hour after
sunset and one-half hour before sunrise shall have a red light plainly visible
from the rear of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 70.20) Penalty, see §
70.99 
§ 70.21 LUG WHEELS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for tractors with wheels injurious to pavement to
be permitted upon the public thoroughfares unless the operator of such vehicle
shall first plank such streets.
   (B)   It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to move or operate any
steam engine, gas or kerosene tractor, or road roller across any curb, gutter,
bridge, culvert, sidewalk, or crosswalk or crossing in any unpaved street
within the corporate limits of the city without first having protected such
curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, or crossing with heavy
plank sufficient in strength to warrant against breaking or damaging of such
curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, or crossing.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to run, drive, move, operate, or convey over or
across or upon any paved street in the city any truck, wagon, vehicle, machine,
or implement with sharp discs or sharp wheels that bear upon the pavement, or
with wheels having cutting edges, or with wheels having lugs or any protruding
parts or bolts thereon that extend beyond a plain tire so as to cut, mar,
indent, or otherwise injure or damage the curb, gutter, or pavement, or any
vehicle, tractor, machine, or implement of such weight or proportions or
carrying any load that will cut, mar, indent, or otherwise injure or damage any
pavement, gutter, or curb within the city without planking the same as provided
herein; provided, where vehicles above mentioned are permitted or allowed to
move along paved or unpaved streets of the city, the Chief of Police is hereby
authorized and empowered to choose the route over which the moving of such
structures will be permitted or allowed.
(Prior Code, § 70.21) Penalty, see §
70.99 
§ 70.22 ENGINE BRAKES; MUFFLERS; UNNECESSARY NOISE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use engine brakes, or any other
device which creates excessive noise, on any vehicle within the city limits.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle which
shall not at all times be equipped with a muffler upon the exhaust thereof in
good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual
noise and it shall be unlawful for any person operating any motor vehicle to
use a cutout, by-pass, or similar muffler elimination appliance.   
(Prior Code, § 70.22) (Ord. 1556, passed 11-27-1995) Penalty, see §
70.99 
§ 70.23 CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEMS.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, OCCUPANT PROTECTION SYSTEM has the
meaning provided in Neb. RS 60-6,265.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who drives any motor vehicle which has or is required
to have an occupant protection system shall ensure that:
         (a)   All children up to six years of age being transported by such
vehicle use a child passenger restraint system of a type which meets Federal
Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 213 as developed by the National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration, as such standard existed on January 1, 2009, and which
is correctly installed in such vehicle; and
         (b)   All children six years of age and less than 18 years of age
being transported by such vehicle use an occupant protection system.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) above shall apply to every motor vehicle which is
equipped with an occupant protection system or is required to be equipped with
restraint systems pursuant to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208, as
such standard existed on January 1, 2009, except taxicabs, mopeds, motorcycles,
and any motor vehicle designated by the manufacturer as a 1963 year model or
earlier which is not equipped with an occupant protection system.
   (C)   Whenever any licensed physician determines, through accepted medical
procedures, that use of a child passenger restraint system by a particular
child would be harmful by reason of the child’s weight, physical condition, or
other medical reason, the provisions of division (B) above shall be waived. The
driver of any vehicle transporting such a child shall carry on his or her
person or in the vehicle a signed written statement of the physician
identifying the child and stating the grounds for such waiver.
   (D)   The drivers of authorized emergency vehicles shall not be subject to
the requirements of division (B) above when operating such authorized emergency
vehicles pursuant to their employment.
   (E)   A driver of a motor vehicle shall not be subject to the requirements
of division (B) above if the motor vehicle is being operated in a parade or
exhibition and the parade or exhibition is being conducted in accordance with
applicable state law and local ordinances and resolutions.
   (F)   The Department of Roads shall develop and implement an ongoing
statewide public information and education program regarding the use of child
passenger restraint systems and occupant protection systems and the
availability of distribution and discount programs for child passenger
restraint systems.
   (G)   All persons being transported by a motor vehicle operated by the
holder of a provisional operator’s permit or a school permit shall use such
motor vehicle’s occupant protection system.
(Neb. RS 60-6,267)
   (H)   (1)   A person violating any provision of division (B) above is guilty
of an offense. The failure to provide a child restraint system for more than
one child in the same vehicle at the same time, as required in division (B),
shall not be treated as a separate offense.
      (2)   Enforcement of division (B)(1)(b) above shall be accomplished only
as a secondary action when an operator of a motor vehicle has been cited or
charged with a violation of some other offense unless the violation involves a
person under the age of 18 years riding in or on any portion of the vehicle not
designed or intended for the use of passengers when the vehicle is in motion.
(Neb. RS 60-6,268)
(Prior Code, § 70.23) (Ord. 1666, passed 7-24-2000) Penalty, see §
70.99 
§ 70.24 OCCUPANT PROTECTION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Except as provided below, no driver shall operate a motor vehicle on
the streets located within the corporate limits of the city unless the driver
and each front seat occupant in the vehicle are wearing occupant protection
systems and all occupant protection systems are worn properly adjusted and
fastened.
   (B)   The following persons shall not be required to wear an occupant
protection system:
      (1)   Any person who possesses written verification from a licensed
physician that the person is unable to wear an occupant protection system for
medical reasons;
      (2)   A rural letter carrier of the United States Postal Service while
performing his or her duties as a letter carrier between the first and last
delivery points; and
      (3)   A member of an ambulance or rescue service while involved in
patient care.
   (C)   This is a secondary offense and may only be charged when the driver of
a motor vehicle has been cited or charged with a violation of some other
offense.
(Prior Code, § 70.24) (Ord. 1666, passed 7-24-2000) Penalty, see §
70.99 
§ 70.25 PROJECTING LOADS; LIGHTS REQUIRED.
   Whenever the load on any vehicle extends more than four feet beyond the rear
of the bed or body thereof, there shall be displayed at the end of such load in
such position as to be clearly visible at all times from the rear of such load
a red flag not less than 12 inches both in length and width, except that
between sunset and sunrise, there shall be displayed at the end of any such
load a red light plainly visible under normal atmospheric conditions at least
200 feet from the rear of such vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 70.25) Penalty, see §
70.99 
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,243
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 70.40 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Chief of Police and all regular or special police officers are hereby
authorized, empowered, and ordered to exercise all powers and duties with
relation to the management of street traffic and to direct, control, stop,
restrict, and regulate, and, when necessary, temporarily divert or exclude, in
the interest of public safety, health, and convenience, the movement of
pedestrians, animals, and vehicular traffic of every kind, in streets, parks,
and on bridges in the city.
(Prior Code, § 70.90)
§ 70.41 TRAFFIC CITATION; DESTRUCTION OF PROHIBITED.
   No person shall tear up or destroy any parking tag placed upon any vehicle
by any police officer of the city or disregard the summons contained on such
tag and fail to appear in court as directed by such tag.
(Prior Code, § 70.91) Penalty, see §
70.99 
§ 70.42 VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT.
   The city police are hereby authorized to remove or to have removed, a
vehicle to the nearest place of safety or to a garage designated or maintained
by the Police Department of the city or by the city, under the circumstances
hereinafter enumerated:
   (A)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, causeway or
viaduct or in any subway or underpass, where such vehicle constitutes an
obstruction to traffic within the city.
   (B)   When a vehicle upon a public street or highway is so disabled as to
constitute an obstruction to traffic or the person or persons in charge of the
vehicle are by reason of physical injury, or otherwise incapacitated to such
extent as to be unable to provide for its custody and removal.
   (C)   When a vehicle is found being driven upon the streets or highways of
the city, and is in such a defective condition as to constitute an immediate
hazard to the safety of its occupants and other persons, pedestrians or motor
vehicles being lawfully operated on the streets.
   (D)   When a vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked
illegally to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement
of traffic or proper street or highway maintenance.
   (E)   When a vehicle constitutes a public nuisance as defined in §
94.40, or is left unattended upon any street, highway, or public property for a
period of 72 hours or more.
   (F)   When the driver of such vehicle is taken into custody by the Police
Department, and such vehicle would thereby be left unattended upon a street.
   (G)   When removal is necessary in the interest of public safety because of
fire, flood, storm, and other emergency reason.
   (H)   When a vehicle has been left for a period of seven days or more on
private property within the city other than public rights of way without the
expressed consent of the owner of such property, and the owner of such property
notifies the Police Department of his or her desire to have the vehicle
removed.
   (I)   Any vehicle failing to display number plates or failing to display the
proper number plates or plates assigned to such vehicle under the provisions of
Neb. RS Ch. 60 as amended, or displaying number plates in such a manner as to
reasonably indicate a violation of any provisions of the statutes of the state
with respect to motor vehicle number plates, while parked attended or
unattended or traveling upon the streets, highways, or alleys of the city.
(Prior Code, § 70.92) Penalty, see §
70.99 
§ 70.43 VEHICLE STORAGE.
   Whenever an officer removes or impounds or stores a vehicle as authorized by
§
70.42, such vehicle will be stored or disposed of and in accordance with the
provisions of Neb. RS 60-1903 and 60-1911 as amended or pursuant to provisions
of the ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 70.93) (Ord. 1207, passed 6-30-1980)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   General. Any person violating any provisions of this traffic code for
which no other penalty is set forth shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Liability certificate. Failure to produce the certificate required
under §
70.02 shall subject the operator of such motor vehicle to a fine not to exceed
$100.
   (C)   Occupant protection systems. Any person operating a motor vehicle in
violation of §
70.24 shall be guilty of a traffic infraction and shall be fined $25, but no
court costs shall be assessed against him or her, nor shall any points be
assessed against the driving record of such person. Regardless of the number of
persons in such vehicle not wearing an occupant protection system pursuant to
this provision, only one violation shall be assessed against the driver of such
motor vehicle for each time the motor vehicle is stopped and a violation of
this provision is found.
(Prior Code, § 70.99) (Ord. 1666, passed 7-24-2000)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
71.001   Reckless driving
   
71.002   Careless driving
   
71.003   Negligent driving
   
71.004   Passing
   
71.005   Following too closely
   
71.006   Driving on right side
   
71.007   Driving on left side; restrictions
   
71.008   Four-lane streets
   
71.009   Funeral processions
   
71.010   Backing; warning required
   
71.011   One-way streets
   
71.012   Emergency vehicles; stop required; following
   
71.013   Truck routes
   
71.014   City parks
   
71.015   Railroads; obstructing streets
   
71.016   Parades
Traffic Signs and Signals
   
71.030   Stop signs
   
71.031   Traffic signals
   
71.032   Crosswalk; stopping in prohibited
   
71.033   Yield signs
   
71.034   Yield to pedestrian signs
   
71.035   One-way street, alley signs
Right-of-Way
   
71.050   Intersections
   
71.051   Pedestrians
   
71.052   Emergency vehicles
Speed Restrictions
   
71.065   Speed limits
   
71.066   Alleys
   
71.067   Speed limits; exceptions
   
71.068   School zones
   
71.069   Speed contests
Turning
   
71.080   Turning at intersections
   
71.081   U turns
Driving Under the Influence
   
71.095   Driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol
 
   
71.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.001 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   Any person who operates a motor vehicle with indifferent regard or wanton
disregard for the safety of persons or property, or in such a manner as to
endanger life, limb, person, or property, or as to interfere with the lawful
traffic or use of the streets, shall be deemed guilty of reckless driving and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be deemed guilty of reckless driving.
(Prior Code, § 71.01) (Ord. 340, passed 4-15-1952) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.002 CARELESS DRIVING.
   Any person who drives any motor vehicle within the city limits carelessly or
without due caution so as to endanger a person or property shall be guilty of
careless driving.
(Prior Code, § 71.02) (Ord. 1302, passed 6-11-1984) Penalty, see §
71.999 
§ 71.003 NEGLIGENT DRIVING.
   Any person who shall operate a motor vehicle in a negligent manner shall be
deemed guilty of negligent driving.
(Prior Code, § 71.03) (Ord. 496, passed 6-15-1965) Penalty, see §
71.999 
§ 71.004 PASSING.
   (A)   Every vehicle passing another vehicle in the same direction shall,
except in four-lane streets, pass at a safe distance to the left of the vehicle
overtaken. The driver of the overtaking vehicle, before passing, shall indicate
his or her desire to do so by sounding a clearly audible horn. When such a
signal to pass is given, the driver of the vehicle in front shall turn to the
right in favor of the overtaking vehicle until the overtaking vehicle has
completed passing and the overtaking vehicle is back in the lane of traffic.
   (B)   Except in four-lane streets, no vehicle shall pass or attempt to pass,
another vehicle going in the same direction while traversing any street
intersection or at any railway crossing unless directed to do so by a traffic
or police officer.
   (C)   In four-lane streets only, vehicles may pass one another going in the
same direction on either the right or the left side, having due regard for the
provisions of §
71.008. Streets on which passing on either the right or the left is permitted
shall be appropriately marked by a sign or standard clearly visible to the
driving public.
(Prior Code, § 71.04) (Ord. 340, passed 4-15-1952) Penalty, see §
71.999 
§ 71.005 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   The operator of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than
is reasonable and prudent having regard for the speed of such vehicle and the
traffic upon and the condition of the street.
(Prior Code, § 71.05) Penalty, see §
71.999 
§ 71.006 DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle on the streets
and highways of the city to allow or permit the same to remain stationary at
any place in the streets, to propel the same or to cause such vehicle to be
propelled along the streets and highways unless the vehicles are standing or
moving along the right side of the highways, depending in each case upon the
direction in which the motor vehicle is proceeding.
(Prior Code, § 71.06) Penalty, see §
71.999 
§ 71.007 DRIVING ON LEFT SIDE; RESTRICTIONS.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive to the left side of the center line
of a street in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, or a vehicle parked at the curb, unless such left side is clearly
visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to
permit such overtaking and passing to be made in safety.
(Prior Code, § 71.07) Penalty, see §
71.999 
§ 71.008 FOUR-LANE STREETS.
   (A)   10th Street from the north city limits to M Street is hereby declared
to be a four-lane street with two lanes of vehicular traffic on each side of
the center thereof. The two lanes in the west one-half thereof are for
southbound traffic; the two lanes in the east one-half thereof are for
northbound traffic. A double yellow line shall be painted along the center of
10th Street and the two lanes of travel on each side thereof shall be separated
with a white line.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle at any time to
cross the double yellow line except at intersections.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to travel
astraddle the white lines herein provided except as may be necessary for the
purpose of changing from one lane to the other as hereinafter provided.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to change the
course of travel of his or her vehicle from the inside lane to the outside lane
or vice versa at any time unless the vehicle so changing is at least 35 feet
distant from all other vehicles in either lane.
(Prior Code, § 71.08) (Ord. 340, passed 4-15-1952) Penalty, see §
71.999 
§ 71.009 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.
   No vehicle shall be driven through any funeral procession or any authorized
parade.
(Prior Code, § 71.09) Penalty, see §
71.999 
§ 71.010 BACKING; WARNING REQUIRED.
   The driver of any vehicle equipped with white reverse lights that are
visible from the rear of such vehicle shall ensure that the lights are
functioning so as to provide ample warning of the driver’s intention to back up
or necessity to drive backward.
(Prior Code, § 71.10) Penalty, see §
71.999 
§ 71.011 ONE-WAY STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, at any time, to travel in a direction
opposite from the direction designated for the orderly flow of traffic on any
street in the city which has been designated as a “one-way street” and where
appropriate signs have been erected in a manner so as to give adequate notice
of the direction of travel to any vehicle entering the “one-way street.”
(Prior Code, § 71.11) (Ord. 560, passed 9-6-1966) Penalty, see §
71.999 
§ 71.012 EMERGENCY VEHICLES; STOP REQUIRED; FOLLOWING.
   Upon the approach of any police, fire department, civil defense, rescue
vehicle, or any other type emergency vehicle which is giving audible signal,
fire bell, siren, or exhaust whistle or when directed to do so by a police
officer or firefighter, the driver of every other motor vehicle shall
immediately drive the same to a position as near as possible and parallel to
the right hand edge or curb of the street, clear of any intersections of
streets and shall stop and remain in such position unless otherwise directed by
a police officer or firefighter, until the police, fire department, civil
defense, or other emergency vehicle shall have passed or until directed to
proceed by a police officer or firefighter. It shall be unlawful for the driver
of any vehicle or other than one on official business to follow any fire
apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or to
drive into a park such vehicle within 300 feet where the fire apparatus has
stopped to answer a fire alarm.
(Prior Code, § 71.12) (Ord. 1079, passed 2-27-1978; Ord. 2065, passed 5- -2018)
Penalty, see §
71.999 
§ 71.013 TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause or permit to
be operated or moved any truck, truck/tractor or semi-trailer unit, or any
combination thereof (except those classified as recreational vehicles) which
exceed 30 feet in length or exceed 20,000 pounds gross vehicle weight on any
public street, road, highway or alley within the city, except those streets or
portions of streets as designated in Ch. 74, Sched. III; provided, however,
such vehicles may be operated or moved upon or otherwise used upon streets,
roads, highways and alleys of the city, in such a manner and to such an extent
as reasonable necessary for the following purposes:
      (1)   To pick up or deliver articles of merchandise or commodities at a
location within the city not otherwise prohibited;
      (2)   To refuel or secure repair services upon such vehicle;
      (3)   To park or place such vehicles upon private property;
      (4)   To park or place such vehicles within authorized truck parking
zones or other places not otherwise prohibited; and/or
      (5)   To carry on any legitimate business purpose reasonably requiring
the use of a truck as described in this section.
   (B)   The departure from and return to the truck routes designated in Ch.
74, Sched. III shall be by the most direct routes.
(Prior Code, § 71.13) (Ord. 1475, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 71.014 CITY PARKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or park any motor
vehicle, minibike, motorcycle, off-road recreational vehicle of any and all
types, or any other powered vehicle in the city park of the city, except on
roadways, thoroughfares, streets, motor vehicle parking areas, or other areas
designated
by the city for use by the motor vehicles.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate this section shall upon conviction
thereof be fined a sum not less than $1 nor more than $100 and shall pay the
costs of prosecution.
(Prior Code, § 71.14) (Ord. 1297, passed 2-13-1984) Penalty, see §
71.999 
§ 71.015 RAILROADS; OBSTRUCTING STREETS.
   It is hereby declared unlawful for any railroad company operating a railroad
into or through the city to obstruct any of the public streets within the city
by leaving trains or cars standing thereon so as to prevent the public from
crossing the railroad tracks for a longer period at one time than five minutes
except in cases of inevitable accident. Any person violating the provisions of
this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 71.15) Penalty, see §
71.999 
§ 71.016 PARADES.
   (A)   Parades; definition. For the purposes of this section, the word PARADE
shall mean and include any parade, organized march, demonstration, procession,
race, or motorcade consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles or a combination
thereof upon the streets, parks, or other public grounds within the city that
interferes with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic upon city right-of-way, parks, or other public grounds in the city.
   (B)   Permit; required. No person shall engage in or conduct any parade
unless a permit for such purpose is first issued pursuant to this section. This
section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Funeral processions;
      (2)   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction
and supervision of the proper school authorities; and
      (3)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
   (C)   Permit; application; time. A person seeking issuance of a parade
permit shall file an application with the City Clerk on forms provided by such
office. The application shall be filed not less than 15 days before the date on
which it is proposed to conduct the parade. The City Administrator may, if good
cause is shown by the organization or individual, consider an application which
has been filed less than 15 days before the date of the proposed parade.
   (D)   Permit; application; contents. The application for a parade permit
shall set forth on a form to be furnished by the City Clerk:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such parade;
      (2)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by
an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such
organization;
      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct;
      (4)   The date when the parade is to be conducted;
      (5)   The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point;
      (6)   The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles
which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals, and description of the
vehicles;
      (7)   The hours when such parade will start and terminate;
      (8)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;
      (9)   The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade;
      (10)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at
any such assembly area or areas;
      (11)   Any additional information which the Police Chief shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should
issue; and
      (12)   If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for,
any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file
with the City Clerk a communication in writing from the person proposing to
hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his or
her behalf.
   (E)   Permit; standards for issuance. The City Administrator (or in his or
her absence, the City Clerk or Police Chief) may approve a permit as provided
for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other
information as may otherwise be obtained, it is found that:
      (1)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
      (2)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the city;
      (3)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions
of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and
areas contiguous thereto;
      (4)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at assembly
points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly
areas;
      (5)   The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment en route to a fire;
      (6)   The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury
to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance;
      (7)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its
point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route;
and
      (8)   The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising
any product, goods, or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private
profit.
   (F)   Permit; decision on application. The City Administrator shall act upon
the application for a parade permit within five days after the filing thereof.
   (G)   Permit; denial. If the City Administrator denies the application, a
notice of the denial shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant stating the
reasons therefor.
   (H)   Permittee; parade chairperson; duties. A permittee hereunder shall
comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws,
including applicable provisions of this municipal code. The parade chairperson
or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit
upon his or her person during the conduct of the parade.
   (I)   Permit; insurance.
      (1)   An organization or individual should name the city as additional
insured on general liability policy effective on the requested use date(s)
covering any acts of negligence on the part of person or
organization or by any of his, her or its agents, officers, servants,
employees, or by persons on city property because of city property use request
in the amount of $500,000 in bodily injury liability and $500,000 property
damage liability or a combined limit of $1,000,000.
      (2)   Upon written showing of good cause, the above insurance requirement
may be waived in the discretion of the City Administrator.
   (J)   Permit; revocation. The City Administrator or Police Chief may revoke
a permit for an activity referred to if it finds that the standards for
issuance set forth in this section will not, or probably will not, be
substantially met, or that the permittee has willfully or negligently failed to
comply with the requirements of this section in any substantial respect. The
City Clerk, within 24 hours after revocation of a permit, shall deliver or mail
to the permittee a notice in writing of the revocation, stating the reason
therefor.
   (K)   Permit; appeal. Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal
the denial or revocation of a parade permit to the City Council. The appeal
shall be taken by filing a notice thereof with the City Clerk within ten days
after the mailing or delivery of the notice of denial or revocation. The City
Council shall act upon the appeal within ten days after its receipt.
   (L)   Public conduct during parades. 
      (1)   No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or
interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or
animal participating or used in a parade.
      (2)   No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or
persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are
conspicuously designated as a parade.
      (3)   The Police Chief shall have the authority, when reasonably
necessary, to prohibit or restrict the operation or parking of vehicles along a
street constituting a part of the route of a parade. The Police Chief shall
post signs to such effect, or cause police officers to direct traffic at such
locations, and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or to park or
leave unattended any vehicle in violation of such sign or directions given by
such officers.
      (4)   No candy or other items shall be thrown from a moving float or
other vehicle, including horseback, bicycle, hand-pulled carts, or any other
vehicle occupying part of the parade route. Candy or items to be given away
will only be allowed by people walking as near to the curb as possible along
the parade route. Parade participants walking along the parade route may hand
out candy or items to spectators, but not other participants.
      (5)   No liquid of any kind may be thrown, sprayed, or otherwise
dissipated to spectators from anyone who is a parade participant. No liquid of
any kind may be thrown, sprayed, or otherwise dissipated from spectators. This
includes, but is not limited to, anyone traveling in the parade in vehicles
described in division (L)(4) above.
      (6)   No alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be consumed while
participating in the parade.
   (M)   Violations.
      (1)   Violators of parade regulations shall be escorted to the nearest
intersection and directed out of the parade. Violators shall wait in areas
designated by the city until traffic clears, spectators clear, or as otherwise
directed by a city police officer. The failure to leave the parade when
directed will result in citations being issued to violators for disorderly
conduct.
      (2)   The city shall have the authority to revoke a permit under this
section instantly upon violation of the conditions and standards for issuance
as set forth in the article of when a public emergency arises where the police
or other resources required for that emergency are so great that deployment of
city services for the parade or public assembly would have an immediate and
adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons or property, or other
unforeseen conditions exist that may render the event unsafe.
(Prior Code, § 71.16) (Ord. 1864, passed 4-14-2008; Ord. 1905, passed 11-23-
2009)
TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS
§ 71.030 STOP SIGNS.
   (A)   The operator of every motor vehicle shall, upon approaching any stop
sign, unless otherwise directed by a traffic officer, bring his or her vehicle
to a complete stop with the front wheels of his or her vehicle even with or not
more than ten feet behind the stop sign before passing the sign.
   (B)   The Mayor and City Council shall designate, by resolution, the
location for installation and removal of stop signs in the city. Upon the
passage and approval of any such resolution, a copy of the same shall be placed
on file and available for public inspection at all reasonable hours in the City
Office Building.
(Prior Code, § 71.30) (Ord. 597, passed 2-6-1968; Ord. 840, passed 7-22-1974)
§ 71.031 TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
   (A)   Traffic control signals equipped with red, yellow, and green lights
electrically operated shall be installed in such places and in the manner that
the Council shall designate. A traffic control signal is defined as any device,
whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
   (B)   No person or motor vehicle shall enter an intersection at any time
when the traffic control signal light facing the direction of approach of such
person or motor vehicle is red, but such person or motor vehicle shall stop and
wait until the light is green before proceeding into the intersection.
(Prior Code, § 71.31) (Ord. 340, passed 4-15-1952; Ord. 612, passed 7-8-1968)
Penalty, see §
71.999 
§ 71.032 CROSSWALK; STOPPING IN PROHIBITED.
   Motor vehicles stopping in obedience to a stop sign or traffic control
signal shall not obstruct the crosswalk passing in front of them.
(Prior Code, § 71.32) (Ord. 340, passed 4-15-1952)
§ 71.033 YIELD SIGNS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a “yield” sign shall slow to a
speed of not more than ten mph and yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching from the right or left on the intersecting street when such
vehicles are so close as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (B)   If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or
interferes with the movement of other vehicles on the preferential street after
driving past a “yield” sign, such collision or interference shall be deemed
prima facie evidence of the driver’s failure to yield the right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 71.33) (Ord. 374, passed 3-26-1956)
§ 71.034 YIELD TO PEDESTRIAN SIGNS.
   (A)   Traffic control signs designated as “yield right-of-way to
pedestrians” or similar markings conveying the same meaning shall be erected in
such places and in the manner designated by the Council.
   (B)   The operator of every vehicle shall, upon approaching any such sign
where pedestrians are present within a marked crosswalk, bring the motor
vehicle to a complete stop and shall remain stopped until the pedestrians are
no longer present in the crosswalk.
(Prior Code, § 71.34) (Ord. 585, passed 9-19-1967)
§ 71.035 ONE-WAY STREET, ALLEY SIGNS.
   The Mayor and City Council may designate certain streets and/or certain
alleys within the city as one-way streets and/or alleys by resolution.
   (A)   Such resolution shall provide for adequate sign placement designating
such street and/or alley as one-way and indicating the direction of traffic
flow thereon.
   (B)   Upon the passage and approval of any such resolution, a copy of the
same shall be placed on file and be available for public inspection at all
reasonable hours in the city office building.
(Prior Code, § 71.35) (Ord. 1519, passed 12-13-1993)
RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 71.050 INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection at approximately
the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-
way to the vehicle on the right except where directed otherwise by a traffic
officer or by a traffic direction device.
   (B)   The driver of any vehicle traveling at an unlawful speed shall forfeit
any right-of-way which he or she might otherwise have hereunder.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle approaching but not having entered an
intersection shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle within such intersection
and turning therein to the left across the line of travel of such first
mentioned vehicle; provided, the driver of the vehicle turning left has given a
plainly visible signal of his or her intention to turn.
(Prior Code, § 71.50) (Ord. 586, passed 9-19-1967)
§ 71.051 PEDESTRIANS.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle upon a street within the city shall yield
the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing the street within any clearly marked
crosswalk or any regular pedestrian crossing included in the prolongation of
the lateral boundary line of the adjacent sidewalk at the end of a block,
except at intersections where the movement of traffic is being regulated by
traffic officers or traffic direction devices.
   (B)   Every pedestrian crossing a street within the city at any point other
than a pedestrian crossing, crosswalk, or intersection shall yield the right-
of-way to vehicles upon the street.
(Prior Code, § 71.51) (Ord. 586, passed 9-19-1967)
§ 71.052 EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Subject to the conditions stated in the State Rules of the Road and
this title, the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to
an emergency call, when pursuing an actual or suspected violator of the law, or
when responding to but not when returning from a fire alarm, may:
      (1)   Stop, park, or stand, irrespective of the provisions of the Rules
and this title, and disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specified directions; and
      (2)   Except for wreckers towing disabled vehicles and highway
maintenance vehicles and equipment:
         (a)   Proceed past a steady red indication, a flashing red indication,
or a stop sign but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe
operation; and
         (b)   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he or she does not
endanger life, limb, or property.
   (B)   Except when operated as a police vehicle, the exemptions granted in
division (A) above shall apply only when the driver of such vehicle, while in
motion, sounds an audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may be
reasonably necessary and when such vehicle is equipped with at least one
lighted light displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle.
   (C)   The exemptions granted in division (A) above shall not relieve the
driver from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons,
nor shall such provisions protect such driver from the consequences of his or
her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
   (D)   Authorized emergency vehicles operated by police and fire departments
shall not be subject to the size and weight limitations of sections Neb. RS 60-
6,288 to 60-6,290 and 60-6,294.
(Neb. RS 60-6,114)
SPEED RESTRICTIONS
§ 71.065 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle upon any street or public
highway at a speed greater than is reasonable or prudent under the conditions
and having regard for the actual and potential hazards then existing.
      (2)   Any person shall drive a motor vehicle at a safe and appropriate
speed when special hazards exist which affect pedestrians or other traffic or
by reason of weather or street and highway conditions.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of 25 mph
within the corporate limits of the city unless otherwise provided.
   (C)   Signs or standards shall be posted so as to be clearly visible to the
driving public on streets wherein the maximum speed limit is different from
that provided by division (B) above.
(Prior Code, § 71.60) (Ord. 2065, passed 5- -2018) Penalty, see §
71.999
Cross-reference:
   Speed limits in the city, see Ch. 74, Sched. I
§ 71.066 ALLEYS.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle in excess of 20 mph in any alley
within the corporate city limits.
(Prior Code, § 71.61) (Ord. 1552, passed 9-25-1995; Ord. 2065, passed 5- -2018)
Penalty, see §
71.999 
§ 71.067 SPEED LIMITS; EXCEPTIONS.
   The speed limits herein provided shall not apply to physicians, surgeons,
police, or Fire Department vehicles or ambulances when answering emergency
calls demanding excessive speed.
(Prior Code, § 71.62) (Ord. 2065, passed 5- -2018) Penalty, see §
71.999 
§ 71.068 SCHOOL ZONES.
   (A)   (1)   On a school day when children are present in the school grounds
or on sidewalks adjacent to the school or school crossings, no person shall
drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of 15 mph while passing a school
speed zone.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, a school day shall begin at 7:00
a.m. and conclude at 4:00 p.m.
   (B)   This section shall not be applicable unless appropriate signs are
posted upon streets wherein the school speed zone is located. Such signs shall
indicate the school speed zone and the speed limit in effect during school days
when children are present.
(Prior Code, § 71.63) (Ord. 1703, passed 2-11-2002; Ord. 1799, passed 8-8-2005)
Penalty, see §
71.999
Cross-reference:
   Speed limits in school zones, see
Ch. 74, Sched. I
§ 71.069 SPEED CONTESTS.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon any street or public highway
in any race, speed competition or contest, drag race, or acceleration contest,
test the physical endurance, exhibition of speed, or acceleration, or for the
purpose of making a speed record and no person shall in any manner participate
in any such race competition, contest, or exhibition.
(Prior Code, § 71.64) (Ord. 1079, passed 2-27-1978; Ord. 2065, passed 5- -2018)
Penalty, see §
71.999 
TURNING
§ 71.080 TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   A driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
   (A)   Both the approach for a right turn, and a right turn shall be made as
closely as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the highway;
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any intersection
shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully
available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle, and
after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the
intersection in a lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction
upon the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be
made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center line of the
intersection;
   (C)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such
vehicle and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as
to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane
lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being
entered; and
   (D)   The Mayor and Council may by resolution, cause markers, buttons, or
signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and
direct that a different course from that specified in this section be traveled
by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when markers, buttons or signs are
so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn at an intersection other than as
directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs.
(Prior Code, § 71.70) (Ord. 558, passed 9-6-1966; Ord. 726, passed 10-11-1971)
Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.081 U TURNS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle at any time to make a U turn in
any of the following intersections:
      (1)   All intersections of two or more streets, one or more of which is a
through street;
      (2)   All intersections listed in Ch. 74, Sch. II; and
      (3)   Appropriate signs with the words “No U Turn” imprinted thereon
shall be placed at each of the intersections.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to make a U turn at any point in
any street of the city other than at intersections, except intersections as to
which such turns are prohibited in this section.
(Prior Code, § 71.71) (Ord. 558, passed 9-6-1966) Penalty, see §
71.999
DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE
§ 71.095 DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF DRUGS OR ALCOHOL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or be in the actual
physical control of any motor vehicle:
      (1)   While under the influence of alcoholic liquor or of any drug;
      (2)   When such person has a concentration of 0.08 of one gram or more by
weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of his or her blood; or
      (3)   When such person has a concentration of 0.08 of one gram or more by
weight of alcohol per 210 liters of his or her breath.
(Neb. RS 60-6,196(1))
   (B)   Any person who operates or has in his or her actual physical control a
motor vehicle in this municipality shall be deemed to have given his or her
consent to submit to a chemical test or tests of his or her blood, breath, or
urine for the purpose of determining the concentration of alcohol or the
presence of drugs in such blood, breath, or urine.
(Neb. RS 60-6,197(1))
   (C)   Any peace officer who has been duly authorized to make arrests for
violations of traffic laws of the state or of ordinances of this municipality
may require any person arrested for any offense arising out of acts alleged to
have been committed while the person was driving or was in actual physical
control of a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic liquor or
drugs to submit to a chemical test or tests of his or her blood, breath, or
urine for the purpose of determining the concentration of alcohol or the
presence of drugs in such blood, breath, or urine when the officer has
reasonable grounds to believe that such person was driving or was in the actual
physical control of a motor vehicle in this municipality while under the
influence of alcoholic liquor or drugs in violation of division (A) above.
(Neb. RS 60-6,197(2))
   (D)   Any person arrested as provided in this section may, upon the
direction of a peace officer, be required to submit to a chemical test or tests
of his or her blood, breath, or urine for a determination of the concentration
of alcohol of the presence of drugs. If the chemical test discloses the
presence of a concentration of alcohol in violation of division (A) above, the
person shall be subject to the administrative revocation procedures provided in
Neb. RS 60-498.01 to 60-498.04, and upon conviction shall be punished as
provided in Neb. RS 60-6,197.02 to 69-6,197.08. Any person who refuses to
submit to such test or tests required pursuant to this section shall be subject
to the administrative revocation procedures provided in Neb. RS 60-498.01 to
60-498.04 and shall be guilty of a crime and upon conviction punished as
provided in Neb. RS 60-6,197.02 to 60-6,197.08.
(Neb. RS 60-6,197(3))
   (E)   Upon the conviction of any person for violation of this section, there
shall be assessed as part of the court costs the fee charged by any physician
or any agency administering tests pursuant to a permit issued in accordance
with Neb. RS 60-6,201 for the test administered and the analysis thereof if
such test was actually made.
(Neb. RS 60-6,203)
(Prior Code, § 71.80) (Ord. 1270, passed 10-25-1982) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter for which no other
penalty is set forth shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Operation of a motor vehicle in excess of the speed limits set forth
in this chapter and Ch. 74 shall be a violation and subject to the following
fines:
      (1)   One to five mph over posted limit: $10;
      (2)   Six to ten mph over posted limit: $25;
      (3)   Eleven to 15 mph over posted limit: $75;
      (4)   Sixteen to 20 mph over posted limit: $125;
      (5)   Twenty-one mph and over posted limit: $200; and
      (6)   In the event that such violations should occur in a construction
zone as identified and designated by state law, all fines double.
   (C)   Any person violating §
71.001 shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $100 and the police may,
in its discretion, suspend the license of such convicted person to operate a
motor vehicle for any purpose for a period of not less than ten days and not
more than one year.
(Prior Code, § 71.99) (Ord. 340, passed 4-15-1952; Ord. 1667, passed 7-24-2000)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Parking: parallel, diagonal, handicap, no parking, and crosswalks;
exceptions
   
72.02   Parking; Congested District
   
72.03   Loading zones; no parking zones
   
72.04   Alleys; restrictions
   
72.05   Truck parking; zones where prohibited
   
72.06   One-hour parking
   
72.07   City parking lots
   
72.08   Parking; where prohibited
   
72.09   Parking, storage, or use of trailers, camper trailers, trailer with
boats, and motor homes
   
72.10   Parking regulations of trailers, camper trailers, and motor homes in
Robidoux R.V. Park during concerts at Five Rocks Amphitheater
   
72.11   Parking on sidewalks, pedestrian crosswalks or parkways prohibited
Parking for Persons with Disabilities
   
72.25   Definitions
   
72.26   Designation of on-street parking spaces and access aisles; display of
permits
   
72.27   Designation of off-street parking stalls, spaces, and access aisles
 
   
72.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 PARKING: PARALLEL, DIAGONAL, HANDICAP, NO PARKING, AND CROSSWALKS;
EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   On all other streets, except in the Congested District and on cul-de-
sacs, vehicles when parked shall stand parallel with and adjacent to the curb
in such a manner as to have both right wheels within 12 inches of the curb or
curb line and so as to leave at least four feet between the vehicle so parked
and any other parked vehicle. Exceptions to parallel parking are permitted only
as provided for in this section.
   (B)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle whether occupied or not at a
public or private driveway entrance.
   (C)   Parked vehicles shall allow residents clear and unobstructed ingress
and egress from and into a driveway from and into the public street and right-
of-way.
(Neb. RS 60-6,166)
(Prior Code, § 72.01) (Ord. 2044, passed - -; Ord. 1851, passed 7-9-2007; Ord.
2041, passed 10-24-2016; Ord. 2041, passed 1- -2017; Ord. 2065, passed - -2018)
§ 72.02 PARKING; CONGESTED DISTRICT.
   (A)   All motor vehicles left standing upon any of the streets of the city
within the Congested District, shall be parked by the operator thereof at the
curb on each side of the street headed in the direction of the traffic. Parking
places in the area shall be marked at the curb at about an angle of 45 degrees
or where parallel parking is required, parking places shall be marked on
pavement or curb and all persons desiring to park their motor vehicles in the
area shall park same between the designated marks, upon the curb and pavement.
Where side parking is indicated, vehicles shall be parked with the right front
wheels thereof at the curb. No motor vehicle shall be parked therein more than
one tier deep or within 15 feet of the intersections of streets or within 15
feet of any fire hydrant for a period of time whatever, or at any place
designated by the sign “No Parking.”
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use a designated parking space
in the area herein described for sale purposes at any time whatsoever.
   (C)   No automobile truck or commercial motor vehicle with an overall length
of more than 17 feet and less than 20 feet shall be parked or left standing
upon any street within the Congested District, except on N Street where they
shall be parked parallel with the curb.
   (D)   No motor vehicle shall be permitted to park or stop in any alley which
connects with any street in the Congested District.
(Prior Code, § 72.02) Penalty, see §
72.99 
§ 72.03 LOADING ZONES; NO PARKING ZONES.
   (A)   The Council may establish, alter, or abolish by resolution, loading
zones and no parking zones. It shall be unlawful for any person to park in such
zones, duly established and duly marked.
   (B)   No parking zones shall be marked by painting the curb red; loading
zones shall be marked by painting the curb orange and posting a sign or
standard on which shall appear the words “Loading Zone” and shall specify the
hours during which such zone may be used for loading or unloading only.
(Prior Code, § 72.03) (Ord. 340, passed 4-15-1952) Penalty, see §
72.99 
§ 72.04 ALLEYS; RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No motor vehicle shall be parked in any alley in the city except for
the purpose of loading or unloading, or of repairing a building or equipment
that cannot be removed from a building. Such parking shall be done in a manner
that will cause the least possible obstruction in the alley, shall not continue
longer than necessary for the purpose of loading or unloading, or of making
repairs; and the Police Chief shall have power to prohibit such parking in any
particular instance in which such parking substantially interferes with the
movement of traffic in the alley or creates a public danger.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed to authorize parking that is
prohibited by any other section of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 72.04) (Ord. 559, passed 9-6-1966) Penalty, see §
72.99 
§ 72.05 TRUCK PARKING; ZONES WHERE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle truck with a gross vehicle weight
of 10,000 pounds or more to park on any street or alley, unless loading or
unloading, anywhere within the city where the applicable zoning regulations
classify the area to be:
   (A)   RL Residential Low Density District;
   (B)   RM Residential Medium Density District;
   (C)   RML Multi-Family Residential Low Density District;
   (D)   RMH Multi-Family Residential High Density District;
   (E)   BNC Neighborhood Commercial District;
   (F)   BCB Central Business District; and
   (G)   BHC Highway Commercial District.
(Prior Code, § 72.05) (Ord. 1335, passed 9-9-1985; Ord. 1556, passed 11-27-
1995) Penalty, see §
72.99 
§ 72.06 ONE-HOUR PARKING.
   (A)   The Mayor and Council may establish one-hour parking zones on
designated streets and parts of streets by resolution.
   (B)   When such street or part of street has been declared a one-hour
parking zone by resolution, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or
leave any vehicle in any one-hour parking zone for a period of time in excess
of one hour between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Sundays and legal
holidays excepted.
   (C)   Such one-hour parking zone shall be clearly marked with appropriate
signs or standards plainly indicating such limitations on the use of the public
street.
(Prior Code, § 72.06) (Ord. 865, passed - -)
§ 72.07 CITY PARKING LOTS.
   (A)   The following shall be designated as city parking lots:
      (1)   The north half of Block Nine, Gardner’s Addition to the city; and
      (2)   Such other designated parking lots as the Mayor and Council may
designate by resolution.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any designated city
parking lot except automobiles, pickups, vans, motorcycles, campers and travel
homes not exceeding three-fourths ton capacity or 20 feet in length including
their load.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any designated city
parking lot continuously for a period in excess of 24 hours.
   (D)   Such designated city parking lots shall be clearly marked with
appropriate signs or standards plainly indicating that parking therein is
restricted to a 24-hour period.
   (E)   Vehicles parked in designated city parking lots for a period of time
in excess of 24 hours or in violation of the size or length restrictions shall
be marked with a parking ticket. Payment of this ticket shall be in the amount
of $0.50 if paid within 48 hours of the time the ticket is written, Sunday and
legal holidays excepted, payment to be made at the Police Department.
   (F)   If payment of the ticket is not made within 48 hours from the date of
its issuance, a warrant may be issued for failure to comply with division (E)
above.
   (G)   Upon failure to comply by payment of the ticket, and upon conviction
thereof, the person found guilty shall be fined in an amount not to exceed
$100, and pay the costs of prosecution and be committed to jail until such fine
or costs are paid or secured or otherwise discharged according to law.
(Prior Code, § 72.07) (Ord. 1099, passed 6-12-1978; Res. 11-80-2, passed 10-10-
1980) Penalty, see §
72.99 
§ 72.08 PARKING; WHERE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Parking is not allowed on the west side of (North) 21st Street from
the public bathrooms south 600 feet.
   (B)   A no parking area shall be allowed as designated and posted on 21st
Street.
(Prior Code, § 72.08) (Ord. 1765, passed 6-28-2004; Ord. 1934, passed 5-9-2011;
Ord. 2069, passed 11-26-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.09 PARKING, STORAGE, OR USE OF TRAILERS, CAMPER TRAILERS, TRAILER WITH
BOATS, AND MOTOR HOMES.
   Described vehicles shall be: trailers, camper trailers, trailers with boats,
and motor homes. Described vehicles are not allowed to park within five feet of
any driveway or 30 feet from any corner. Described vehicles shall be no wider
than eight and one-half feet. Described vehicles must have tires that are fully
inflated with air and the vehicle must be usable and properly licensed. All
non-motorized vehicles must have reflectors at least three feet above the
ground on the street or left side of the trailer. All trailers must also be
secured with blocks or a locking device so the trailer cannot be moved. All
trailers in such a position must have a tongue lock that reduces the chance of
theft. Described vehicles cannot be parked on the street to store junk,
unusable items, or items defined as nuisances. Any trailer with sharp,
dangerous, or protruding objects cannot be parked on the street. This includes
any objects that protrude from the trailer bed, frame, and any objects the
trailer is designed to carry. Any objects determined to be dangerous by the
Police Department or City Council are not allowed within any described vehicle.
All described vehicles are authorized to park along the street so as not to in
any way impede the flow of traffic and to park on the street only within the
lot lines of property where the owners of such vehicles live.
(Prior Code, § 72.09) (Ord. 1765, passed 6-28-2004; Ord. 1934, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 72.10 PARKING REGULATIONS OF TRAILERS, CAMPER TRAILERS, AND MOTOR HOMES IN
ROBIDOUX R.V. PARK DURING CONCERTS AT FIVE ROCKS AMPHITHEATER.
   Described vehicles shall be park registered trailers, camper trailers and
motor homes and their guests. Parking of non-authorized vehicles of any type is
prohibited in the Robidoux Recreational Vehicle Park at 140180 Highway 71 on
the days of concerts between the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m.. Non-
authorized vehicles found parked in the recreational park after 6:00 p.m. on
the day of a concert shall be towed at the owner’s expense. Appropriate signs
shalt be posted at the Recreational Vehicle Park before 6:00 a.m. on the day of
a concert. The signs shall advise that there shall be no parking of non-
authorized vehicles designated in this section and that violator’s vehicles
will be towed away.
(Prior Code, § 72.10) (Ord. 1771, passed 8-23-2004)
§ 72.11 PARKING ON SIDEWALKS, PEDESTRIAN CROSSWALKS OR PARKWAYS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in such a manner
as to have any portion thereof on or extending over a public sidewalk or a
designated pedestrian crosswalk or on or extending over any parkway which is
hereby defined to be that distance between the public sidewalks and the curb.
(Prior Code, § 72.11) (Ord. 1845, passed 4-9-2007)
PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
§ 72.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESS AISLE. A space adjacent to a handicapped parking space or passenger
loading zone which is constructed and designed in compliance with the federal
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq., and
the federal rules and regulations adopted and promulgated in response to the
act.
(Neb. RS 18-1736)
   HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSON.
      (1)   Any individual with a severe visual, neurological, or physical
impairment which limits personal mobility and results in an inability to travel
unassisted more than 200 feet without the use of a wheelchair, crutch, walker,
or prosthetic, orthotic, or other assistant device, any individual whose
personal mobility is limited as a result of respiratory problems, any
individual who has a cardiac condition to the extent that his or her functional
limitations are classified in severity as being Class III or Class IV,
according to standards set by the American Heart Association, and any
individual who has permanently lost all or substantially all the use of one or
more limbs.
      (2)   TEMPORARILY HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSON. Any handicapped or
disabled person whose personal mobility is expected to be limited in such
manner for no longer than one year.
(Neb. RS 60-352.01)
   HANDICAPPED PARKING INFRACTION. The violation of any section of this
subchapter regulating the use of parking spaces, including access aisles,
designated for use by handicapped or disabled persons, the unauthorized
possession, use, or display of handicapped or disabled parking permits, or the
obstruction of any wheelchair ramps constructed or created in accordance and in
conformity with the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42
U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.
(Neb. RS 18-1741.01)
(Prior Code, § 72.20)
§ 72.26 DESIGNATION OF ON-STREET PARKING SPACES AND ACCESS AISLES; DISPLAY OF
PERMITS.
   (A)   The City Council may designate parking spaces, including access
aisles, for the exclusive use of handicapped or disabled persons whose motor
vehicles display the distinguishing license plates issued to handicapped or
disabled persons pursuant to Neb. RS 60-6,113, handicapped or disabled persons
whose motor vehicles display a distinguishing license plate issued to a
handicapped or disabled person by another state, such other handicapped or
disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, as certified
by the city, whose motor vehicles display the permit specified in Neb. RS 18-
1739, and such other motor vehicles, as certified by the city, which display
such permit. All such permits shall be displayed by hanging the permit from the
motor vehicle’s rearview mirror so as to be clearly visible through the front
windshield. The permit shall be displayed on the dashboard only when there is
no rearview mirror.
   (B)   If the City Council so designates a parking space or access aisle, it
shall be indicated by posting aboveground and immediately adjacent to and
visible from each space or access aisle a sign as described in Neb. RS 18-1737.
In addition to such sign, the space or access aisle may also be indicated by
blue paint on the curb or edge of the paved portion of the street adjacent to
the space or access aisle.
(Prior Code, § 72.21)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1736
§ 72.27 DESIGNATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING STALLS, SPACES, AND ACCESS AISLES.
   The city and any person in lawful possession of any off-street parking
facility may designate stalls or spaces, including access aisles, in such
facility owned or operated by the city or person for the exclusive use of
handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles display the distinguishing
license plates issued to such individuals pursuant to Neb. RS 60-6,113; such
other handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled
persons, as certified by the city, whose motor vehicles display the handicapped
or disabled parking permit specified in Neb. RS 18-1739; and such other motor
vehicles, as certified by the city, which display such handicapped or disabled
parking permit. Such designation shall be made by posting aboveground and
immediately adjacent to and visible from each stall or space, including access
aisles, a sign which is in conformance with the requirements in Neb. RS 18-
1737; the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, adopted pursuant to Neb.
RS 60-6,118; the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990; and the
federal regulations adopted in response to the act, as the act and the
regulations existed on January 1, 2011.
(Prior Code, § 72.22)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1737
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter for which no other
penalty is set forth shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Vehicles parked in violation of §§
72.06,
72.07, or
 Ch. 75, Sched. II shall be marked with a parking ticket. Payment of this
ticket shall be in the amount of $0.50 if paid within 48 hours of the time the
ticket is written, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, payment to be made at
the Police Department.
      (2)   If payment of the ticket is not made within 48 hours from the date
of its issuance, a warrant may be issued for failure to comply with division
(B)(1) above.
      (3)   Upon failure to comply by payment of the ticket, and upon
conviction thereof, the person found guilty shall be fined in an amount not to
exceed $100 and pay the cost of prosecution and be committed to jail until such
fine or costs are paid or secured, or otherwise discharged according to law.
(Prior Code, § 72.99) (Ord. 865, passed - - ; Ord. 1084, passed - - ; Ord.
1099, passed 6-12-1978; Ord. 2069, passed 11-26-2018)
CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
73.01   Definitions
   
73.02   Bicycles, skates, and the like; operation restricted
   
73.03   Snow mobiles; operation prohibited; exceptions
   
73.04   Golf car vehicles; operation; restrictions
Bicycles and Scooters
   
73.20   Registration and license required; fee
   
73.21   Traffic laws apply
   
73.22   Pedestrian right-of-way
   
73.23   Parking on sidewalks
   
73.24   Lights and brakes
All-Terrain Vehicles and Utility-Type Vehicles
   
73.35   Operation
   
73.36   Restriction
   
73.37   Lights, safety flag and brakes
   
73.38   Exhaust system
   
73.39   License, passengers and helmets; restrictions
   
73.40   Insurance coverage required
Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Devices
   
73.55   Definition
   
73.56   Exception from certain requirements
   
73.57   Operation; restrictions
   
73.58   Operation at nighttime; equipment required
 
   
73.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 73.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE. Any motorized off-highway vehicle which:
       (1)   Is 50 inches or less in width;
      (2)   Has a dry weight of 900 pounds or less;
      (3)   Travels on four or more low-pressure tires;
      (4)   Is designed for operator use only with no passengers or is
specifically designed by the original manufacturer for the operator and one
passenger;
      (5)   Has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator; and
      (6)   Has handlebars or any other steering assembly for steering control.
   BICYCLES. Every device propelled solely by human power upon which any person
may ride, and having two tandem wheels either of which is more than 14 inches
in diameter.
   GOLF CAR VEHICLE. A vehicle which:
      (1)   Has at least four wheels;
      (2)   Has a maximum level ground speed of less than 20 mph;
      (3)   Has a maximum payload capacity of 1,200 pounds;
      (4)   Has a maximum gross vehicle weight of 2,500 pounds;
      (5)   Has a maximum passenger capacity of not more than four persons;
      (6)   Is designed and manufactured for operation on a golf course for
sporting and recreational purposes; and
      (7)   Is not being operated within the boundaries of a golf course.
   PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE, ELECTRIC. A self-balancing, two-non-
tandem-wheeled device, designed to transport only one person and containing an
electric propulsion system with an average power of 750 watts or one
horsepower, whose maximum speed on a paved level surface, when powered solely
by such a propulsion system and while being ridden by an operator who weighs
170 pounds, is less than 20 mph.
   ROAD. A public way for the purposes of vehicular travel, including the
entire area within the right-of-way.
   SCOOTER. Any device upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels
either of which is less than 14 inches in diameter and is either human powered
or powered by any mechanical device of any type to include, but not limited to,
motorized power or electrical power.
   SKATEBOARD. A single platform mounted on wheels, which is propelled solely
by human power and which has no mechanism or other device with which to steer
or to control the movement or direction of the platform.
   SKATES. Any device worn on the feet or shoes which has one or more wheels
attached and which is propelled solely by human power.
   SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled motor vehicle designed to travel on snow, ice,
or on a natural terrain steered by wheels, skis, or runners and propelled by a
belt driven track with or without steel cleats.
   STREET, SIDEWALK, OR HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary limits
of any street, road, avenue, boulevard, including the sidewalk or way which is
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
   STREETS ADJACENT AND CONTIGUOUS TO A GOLF COURSE. Those streets near and
bordering the city’s golf course which streets are designated in §
73.04.
   UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLE. Any motorized off-highway vehicle which:
      (1)   Is not less than 48 inches, nor more than 74 inches in width;
      (2)   Is not more than 135 inches, including the bumper, in length;
      (3)   Has a dry weight of not less than 900 pounds, nor more than 2,000
pounds;
      (4)   Travels on four or more low-pressure tires; and
      (5)   Is equipped with a steering wheel and bench or bucket-type seating
designed for at least two people to sit side by side.
(Prior Code, § 73.01) (Ord. 1296, passed 2-13-1984; Ord. 1682, passed 6-11-
2001; Ord. 1923, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. 1935, passed 11-8-2011; Ord. 1946,
passed 11-14-2011; Ord. 1967, passed 1-14-2013)
§ 73.02 BICYCLES, SKATES, AND THE LIKE; OPERATION RESTRICTED.
   (A)   Skates and skateboards shall not be operated on the streets of the
city except for the purpose of crossing a street within a crosswalk or
designated street crossing area. The rules relating to pedestrians crossing
streets shall apply to persons crossing streets on skates or a skateboard.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a bicycle, scooter, skateboard or skates
on a public sidewalk or city-owned or operated parking lot situated in whole or
in part within the area bounded by J Street on the south, U Street on the
north, 9th Street on the east, and 11th Street on the west.
      (2)   Bicycles may be parked in bicycle racks within the restricted area;
provided, that the operator walk the bicycle on the sidewalks to the bicycle
racks.
(Prior Code, § 73.02) (Ord. 1682, passed 6-11-2001) Penalty, see §
73.99 
§ 73.03 SNOW MOBILES; OPERATION PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person shall operate a snowmobile on any street, alley or any city
property located within or without the corporate limits of the city, except:
   (A)   The Mayor or in case of his or her absence or disability, the Chief of
Police may in an emergency prescribe in the manner, time and areas in which,
and the minimum age of persons by which snowmobiles may be operated; and
   (B)   The City Council, whenever it shall by resolution determine that the
public safety, convenience, or welfare require or warrant, by resolution may
permit operation of snowmobiles on particular streets, alleys or city property
or parts thereof.
(Prior Code, § 73.10) (Ord. 1296, passed 2-13-1984) Penalty, see §
73.99 
§ 73.04 GOLF CAR VEHICLES; OPERATION; RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   A golf car vehicle may be operated within the corporate limits of the
city only if the operation is on STREETS ADJACENT AND CONTIGUOUS TO A GOLF
COURSE, as that term is defined in §
73.01.
   (B)   The operation of golf car vehicles within the corporate limits of the
city may be on streets adjacent and contiguous to a golf course as set forth in
division (D) below.
   (C)   Any person operating a golf car vehicle is authorized under this
section to have a valid Class O operator’s license and the owner of the golf
car vehicle shall have liability insurance coverage for the golf car vehicle.
This section is subject to the Department of Roads regulations necessary in the
interest of the public safety.
   (D)   Roads adjacent and contiguous to a golf course within the corporate
limits of the city are all roadways west of State Highway 71 (Five Rocks Road)
and its rights-of-way:
      (1)   Country Club Road;
      (2)   Monument Shadows Road;
      (3)   Tiger Court;
      (4)   Eagle Pointe;
      (5)   Applewood Road;
      (6)   Monument Valley Road;
      (7)   Grandview Road;
      (8)   Clubhouse Road;
      (9)   Buffalo Circle;
      (10)   Shadow Road Drive;
      (11)   South Ridge Court;
      (12)   Sentinel Circle;
      (13)   Saddle Drive;
      (14)   Lariat Loop Drive;
      (15)   Westridge Drive; and
      (16)   Silver Spur Court.
   (E)   Golf car vehicles are not allowed on roadways adjacent and contiguous
to a golf course after sunset and before sunrise unless golf car vehicles have
working headlights, brake lights, and a horn.
   (F)   Golf car vehicles operated on roads adjacent and contiguous to a golf
course must comply with and obey state statutes concerning rules of the road.
(Prior Code, § 73.40) (Ord. 1967, passed 1-14-2013) Penalty, see §
73.99
BICYCLES AND SCOOTERS
§ 73.20 REGISTRATION AND LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle or scooter upon any
street or public way within the city without first having registered the
bicycle or scooter with the Chief of Police and obtaining a license therefor.
Licenses will be issued free of charge.
(Prior Code, § 73.20) (Ord. 1682, passed 6-11-2001; Ord. 1806, passed 9-26-
2005) Penalty, see §
73.99 
§ 73.21 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY.
   (A)   Bicycle and scooter operators will be subject to all traffic
regulations and privileges as other vehicles operated in the streets and alleys
of the city.
   (B)   Bicycles and scooters shall be operated on the streets and alleys as
near to the right of the street or alley as practicable, and operators shall at
no time carry another person on the bicycle, scooter, skateboard, or skates,
unless it is equipped to carry another person, or ride more than two abreast.
   (C)   No bicycle or scooter will be attached to another vehicle nor shall
the operator thereof hold to another vehicle while either vehicle is moving.
(Prior Code, § 73.21) (Ord. 1682, passed 6-11-2001) Penalty, see §
73.99 
§ 73.22 PEDESTRIAN RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Any person operating a bicycle or scooter upon a public sidewalk or other
public way shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 73.22) (Ord. 1682, passed 6-11-2001)
§ 73.23 PARKING ON SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall obstruct a public sidewalk with a bicycle or scooter.
(Prior Code, § 73.23) (Ord. 1682, passed 6-11-2001) Penalty, see §
73.99 
§ 73.24 LIGHTS AND BRAKES.
   (A)   Each bicycle or scooter, or bicycle or scooter operator, shall be
equipped with a white light or reflector on the front which shall emit a white
light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front on a clear
night from all distances between 100 feet and 600 feet to the rear when
directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlights on a motor vehicle. A
light emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may
be used in addition to such red reflector.
   (B)   Each bicycle or scooter shall be equipped with a brake which will
enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean
pavement.
(Prior Code, § 73.24) (Ord. 1682, passed 6-11-2001)
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLES
§ 73.35 OPERATION.
   (A)   An all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle may be operated on
streets and highways, other than a controlled-access highway with more than two
marked traffic lanes, within the corporate limits of the city, only if the
operator and the vehicle comply with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   It is unlawful to operate a three-wheeled all-terrain vehicle or
utility-type vehicle within the city limits.
   (C)   Any person operating an all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle
within the city must do so only during the course of their employment if its
use is required in the normal course of their employment.
   (D)   An all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle shall not be operated
at a speed in excess of 30 mph, and shall observe posted speed limits if lower
than 30 mph.
   (E)   An all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle shall not be operated
on any controlled-access highway with more than two marked traffic lanes, and
the crossing of any controlled-access highway with more than two marked traffic
lanes shall not be permitted. The crossing of any one of these streets or
avenues shall be permitted by an all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle
if:
      (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the street or avenue and at a place where no obstruction prevents
a quick and safe crossing;
      (2)   The vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or roadway of the street or avenue;
      (3)   The operator yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic that
constitutes an immediate potential hazard;
      (4)   The crossing is made only at an intersection of such street or
avenue with another street or avenue; and
      (5)   Both the headlight and taillight of the vehicle are on when the
crossing is made.
   (F)   All-terrain vehicles or utility-type vehicles may be operated on
streets and highways without complying with divisions (B) through (D) above
while in parades which have been authorized by the state, any department,
board, commission, or political subdivision of the state.
   (G)   If an accident results in the death of any person or in the injury of
any person which requires a treatment of the person by a physician, the
operator of each all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle involved in the
accident shall give notice in the accident in the same manner as provided by
Neb. RS 60-699.
(Prior Code, § 73.30) (Ord. 1923, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. 1926, passed 11-22-
2010; Ord. 1935, passed 11-8-2010) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.36 RESTRICTION.
   (A)   No all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle is permitted to ride on
private property except that property owned by the same individual as the all-
terrain vehicle or without the written consent of the owner.
   (B)   If the owner is present on property where an all-terrain vehicle or
utility-type vehicle is being used, they are permitted to give verbal consent.
(Prior Code, § 73.31) (Ord. 1923, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. 1935, passed 11-8-
2010) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.37 LIGHTS, SAFETY FLAG AND BRAKES.
   (A)   When operating an all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle, the
headlight of the vehicle shall be on. Whenever an all-terrain vehicle or
utility-type vehicle is operated within the city, there shall be no trailer
attached to the all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle, and all cargo must
be securely attached to the vehicle in such a manner that the cargo remains
secured without any assistance of the operator.
   (B)   Every all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle shall be equipped
with a bicycle safety flag which extends not less than six feet aboveground
attached to the rear of the vehicle. The safety flag shall be triangular in
shape with an area of not less than 30 square inches and shall be day-glow in
color. Every all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle shall also be equipped
with:
      (1)   A brake system maintained in good operating condition;
      (2)   An adequate muffler system in good working condition; and
      (3)   A United States Forest Service qualified spark arrester.
(Prior Code, § 73.32) (Ord. 1923, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. 1935, passed 11-8-
2010) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.38 EXHAUST SYSTEM.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Equip the exhaust system of an all-terrain vehicle or utility-type
vehicle with a cutout, bypass, or similar device;
   (B)   Operate an all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle with an exhaust
system so modified; or
   (C)   Operate an all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle with the spark
arrester removed or modified, except for use in a closed-course competition
event.
(Prior Code, § 73.33) (Ord. 1923, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. 1935, passed 11-8-
2010) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.39 LICENSE, PASSENGERS AND HELMETS; RESTRICTIONS.
   Any person operating an all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle shall
have obtained a valid Class O operator’s license issued in accordance with the
Motor Vehicle Operations License Act, Neb. RS 60-479 et seq. and license
regulations promulgated by state’s Department of Motor Vehicles. No passengers
shall be allowed on any all-terrain vehicles or utility-type vehicle while
operated in the city under this section unless designed by the original
manufacturer for more than one passenger. The operator of any all-terrain
vehicle or utility-type vehicle must wear a helmet in compliance with Neb. RS
60-6,278 through 60-6,282.
(Prior Code, § 73.34) (Ord. 1923, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. 1935, passed 11-8-
2010) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.40 INSURANCE COVERAGE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person operating an all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle
shall have liability insurance coverage for the all-terrain vehicle while
operating the all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle within the city. The
person operating the all-terrain vehicle shall provide proof of such insurance
coverage to any peace officer requesting such proof within five days of such
request.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any all-terrain vehicle
or utility-type vehicle within the city until the owner has demonstrated proof
of insurance to the Police Department and obtained an insurance decal for the
current year.
   (C)   The Police Department will issue a decal for the current year that
must be affixed to the all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle in a
conspicuous place. The city will charge a fee of $25 for the issuance of the
permit.
(Prior Code, § 73.35) (Ord. 1923, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. 1935, passed 11-8-
2010) Penalty, see §
73.99
ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES
§ 73.55 DEFINITION.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE. A self-balancing, two-non
tandem-wheeled device, designed to transport only one person and containing an
electric propulsion system with an average power of 750 watts or one
horsepower, whose maximum speed on a paved level surface, when powered solely
by such a propulsion system and while being ridden by an operator who weighs
170 pounds, is less than 20 mph.
(Prior Code, § 73.50) (Ord. 1946, passed 11-14-2011)
§ 73.56 EXCEPTION FROM CERTAIN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   An electric personal assistive mobility device may be operated within
the city on the streets, alleys, highway, or sidewalk, except that such
electric personal assistive mobility devices may not be operated on any
transportation improvement project funded by federal grant(s) or initiatives;
or where bicycles are prohibited from being operated pursuant to §
73.02.
   (B)   All electric personal assistive mobility devices must be registered
with the Police Department. An application for registration shall be made by
the owner in writing to the Police Department on forms furnished by the Police
Department. The application shall include the name of the applicant, the
applicant’s address, a description of the electric personal assistive mobility
device, and any other information as the Police Department may require. The
Police Department shall issue a registration certificate for an electric
personal assistive mobility device when such device satisfactorily complies
with the inspection test provided. The Police Department shall inspect each
electric personal assistive mobility device for registration, and shall refuse
to issue a registration certificate and number plate for any electric personal
assistive mobility device found to be in unsafe mechanical condition. All
registration certificates and number plates issued shall be effective as long
as the owner owns the electric personal assistive mobility device; provided,
the certificates and number plates may be issued for a lesser period of time if
requested by the owner, or if the Police Department determines the
circumstances warrant a shorter registration period.
   (C)   The Police Department may provide a registration number plate
corresponding to the number appearing on the registration certificate, which
number plate shall be attached to the electric personal assistive mobility
device under the supervision of the Police Department, and shall remain
attached to the electric personal assistive mobility device for as long as the
owner owns the device. The records shall be kept by the Police Department
reflecting the issuance of registration certificates and date of issuance, to
whom issued, the number thereof, a description of the electric personal
assistive mobility device, and the manufacturer’s serial number on the device.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an electric personal
assistive mobility device upon any street or public way without having a
registration number plate issued therefore under the direction of the Police
Department displayed upon the frame of such electric personal assistive
mobility device to be plainly visible.
   (E)   It shall be the duty of any person who sells or transfers ownership of
any electric personal assistive mobility device to report within five days of
the date of sale or transfer such sale or transfer by returning to the Police
Department the registration certificate therefor, together with the name and
address of the person to whom such electric personal assistive mobility device
was sold or transferred. It shall be the duty of a purchaser or transferee of
such electric personal assistive mobility device to apply for a new
registration within five days of the sale or transfer.
   (F)   An electric personal assistive mobility device that is registered in
another city or jurisdiction and is operated in the city does not have to be
registered with the Police Department. The registration certificate and
numbered license plates or stickers shall be proof that the device has been
properly registered with the agency of jurisdiction where the owner lives.
(Prior Code, § 73.51) (Ord. 1946, passed 11-14-2011) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.57 OPERATION; RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Any person who operates an electric personal assistive mobility device
on the streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public ways of the city shall comply
with the same provisions as operators of bicycles pursuant to §
73.21.
   (B)   Any person operating an electric personal assistive mobility device
must wear a helmet in compliance with Neb. RS 60-6,278 through 60-6,282.
   (C)   Every operator shall comply with Neb. RS 60-6,142 in regard to driving
on the shoulders of highways.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for more than one person to stand, ride, or be
carried upon an electric personal assistive mobility device while being
operated within the city.
   (E)   Any person operating an electric personal assistive mobility device
upon a sidewalk or within a sidewalk space shall do so at their own risk.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for an electric personal assistive mobility
device to be operated on the following streets: 10th Street between U Street
and J Street, Q Street, U Street, M Street, D Street, and 7th Street.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful to operate an electric personal assistive
mobility device within the city carelessly or without due caution so as to
endanger a person or property.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any person under 16 years of age to operate
an electric personal assistive mobility device within the city, except
individuals 14 years of age or older may operate an electric personal assistive
mobility device.
   (I)   An electric personal assistive mobility device, its owner, and its
operator, shall be entitled to the exemptions as provided for by Neb. RS 60-
6,375, as the same presently exists.
(Prior Code, § 73.52) (Ord. 1946, passed 11-14-2011) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.58 OPERATION AT NIGHTTIME; EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   When in use at nighttime, an electric personal assistive mobility device or
the operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device shall be
equipped with a light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front
on a clear night, and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which is
visible on a clear night from all distances between 100 feet and 600 feet to
the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlights on a motor
vehicle. A red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be
used in addition to such red reflector.
(Prior Code, § 73.53) (Ord. 1946, passed 11-14-2011) Penalty, See §
73.99
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter pertaining
to bicycles, scooters, snowmobiles, skateboards or skates shall upon conviction
be subject to any one or more of the following: a fine in an amount not to
exceed $100, and/or an order to surrender his or her bicycle, scooter,
snowmobile, skateboard or skates to the Police Chief for impounding for a
period not to exceed six months; provided, in the case of an apparent violation
of any provision of the chapter by a person under 14 years of age who has
neither been convicted nor received a warning of a violation of any provision
of this chapter during the preceding 12 months, a written warning may be issued
and a copy shall be mailed to the parents or guardians of the apparent violator
at their last known address.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter pertaining to
all-terrain vehicles or utility-type vehicles shall be punished as provided in
§
10.99 of this code, unless otherwise provided for in §§ 73.30 through
73.35. In addition to any penalties for violation hereof, the city’s Police
Department may impound any all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle when
operated in violation of state law or city ordinance, in the same situation as
any violation in connection with a motor vehicle.
   (C)   A violation of §§
73.55 through
73.58 shall be punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 73.99) (Ord. 1682, passed 6-11-2001; Ord. 1923, passed 11-8-
2010; Ord. 1935, passed 11-8-2010)
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.    Speed limits
   
II.    Turns prohibited
   
III.    Truck routes
   
IV.    Direction of traffic flow
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The maximum speed limit on the following streets shall be as
follows:
Street Speed Limit Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Street                Speed Limit Location                 Ord. No. Date Passed
7th Street            30          Between M Street and     1343     12-23-1985
                                  south city limits
7th Street            45          Between County Club Road 1318     1-28-1985
                                  and Morrison Road
7th Street            35          Between Morrison Road    1318     1-28-1985
                                  and U Street
7th Street            30          Between U Street and M   1110     9-25-1978
                                  Street
10th Street           25          Between S Street and M
                                  Street
                                  Between the central
10th Street           40          ditch and 100 yards      1703     2-11-2002
                                  north of the Union       1965     10-22-2012
                                  Pacific Railroad tracks
10th Street           35          Between M Street and J   1660     3-27-2000
                                  Street
                                  Between 100 yards north
10th Street           30          of the Union Pacific     1703     2-11-2002
                                  Railroad tracks and S    1965     10-22-2012
                                  Street
                                  Between D Street and J
13th Street           25/15       Street                   2064     5-21-2018
                                  (15 mph if pedestrians
                                  present)
Country Club Road     30          Between 10th Street and  1164     6-25-1979
                                  21st Street
Country Club Road     35          Between 21st Street and  1110     9-25-1978
                                  the west city limits
D Street              25          Between 7th Street and   1787     1-24-2005
                                  Kimball Avenue
D Street              40          Between Rundell Road and 1789     2-7-2005
                                  Lockwood Road
                                  On those portions of
Highway No. 71        45          lying within the city    1214     9-8-1980
                                  corporate limits
Kimball Avenue                    Southwest from the
(formerly Highway No. 35          intersection of J Street 1407     5-8-1989
71)                               to the intersection of
                                  Aspen Street
Kimball Avenue                    From the intersection of
(formerly Highway No. 45          Aspen Street to Highway  1407     5-8-1989
71)                               No. 71
Morrison Road         35          Between 7th Street and   1110     9-25-1978
                                  10th Street
                                  Between the east city
M Street              35          limits and the west city 1339     11-11-1985
                                  limits
                                  Between D Street and J
Overland Trails Road  25/15       Street                   2064     5-21-2018
                                  (15 mph if pedestrians
                                  present)
                                  Between 13th Street and
U Street              20          17th Street when the     1656     12-13-1999
                                  safety lights are
                                  flashing
 
      (2)   In the event that any of the streets mentioned in this division are
not in the city limits of the city at the time of passage of this schedule,
that fact shall not invalidate this division and if any of such streets should
be incorporated into the city limits at a later date, the above speed limits
shall apply to the street.
   (B)   School zones. On a school day when children are present in the school
grounds or on sidewalks adjacent to the school or school crossings, no person
shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of 20 m.p.h. while passing a
school speed zone. For the purposes of this section, a school day shall begin
at 7:00 a.m. and conclude at 4:00 p.m. The following are designated as school
speed zones:
School Street Location
School                       Street            Location
Elementary Schools
                             17th Street       From 100 feet north of Mitchell
                                               Pass Boulevard to D Street
Geil Elementary School                         From 100 feet west of 17th
                             D Street          Street to 100 feet east of 16th
                                               Street
                             R Street          From 100 feet west of 14th
                                               Street to 13th Street
                             14th Street       From R Street to Q Street
Lincoln Elementary School                      From 100 feet west of 14th
                             Q Street          Street to 100 feet east of 13th
                                               Street
                             13th Street       From Q Street to R Street
                                               From 100 feet west of Ponder
                             Nelson Avenue     Place to 100 feet east of Donna
                                               Drive
                             Donna Drive       From 100 feet south of Flaten
                                               Avenue to Nelson Avenue
Northfield Elementary School Flaten Avenue     From 100 feet east of Donna
                                               Drive to Ponder Place
                             Ponder Place      From 100 feet south of Flaten
                                               Avenue to Nelson Avenue
                             Country Club Road From Five Rocks Road east to
                                               Langley Avenue
Junior High School and High School
                             S Street          From 100 feet west of 8th Street
                                               to 7th Street
                             7th Street        From 100 feet north of S Street
                                               to 100 feet south of Q Street
Gering Junior High School    Q Street          From 9th Street to 7th Street
                             9th Street        From 100 feet north of R Street
                                               to Q Street
                             R Street          From 100 feet west of 9th Street
                                               to 8th Street
                             8th Street        From S Street to R Street
                             17th Street       From Gentry Boulevard to U
                                               Street
                                               From 100 feet west of 17th
Gering High School           U Street          Street to 100 feet east of 13th
                                               Street
                             Pacific Boulevard From Gentry Boulevard to U
                                               Street
 
   (C)   Signs. This section shall not be applicable unless appropriate signs
are posted upon streets wherein the school speed zone is located. Such signs
shall indicate the school speed zone and the speed limit in effect during
school days when children are present.
(Prior Code, Ch. 74, Sched. I) (Ord. 1407, passed 5-8-1989; Ord. 1611, passed
4-13-1998; Ord. 1656, passed 12-13-1999; Ord. 1660, passed 3-27-2000; Ord.
1703, passed 2-11-2002; Ord. 1787, passed 1-24-2005; Ord. 1789, passed 2-7-
2005; Ord. 1799, passed 8-8-2005; Ord. 1964, passed 10-22-2012) Penalty, see §
73.99
SCHEDULE II. TURNS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   U-turns prohibited. The following u-turns shall be prohibited:
 
Street      Location
9th Street  All intersections between M Street and S Street
10th Street All intersections
11th Street All intersections between M Street and U Street
M Street    All intersections
U Street    All intersections
 
   (B)   Left turns prohibited.
      (1) The following left turn shall be prohibited:
 
Street      Direction                Location
10th Street Northbound or southbound At its intersection with O Street
 
      (2)   The intersection shall be clearly marked with appropriate signs or
standards plainly indicated “no left turn” for northbound or southbound
traffic.
(Ord. 558, passed 9-6-1966; Ord. 875, passed 3-24-1975) Penalty, see §
10.99
SCHEDULE III. TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   Routes designated. The following streets and portions of streets of
the city are hereby established as routes to be used by trucks, truck/tractors
or semi-trailers, or any combination thereof, exceeding 30 feet in total length
or exceeding 20,000 pounds gross vehicle weight (but not including vehicles
classified as recreational vehicles):
Street Location
Street            Location
7th Street        U Street to Country Club Road
10th Street North Morrison Road to north city limits
Country Club Road Five Rocks Road to 7th Street
Five Rocks Road   South city limits to north city limits
M Street          East city limits to west city limits
Morrison Road     10th Street to 7th Street
U Street          7th Street to east city limits
21st Avenue       South city limits to north city limits
Lockwood Road     South city limits to north city limits
 
   (B)   Trucks restricted, exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate, cause or permit to be operated or moved any truck, truck/tractor or
semi-trailer unit, or any combination thereof (except those classified as
recreational vehicles which exceed 20,000 pounds gross vehicle weight on any
public street, road, highway or alley within the city, except those streets or
portions of streets as designated in division (A) above; provided, however,
such vehicles may be operated or moved upon or otherwise used upon streets,
roads, highways and alleys of the city in such manner and to such extent as
reasonably necessary for the following purposes:
      (1)   To pick up or deliver articles of merchandise or commodities at a
location within the city not otherwise prohibited;
      (2)   To refuel or secure repair services upon such vehicle;
      (3)   To park or place such vehicles upon private property provided
zoning allows for said vehicles;
      (4)   To park or place such vehicles within authorized truck parking
zones or other places not otherwise prohibited;
      (5)   To carry on any legitimate reasonable business purposes requiring
the use of a truck as described herein; and
      (6)   The departure from and return to the truck routes designated in
division (A) above shall be by the most direct route.
(Ord. 1475, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 1788, passed 1-24-2005; Ord. 1996, passed 6-
8-2015; Ord. 2121, passed - -2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
SCHEDULE IV. DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC FLOW.
 
Direction Location
Westbound Between 10th and 11th Street and O and P Street
 
(Ord. 2028, passed 7-11-2016)
CHAPTER 75: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Parking prohibited
   
II.   Ten-minute parking
   
III.   Special event parking
SCHEDULE I. PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The following streets shall be designated as “no parking zones”:
 
Street         Side  Location                         Ord./Res. No. Date Passed
Lockwood Road  Both  All                              968           8-26-1976
                     Between 10th and 11th Streets
                     more particularly described as
                     20 feet, the length of one
Q Street       South parallel parking space, on the   12-00-1       12-11-2000
                     east and west sides of the
                     dedicated alley way entering Q
                     Street from the south between
                     10th and 11th Streets
                     From a point 480 feet north of
Red Barn Drive Both  the western intersection with    2139          11-13-2023
                     Country Club Road, to the
                     intersection with 12th Street
                     From a point 350 feet north of
               East  the intersection with D Street   2144          - -
                     to a point 545 feet north of the
Rundell Road         intersection with D Street
                     From a point 300 feet north of
               West  the intersection with D Street   2144          - -
                     to a point 500 feet north of the
                     intersection with D Street
 
   (B)   Diagonal, parallel, handicap, including crosswalks, and no parking
areas shall be allowed as designated and posted, on Overland Trails Road and
13th Street between D Street and J Street.
(Prior Code, Ch. 75, Sched. I) (Ord. 968, passed 8-26-1976; Res. 12-00-1,
passed 12-11-2000; Ord. 2065, passed 5- -2018 ; Ord. 2144, passed - -
)  Penalty, see §
72.99
SCHEDULE II. TEN-MINUTE PARKING.
   (A)   The following streets shall be ten-minute parking zones:
      (1)   The first two parking stalls east of 11th Street on the north side
of P Street; and
      (2)   Such other designated streets or parts of streets or parking spaces
as the Mayor and Council may designate by resolution.
   (B)   When such street or part of street has been declared a ten-minute
parking zone, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave any vehicle
in any ten-minute parking zone for a period of time in excess of ten minutes.
   (C)   Such ten-minute parking zones shall be clearly marked with appropriate
signs or standards plainly indicating such limitations on the use of the public
street.
(Prior Code, Ch. 75, Sched. II) Penalty, see §
72.99 
SCHEDULE III. SPECIAL EVENT PARKING.
   (A)   The following streets shall be prohibited from parking on the Annual
Oregon Trail Days Parade:
 
Street      Location                      Times
10th Street Between M Street and U Street From 6:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.
 
   (B)   Motor vehicles found parked along the street after 6:00 a.m. on the
day of the parade shall be towed from 10th Street at the owner’s expense.
   (C)   Appropriate signs shall be posted along the route between M Street and
U Street at least 24 hours before 6:00 a.m. on the day of the parade. The signs
shall advise that there shall be no parking along the area between the times
designated in this schedule and that violators’ vehicles will be towed away.
(Prior Code, Ch. 75. Sched. III) (Ord. 1391, passed 6-27-1988) Penalty, see §
72.99 
CHAPTER 76: EMERGENCY SNOW REMOVAL
Section
   
76.01   Introduction
   
76.02   Snow emergency declaration
   
76.03   Primary emergency snow routes
   
76.04   Secondary emergency snow routes and parking limitations
   
76.05   Driveways and snow removal from private property
 
   
76.99   Penalty
§ 76.01 INTRODUCTION.
   Due to the location of city, snow, ice, or freezing rain can be expected
between September through April each year. Snow and ice control is basically
emergency work in which city streets must be cleared at any time of the day or
night. Since snow and ice removal is considered an emergency service by the
city, the city shall undertake operations using the methods, resources, and
equipment necessary to keep access to the city as open as possible during snow
events.
(Prior Code, § 76.01) (Ord. 1882, passed 2-9-2009; Ord. 2053-2, passed 12-11-
2017; Ord. 2172, passed - -2025)
§ 76.02 SNOW EMERGENCY DECLARATION.
   (A)   A SNOW EMERGENCY is defined as a special condition of a snowfall event
requiring residents to move their vehicles off the emergency snow routes to
accommodate emergency snow removal.
   (B)   A snow emergency declaration allows for the towing of vehicles from
the emergency snow routes. A snow emergency is normally declared after a
measurable snowfall of four inches or more; however, any amount of snow
combined with ice, rain, and/or wind can also require a snow emergency to be
declared.
   (C)   The City Administrator or his or her designee may declare a snow
emergency. A snow emergency may be declared in advance of an anticipated storm,
to start at a specific time; or a snow emergency may be declared anytime during
or after a storm. A snow emergency will normally not last more than 72 hours
past the end of the last snowfall.
   (D)   That a snow emergency has been declared will be communicated to the
public through mass media outlets and the city’s website as deemed appropriate
by the City Administrator, Transportation Superintendent or Public Works
Director.
   (E)   During a declared snow emergency, snow removal equipment engaged in
the process of snow removal shall be considered an emergency vehicle. The
driver of any other vehicle shall yield the right of way to snow removal
equipment engaged in the process of snow removal.
(Prior Code, § 76.02) (Ord. 1882, passed 2-9-2009; Ord. 2053-2, passed 12-11-
2017; Ord. 2172, passed - -2025)
§ 76.03 PRIMARY EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTES.
   (A)   A system of marked emergency snow routes has been established to
maintain the flow of traffic, goods and services to the city on thoroughfare
streets. The marked primary emergency snow routes are established as follows:
PRIMARY EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTES
PRIMARY EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTES
7th Street from M Street to Country Club Road
10th Street (Scottsbluff/Gering Highway) from U Street to the river bridge
10th Street from J Street to U Street
21st Avenue from M Street to the North Platte River bridge
Country Club Road from 10th Street to 7th Street
Five Rocks Road from Robidoux Road to Country Club Road
Kimball Avenue from Five Rocks Road to J Street
Lockwood Road from Hwy 71 to M Street
M Street/Old Oregon Trail from the cemetery road east to Highway 72 bypass
S Street from 10th Street to 7th Street
U Street from 7th Street east to 21st Avenue
U Street from Five Rocks Road to 10th Street
 
   (B)   Modifications to ban. The foregoing prohibition shall be modified
within the area of the Downtown Business District designed for parking and more
particularly described as follows:
      (1)   10th Street from K Street to S Street:
      (2)   M Street from 9th Street to 14th Street.
   (C)   The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to the above described area
during the business hours of 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 76.03) (Ord. 1882, passed 2-9-2009; Ord. 2053-2, passed 12-11-
2017; Ord. 2172, passed - -2025) Penalty, see § 76.99
§ 76.04 SECONDARY EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTES AND PARKING LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   A secondary emergency snow route is defined as a well-traveled road
that provides access to major streets (primary snow routes) and is plowed after
the primary routes, but before less-used residential streets, to maintain
essential transportation for emergency services and commuters. These routes are
often collector streets or minor arterials and are plowed to allow continued
access to neighborhoods.
   (B)   Once a snow emergency is declared, parking where normally allowed on
both sides of a street, is allowed only on the odd or even numbered sides of
the street on all secondary emergency snow routes. Citations may be issued to
citizens who have their vehicles parked on the wrong side of the street.
   (C)   The secondary emergency snow routes are established as follows:
SECONDARY EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTES
Street Side of Street on Which Vehicles Should be Parked During a Snow
       Emergency Event
SECONDARY EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTES
Street                                  Side of Street on Which Vehicles Should
                                        be Parked During a Snow Emergency Event
8th Street from R Street to S Street    Odd numbered side
9th Street from K Street to S Street    Odd numbered side
11th Street from N Street to U Street   Odd numbered side
14th Street from Q Street to R Street   Odd numbered side
17th Street from U Street to Kings Road Odd numbered side
17th Street from D Street to M Street   Odd numbered side
17th Street from M Street to U Street   Odd numbered side
Flaten Avenue from Ponder Place to      Odd numbered side
Pacific Blvd.
Ponder Place from Flaten Drive to       Odd numbered side
Nelson Avenue
Chinoe Road from Country Club Road to   Odd numbered side
Nelson Ave.
Q Street from 7th Street to 17th Street Odd numbered side
D Street from Kimball Avenue to Five    Odd numbered side
Rocks Road
K Street from 5th Street to 12th Street Odd numbered side
12th Street from K Street to Q Street   Odd numbered side
13th Street from P Street to U Street   Even numbered side
R Street from 12th Street to 15th       Even numbered side
Street
R Street from 12th Street to 15th       Even numbered side
Street
Pacific Blvd. from U Street to Davis    Even numbered side
Avenue
Nelson Avenue from Pacific Blvd. to     Even numbered side
Ponder Place
Donna Drive from Flaten Avenue to       Even numbered side
Nelson Drive
 
(Ord. 2172, passed - -2025)
§ 76.05 DRIVEWAYS AND SNOW REMOVAL FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   City snowplows will not clear private driveways. The snow placed in
driveways by city plows is a natural result of clearing the streets and is the
responsibility of the property owner to remove.
   (B)   Only on emergency snow routes, when plowed windrows exceed 24 inches,
if time and conditions allow, the city will attempt to plow open private
driveways at the curb line.
   (C)   Snow from a private driveway, private sidewalk, business driveway, or
parking lot may not be placed on a city street.
   (D)   City equipment will not be used to remove piled snow or push snow away
from private property or businesses. Snow will only be removed from city
facilities. Using city equipment to clear snow from private property is a
violation of this code unless it is necessary to allow emergency vehicles
access to the private property for ambulance, fire or police calls.
(Ord. 2172, passed - -2025) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.99 PENALTY.
   A violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a $250 fine.
(Prior Code, § 76.99) (Ord. 1882, passed 2-9-2009; Ord. 2053-2, passed 12-11-
2017; Ord. 2172, passed - -2025)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   LEISURE AND RECREATION
      
91.   CEMETERY AND MEMORIALS
      
92.   FIRE REGULATIONS
      
93.   JUNKED AND ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
      
94.   HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
      
95.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC WAYS
      
96.   ANIMALS
      
97.   TREES
      
98.   ALARM SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 90: LEISURE AND RECREATION
Section
Library
   
90.01   Existing library; terms defined
   
90.02   Library Board; appointment; tenure of office
   
90.03   Officers; quorum; procedure; duties
   
90.04   Finances
   
90.05   Librarian; assistants; by-laws
   
90.06   Annual report
   
90.07   Amendment of rules
   
90.08   Donations, vesting of; exemptions; release and renewal of mortgages
   
90.09   Library receipts; librarian pays to Treasurer monthly
   
90.10   Destruction of library property; violation
   
90.11   Tax levied for maintenance
Parks
   
90.25   Rules and regulations
   
90.26   Destruction of park property
   
90.27   Hours
   
90.28   Bounce houses
LIBRARY
§ 90.01 EXISTING LIBRARY; TERMS DEFINED.
   The public library and reading room now existing in the city is hereby
established and continued as a public library and reading room which shall be
forever kept and maintained by said city and shall be known as the “Gering
Public Library and Reading Room.” Whenever in this subchapter there shall be
used the words “public library,” the same shall be construed to include the
“Gering Public Library and Reading Room.”
(Ord. 2097, passed - -2021)
§ 90.02 LIBRARY BOARD; APPOINTMENT; TENURE OF OFFICE.
   (A)   At the last regular, adjourned regular or special meeting in December
in each and every year, the Mayor, by and with the consent of the Council, or a
majority of the same, shall appoint one director to be chosen from the citizens
at large for the managing of such public library for a term of three years from
and after January 1 of the year in which he or she shall have been appointed;
provided, however, if the Mayor shall fail or neglect to appoint such director,
as above provided, then the Council shall appoint such director by a majority
vote of its members. Neither the Mayor nor any member of the City Council shall
be a member of such Library Board.
   (B)   No director shall receive any pay or compensation for his or her
services as a member of such Board. In cases of vacancies by resignation,
removal or otherwise, the Mayor and Council shall fill such vacancy for the
unexpired term.
   (C)   The Library Board shall consist of five members. They shall have
power, with the approval of Mayor and Council, to prepare and adopt such rules
and regulations for the efficient management of said library as they deem
expedient.
(Ord. 2097, passed - -2021)
§ 90.03 OFFICERS; QUORUM; PROCEDURE; DUTIES.
   The directors shall, at their first meeting in January of each year,
organize by electing from their number a President, Secretary, and such other
officers as may be necessary. Three of such Board shall constitute a quorum;
provided, however, any motion, resolution or order passed by said Board in
order to be valid shall require the vote or assent of three members of said
Board. They shall have the power to adopt such by-laws, rules, and regulations
for their guidance and for the government of the library as they may deem
expedient, subject to the supervision and control of the Mayor and Council and
not inconsistent with this subchapter. They shall have exclusive control of the
expenditure of all the money collected or donated to the credit of the Library
Fund, and the exclusive control of all library property, and of the renting or
construction of any library building and the supervision, care, and custody of
the grounds, rooms, or buildings constructed, leased, or set apart for that
purpose.
(Ord. 2097, passed - -2021)
§ 90.04 FINANCES.
   All taxes levied or collected and all funds donated or in any way acquired
for the erection, maintenance, or support of such public library shall be kept
for the use of such library, separate and apart from other funds of said city,
and shall be drawn upon and paid out by the City Treasurer upon approval of the
Library Board and authenticated by the Secretary of such Board, and shall not
be used or disbursed for any other purpose or in any other manner.
(Ord. 2097, passed - -2021)
§ 90.05 LIBRARIAN; ASSISTANTS; BY-LAWS.
   The Library Board shall have power to appoint a suitable librarian and
assistants, to fix their compensation, and remove their appointees at pleasure,
and shall have power to establish such regulations for the government of such
library as may be deemed necessary for its preservation, and to maintain its
usefulness and efficiency they shall fix and impose by general rules,
penalties, and forfeitures for trespass or injury upon or to the library
building, grounds, rooms, books, or other property or for the failure to return
any book or for violation of any by-laws or regulations, and shall have and
exercise such power as may be necessary to carry out the spirit and intent of
this subchapter in establishing and maintaining a public library.
(Ord. 2097, passed - -2021)
§ 90.06 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Library Board shall, on or before the second Monday in February in each
year, make a report to the City Council of the condition of its trust on the
last day of the prior fiscal year. The report shall show all money received and
credited or expended; the number of materials held, including books, video and
audio materials, software programs, and materials in other formats; the number
of periodical subscriptions on record, including newspapers; the number of
materials added and the number withdrawn from the collection during the year;
the number of materials circulated during the year; and other statistics,
information, and suggestions as the Library Board may deem of general interest
or as the City Council may require. The report shall be verified by affidavit
of the President and Secretary of the Library Board.
(Ord. 2097, passed - -2021)
§ 90.07 AMENDMENT OF RULES.
   Any by-laws, rules or regulations established by the Library Board may be
amended by the Mayor and Council.
(Ord. 2097, passed - -2021)
§ 90.08 DONATIONS, VESTING OF; EXEMPTIONS; RELEASE AND RENEWAL OF MORTGAGES.
   Any person may make any donation of money, lands, or property for the
benefit of such library, and the title to the property donated may be made to
and shall vest in the city for the public library, and such property shall
thereupon be exempt from taxation. The President shall have the power to
release, upon full payment, any mortgage constituting a credit to the Library
Fund outstanding in the name of such Library Board and the signature of the
President on any such release shall be authenticated by the Secretary of the
Board. The President and Secretary in like manner, upon resolution duly passed
and adopted by the Board, may renew any such mortgage.
(Ord. 2097, passed - -2021)
§ 90.09 LIBRARY RECEIPTS; LIBRARIAN PAYS TO TREASURER MONTHLY.
   All moneys received by the Board of Directors or by any librarian or
assistant of said library from any source for the use and support thereof,
shall be paid monthly to the City Treasurer.
(Ord. 2097, passed - -2021)
§ 90.10 DESTRUCTION OF LIBRARY PROPERTY; VIOLATION.
   Penalties imposed or accruing by any by-law or regulation of the Library
Board and any court costs and attorney’s fees may be recovered in a civil
action before any court having jurisdiction, such action to be instituted in
the name of the Library Board. Money, other than any court costs and attorney’s
fees, collected in such actions shall be placed in the treasury of the
municipality to the credit of the Library Fund. Attorney’s fees collected
pursuant to this section shall be placed in the treasury of the municipality
and credited to the budget of the Municipal Attorney’s office.
(Ord. 2097, passed - -2021)
§ 90.11 TAX LEVIED FOR MAINTENANCE.
   There shall be levied and appropriated annually for the support and
maintenance of a public library and reading room a tax of not more than one
mill upon the dollar of the actual valuation of real and personal property of
the city; the same shall be levied, appropriated, collected, and expanded and
known as the “Library Fund.”
(Ord. 2097, passed - -2021)
PARKS
§ 90.25 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Board of Commissioners is hereby empowered to establish rules and
regulations for the management, care, and use of all land now owned by the city
for park purposes, and land which shall hereafter be acquired for park
purposes. It shall be the duty of the Board to see that the parks are properly
cared for. The Board shall have the power to incur bills for park improvements,
within the limits of the appropriation therefor made by the Mayor and Council.
All accounts drawn against the Park Fund shall be audited by the Board of Park,
Cemetery, and Tree Commissioners and shall be paid by warrants drawn against
the Park Fund by the Chairperson of the Board of Park, Cemetery, and Tree
Commissioners. Warrants so drawn shall be paid by the Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 90.20)
§ 90.26 DESTRUCTION OF PARK PROPERTY.
   Any person who shall cut down, injure, or destroy any tree, plant, or shrub,
or who shall injure or destroy and building, equipment, or paraphernalia
belonging to the city, and installed in its parks, or who shall commit any
waste of any kind therein, shall upon conviction thereof be deemed guilty of an
offense.
(Prior Code, § 90.21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.27 HOURS.
   (A)   All public parks within the city which are under the control and
supervision of the city shall be closed between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:
00 a.m., local time.
   (B)   The skate park shall be closed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:
00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 90.22) (Ord. 1641, passed 7-26-1999)
§ 90.28 BOUNCE HOUSES.
   (A)   General. The city, a municipal corporation, requires that bounce
houses or other similar apparatus are prohibited in city parks or on other city
property or facilities, unless certain conditions are met.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a policy for the
use of bounce houses and other similar apparatus in city parks and facilities.
The city desires to provide safe parks and recreational opportunities for all
city residents and visitors. To achieve this goal and purpose, the city is
charged with ensuring that park patrons and user groups comply with reasonable
standards that promote safety and reasonable enjoyment of the city’s parks and
public facilities. The following policy applies to all individuals and groups
that make use of a bounce house or similar apparatus in any city park or
facility.
   (C)   Terms and conditions.
      (1)   User shall first submit a special event permit and applicable fees
for the use of a city park or facility no less than 30 days prior to use or the
event.
      (2)   User shall inform the city at the time he or she submits a special
event permit that he or she intends to use a bounce house as part of the event.
      (3)   Use of the city’s parks and facilities constitutes the user’s
agreement to follow all ordinances, rules, and policies of the city and subject
to all terms and conditions set forth in the special event permit and in a
separately executed bounce house user’s agreement.
      (4)   User shall follow all state, federal, and local laws and
ordinances, including all applicable ordinances of the city.
      (5)   Bounce houses shall be rented from a company that has liability
insurance on file with the city providing insurance coverage for bounce houses
and their use. The bounce house company shall provide a certificate of
insurance from an insurance company naming the city as additional insured and
listed as certificate holder with the following minimum limits:
         (a)   Commercial general liability per occurrence/aggregate:
$1,000,000; and
         (b)   Policies shall be written as primary, not contributing with or
in excess of any coverage which the city may carry. The insurance company shall
have no less than an A-VII A.M. Best rating. The bounce house company shall
provide an appropriate additional insured endorsement from the insurance policy
or policies containing the following language: “The City of Gering, and its
officers, employees, agents, and volunteers are additional insureds under
policy number            .”
      (6)   Bounce houses shall not remain in the city parks or facilities
overnight. Bounce houses shall be set up and removed only by trained and
qualified representatives of the bounce house company in compliance with the
manufacturer’s specifications.
      (7)   Bounce houses shall be freestanding and weighted. In the event that
stakes are required to secure the bounce house to the ground, the city requires
no less than three days notice prior to the event for city staff to approve and
flag the location for staking. Bounce houses must be securely anchored at all
times. Tying or tethering bounce houses to trees, tables, or other park
amenities or structures is strictly prohibited.
      (8)   Bounce house users shall provide adequate and appropriate adult
supervision at all times to ensure that the use is in compliance with the
manufacturer’s recommendations and reflects a safe level of operation. Bounce
house users at all times shall comply with the manufacturer’s operating
procedures and ensure that users have access to the appropriate manufacturer’s
operating procedures. In order to ensure that users have access to the
appropriate manufacturer’s operating procedures, a copy of the manufacturer’s
operating procedures shall be on file with the city as a condition of obtaining
a special events permit users are required to execute a bounce house users
agreement.
      (9)   Where available, city electricity can be used to inflate bounce
houses. Where electricity is not available, bounce house users shall be
responsible for providing a generator for inflation of the bounce house. The
generator shall be one rated as “quiet” and which will not generate noise in
excess of city standards. The generator shall be placed a safe distance from
the bounce house and all electrical cords properly insulated, grounded, and
covered to prevent tripping hazards. Electrical cords running across a public
street from a nearby private residence are prohibited. Additional gasoline cans
shall not be stored next to the generator.
      (10)   All bounce houses and generators shall be placed not more than 50
feet from the location of the area authorized for the event as set forth in the
facility reservation application. The user shall select the location no fewer
than 72 hours before the event so that the distance between the bounce house
and the authorized location can be confirmed.
      (11)   Privately owned, noncommercial bounce houses and other similar
inflatable/apparatus, including but not limited to those that use water or have
water features as part of the bounce house/inflatable/apparatus, are prohibited
in the city parks and facilities.
      (12)   Users of bounce houses and the bounce house company shall be
jointly and severally liable for all damages caused by their use of the bounce
house in the city’s parks and or facilities. Damage to city property or turf
may result in additional charges to the user and bounce house company which
shall be remediated by users and/or bounce house company.
      (13)   Users and bounce house company shall agree to jointly and
severally indemnify, protect, defend, save, and hold harmless the city, its
officers, employees, agents, and volunteers from and against any and all
liability, claims, suits, and causes of action for death or injury to person,
or damage to property, resulting from intentional or negligent acts, errors, or
omissions of user and/or the bounce house company arising out of the setup,
use, or operation of the bounce house, or resulting from any violation of any
federal, state, or municipal law or ordinance, the extent caused, in whole or
in part, by the willful misconduct, negligent acts, or omissions of user and/or
the bounce house company, which occurs related to the setup, use, or operation
of the bounce house.
      (14)   Users who fail to execute the bounce house users agreement shall
not use bounce houses at their event. A user who is found using a bounce house
without having signed the bounce house user’s agreement is subject to immediate
termination of his or her event whether or not the event has commenced or is in
the progress and the user shall forfeit any fees or other charges paid to the
city.
   (D)   Fees. The party wishing to schedule a bounce house or amusement device
on city property shall pay fees required and as determined by city staff once
the special event permit is approved.
(Prior Code, § 90.23) (Ord. 1990, passed 4-13-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 91: CEMETERY AND MEMORIALS
Section
Cemetery
   
91.01   Burial prohibited in other places
   
91.02   Perpetual care fund
   
91.03   Care of lots
   
91.04   Records
   
91.05   Commission prohibited
Roadside Memorial Signs
   
91.20   General provisions
   
91.21   Applicants
   
91.22   Eligibility
   
91.23   Application
   
91.24   Sign specifications
   
91.25   Placement
   
91.26   Duration and removal
   
91.27   Sample sign
 
   
91.99   Penalty
CEMETERY
§ 91.01 BURIAL PROHIBITED IN OTHER PLACES.
   No burial shall be permitted in any church yard, or any other place within
the limits of the city except a cemetery, and any person violating the
provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 91.01) (Ord. 1728, passed 6-23-2003) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 PERPETUAL CARE FUND.
   Of the amount arising from the sale of lots or burial spaces in the
cemetery, the Treasurer shall allocate and set apart 33 and one-third percent
as a permanent fund to be known as the “West Lawn Cemetery Perpetual Care
Fund,” which shall be a permanent fund, and as it accumulates shall be invested
and kept invested in such interest bearing securities as the Board of
Commissioners of Educational Lands and Funds is authorized by law to invest the
educational funds of the state and the income therefrom shall be used in the
care, upkeep, ornamentation, or maintenance of such lots and burial spaces and
the cemetery in general. The city may receive money by donation, bequest, or
otherwise to be held in trust in perpetuity, and the money so received shall be
invested as the “West Lawn Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund” is herein required to
be invested and the income derived therefrom shall be expended as the West Lawn
Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund is expended or as the donor may designate. The
Treasurer shall be the custodian of the “West Lawn Cemetery Perpetual Care
Fund” which shall be invested by a Board composed of the Mayor, Clerk, and
Treasurer; and whenever investments are made by the Board, the nature and
character of the same shall be reported to the Mayor and City Council and the
investment report shall be made a matter of record by the Clerk in City Council
proceedings. All other moneys, including income from the West Lawn Cemetery
Perpetual Care Fund, accruing to the Cemetery Fund shall be credited,
allocated, kept, and disbursed by the Treasurer under the head of “Cemetery
General Fund.”
(Prior Code, § 91.02) (Ord. 1728, passed 6-23-2003)
§ 91.03 CARE OF LOTS.
   The city agrees to care for all lots, parts of lots, or burial spaces in the
cemetery, now platted or to be platted, through its Park, Cemetery, and Tree
Board.
(Prior Code, § 91.03) (Ord. 1728, passed 6-23-2003; Ord. 1732, passed 7-28-
2003)
§ 91.04 RECORDS.
   The cemetery shall keep its records in the office of the City Clerk or at
such other convenient place in the city as may be determined as best suited for
the economical administration of the affairs of the cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 91.04) (Ord. 1728, passed 6-23-2003)
§ 91.05 COMMISSION PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to accept or contract to accept any
commission or fee arising out of a transaction on the sale of a lot, part of a
lot, or burial space in the cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 91.05) (Ord. 1728, passed 6-23-2003) Penalty, see §
91.99
ROADSIDE MEMORIAL SIGNS
§ 91.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Private memorials (including but not limited to flowers, balloons,
wreaths, and non-approved signage) will not be allowed on any city street or
roadway. All private memorials, whether placed alone or in addition to the
official memorial sign, will be removed without notice.
   (B)   Multiple applications for separate fatalities seeking placement at the
same location will be erected using one safety message panel. One memorial
message panel for each of the applications will be placed below the safety
message panel in a stacked arrangement. The victims’ names will be organized in
alphabetical order from the top down.
(Ord. 2090, passed 9- -2020)
§ 91.21 APPLICANTS.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBERS are defined as grandparents, parents, spouse, sons,
daughters, sisters, and brothers. Immediate family members may apply for a city
Transportation Department-produced memorial message sign to be erected at a
requested location at or near city streets or roadways.
(Ord. 2090, passed 9- -2020)
§ 91.22 ELIGIBILITY.
   Any person who is killed as the result of a motor vehicle collision on a
city street or roadway system shall be eligible to have a memorial message sign
erected in their honor, except in cases where:
   (A)   Such person was the operator of a motor vehicle and was found to have
a blood alcohol content equal to or above the legal limit set forth in Neb. RS
60-6,196.01; or
   (B)   Such person was the operator of a motor vehicle and was found to have
been impaired by any recreational or other illicit substance which is illegal
in the state.
(Ord. 2090, passed 9- -2020)
§ 91.23 APPLICATION.
   (A)   There shall be a limit of one name per application. If multiple names
are to be displayed, each name shall be submitted on separate applications. An
application will only be accepted by the city when signed and submitted by an
immediate family member of the deceased.
   (B)   The application must be submitted to the city no more than ten years
from the date of the accident. The application shall be produced by city staff
and can be updated as deemed necessary from time to time.
(Ord. 2090, passed 9- -2020)
§ 91.24 SIGN SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The memorial sign assembly shall have a blue background with white
lettering. Each memorial sign assembly shall consist of one safety message sign
and one or more supplemental memorial message plaque. Each safety message sign
shall measure 24 inches by 24 inches and include one of the following safety
messages which shall be chosen by the applicant:
      (1)   “Please Drive Safely;”
      (2)   “Seat Belts Save Lives;”
      (3)   “Don’t Text and Drive;” or
      (4)   “Don’t Drive Impaired.”
   (B)   Memorial message plaques shall measure 24 inches by 12 inches for one
name, or 24 inches by 18 inches for two names and will be placed directly below
the safety message sign. If more than one name, the names will be placed in
alphabetical order. There will be a charge of $50 to produce, erect and
maintain the sign. The signs will conform to MUTCD standards (Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices). See Appendix A, incorporated in §
91.27.
(Ord. 2090, passed 9- -2020)
§ 91.25 PLACEMENT.
   The city will make every effort to place the memorial message sign as close
to the requested location as possible. The sign will serve as a memorial for a
minimum of two years after installation.
(Ord. 2090, passed 9- -2020)
§ 91.26 DURATION AND REMOVAL.
   Each memorial message sign shall be left in place for two years from the
date the sign is erected. At the end of the two-year period, the sign shall be
removed and stored at the city Transportation Department for 30 days. The
applicant may retrieve the memorial message sign during that time. After 30
days, the sign will be recycled. Subsequent applications for a memorial sign,
for the same family member, will not be accepted.
(Ord. 2090, passed 9- -2020)
§ 91.27 SAMPLE SIGN.
(Ord. 2090, passed 9- -2020)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of §§
91.01 through
91.05, unless otherwise specifically provided, shall be deemed guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum not exceeding
$100. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of
failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 91.99)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to impose penalties, see Neb. RS 16-245
CHAPTER 92: FIRE REGULATIONS
Section
Fire Limits
   
92.01   Limits designated
   
92.02   Building restrictions within limits
   
92.03   Special permits
   
92.04   Moving buildings into limits; permit
   
92.05   Ironclads
   
92.06   Removal when damaged by fire
Fireworks
   
92.20   Definitions
   
92.21   Prohibited fireworks
   
92.22   Permit required
   
92.23   Sales and discharges; times permitted; use on city property
Fire Hazards; Explosives
   
92.35   Stacking combustibles
   
92.36   Public buildings; requirements
   
92.37   Chimneys; construction
   
92.38   Explosives; storage; permit
   
92.39   Burning; restrictions
FIRE LIMITS
§ 92.01 LIMITS DESIGNATED.
   The following described territory in the city shall constitute the fire
limits of the city: commencing at a point 150 feet east of the southeast corner
of 10th Street in the city, thence north on a line 150 feet east of the east
side of 10th Street to the center of K Street; thence east to the center of 9th
Street, thence north along the center line of 9th Street to the center of S
Street; thence east along the center line of S Street to the center of Seventh
Street; thence south along the center line of 7th Street to the center line of
R Street; thence east along the center line of R Street to the center line of
5th Street; thence north along the center line of 5th Street to the south side
of U.P. right-of-way; thence northwesterly along the U.P. right-of-way to the
center line of 7th Street; thence north along the center line of 7th Street to
the city limits; thence west along the north boundary of the city limits to a
point 340 feet west of the west line of 10th Street; thence south along the
line to the city limits, thence east to the center line of 10th Street; thence
south to the city limits; thence to the point of beginning, all of which
described property is within the corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 92.01)
§ 92.02 BUILDING RESTRICTIONS WITHIN LIMITS.
   No combustible building, except as hereinafter provided, shall hereafter be
built, or moved within, or to, the herein described fire limits and any
building to be constructed, or moved within, or to, this area shall be built
under the following limitations: outside walls and interior supporting members
shall be of at least one-hour fire resisting construction; and between ceiling
and roof there shall be a layer of at least one-half hour fire resistant
insulation; the exterior roof material to be at least as fire resistant as
asphalt roofing.
(Prior Code, § 92.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.03 SPECIAL PERMITS.
   In all that portion of the fire limits not included within the following
description: All property 190 feet east of the center line of 11th Street and
190 feet west of the center line of 9th Street; the Council may upon
application of any land owner within the fire limits grant a special permit for
the construction of buildings of a kind and quality different than that
heretofore set forth in §
92.02. Such application shall be filed with the Clerk and shall be accompanied
by plans of the proposed building showing the size and height thereof; the type
of materials to be used and the location where it is proposed to erect such
structure. Granting of such special permit may be done by motion passed by a
majority of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 92.03)
§ 92.04 MOVING BUILDINGS INTO LIMITS; PERMIT.
   No building of any kind shall be constructed, or moved within or to, the
fire limits until a permit therefor shall be granted upon action of the Mayor
and Council. The action shall be based upon an application for a permit
submitted by the proposed builder or mover, which application shall include
complete plans, specifications, and materials to be used in the construction of
the proposed building and the same must be approved by an action of the Mayor
and Council.
(Prior Code, § 92.04) (Ord. 270, passed 5-1-1948) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 92.05 IRONCLADS.
   All buildings, sheds, and structures known as ironclads, that is, buildings,
sheds, or structures constructed of wood and covered with sheet iron or tin
attached to a frame work or posts or any skeleton support constructed of wood
or other combustible material, shall be considered and deemed for all purposes
within every section of this chapter to be constructed of combustible materials
and the erection of such buildings, sheds, and structures is hereby prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 92.05) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 92.06 REMOVAL WHEN DAMAGED BY FIRE.
   Whenever any wooden or combustible building or structure or any
noncombustible building stands within the fire limits and it shall be damaged
by fire or other casualty to the extent of 50% or more of its value (exclusive
of foundation), it shall not be repaired or rebuilt, but shall be taken down
and removed within 60 days from the date of such fire or other casualty, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to repair or rebuild any such damaged building
or structure or for any owner thereof to fail to remove any such damaged
building or structure within 30 days after notice to do so from the Mayor and
Council.
(Prior Code, § 92.06)
FIREWORKS
§ 92.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERMISSIBLE FIREWORKS.
      (1)   AERIAL SHELL. A firework fired from a cylinder, such as a mortar,
but excluding rockets.
      (2)   CONSUMER FIREWORKS.
         (a)   Any of the following devices that:
            1.   Meet the requirements set forth in 16 C.F.R. parts 1500 and
1507, as such regulations existed on January 1, 2010; and
            2.   Are tested and approved by a nationally recognized testing
facility or by the State Fire Marshal:
               a.   Any small firework device designed to produce visible
effects by combustion and which is required to comply with the construction,
chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer
Product Safety Commission set forth in 16 C.F.R., as such regulations existed
on January 1, 2010;
               b.   Any small device designed to produce audible effects such
as a whistling device;
               c.   Any ground device or firecracker;
               d.   Any aerial device containing 130 milligrams or less of
explosive composition; and
               e.   Class C explosives as classified by the United States
Department of Transportation shall be considered consumer fireworks.
         (b)   CONSUMER FIREWORKS does not include:
            1.   Rockets that are mounted on a stick or wire and project into
the air when ignited, with or without report;
            2.   Wire sparklers, except that silver and gold sparklers are
deemed to be CONSUMER FIREWORKS until January 1, 2014;
            3.   Nighttime parachutes;
            4.   Fireworks that are shot into the air and after coming to the
ground cause automatic ignition due to sufficient temperature;
            5.   Firecrackers that contain more than 50 milligrams of explosive
composition; or
            6.   Fireworks that have been tested by the State Fire Marshal as a
response to complaints and have been deemed to be unsafe.
      ROCKET. A device consisting of a container containing a combustible
substance which is attached to a guiding stick, the whole being projected
through the air by pressure exerted by the rearward discharge of gases
liberated by combustion.
(Prior Code, § 92.20) (Ord. 1929, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 92.21 PROHIBITED FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to
possess, sell, offer for sale, bring into the city, or discharge any
pyrotechnics commonly known as fireworks other than permissible fireworks.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any firecracker, or any
object which explodes upon contact with another object:
      (1)   From or on to a motor vehicle;
      (2)   On to any street, highway, or sidewalk;
      (3)   At or near any person;
      (4)   Into any building; or
      (5)   Into or at any group of persons.
(Prior Code, § 92.21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.22 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, hold for sale, or offer for
sale any fireworks in the city unless such person has first obtained a permit.
Application for such permit shall be made to the City Clerk on forms to be
prescribed by the Clerk. Each application shall be accompanied by the required
fee, which shall be $50. The license shall be good only for the period in which
issued and shall at all times be displayed at the place of business of the
holder thereof.
(Prior Code, § 92.22) (Ord. 1648, passed 10-25-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.23 SALES AND DISCHARGES; TIMES PERMITTED; USE ON CITY PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or light, ignite, or
discharge any fireworks on, within, or onto any city recreational facility or
park at any time, except professional fireworks shows authorized under a permit
from the State Fire Marshal and approved by the City Council, or except for
consumer grade fireworks shows authorized by the City Council but not requiring
a permit from the State Fire Marshal. For both such instances a special event
permit must be obtained no less than 30 days in advance and the required
insurance coverages must be provided.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to sell any permissible fireworks at retail
within the city except:
      (1)   Between the dates of June 25 at 12:01 a.m. and July 4 of each year
at 11:59 p.m.; and
      (2)   Between the dates of December 29 at 12:01 a.m. and December 31 of
each year at 11:59 p.m.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to light, ignite, or discharge any fireworks
within the city except during the allowable days of sale as identified in
division (B) above.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to light, ignite, or discharge any fireworks
after 10:30 p.m. or before 8:00 a.m., except on July 4 and December 31, when
fireworks may be discharged until 12:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 92.23) (Ord. 2047, passed 5-8-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
FIRE HAZARDS; EXPLOSIVES
§ 92.35 STACKING COMBUSTIBLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to have or keep any hay, straw, stalks,
excelsior, empty boxes, barrels, or other combustible materials, which are
hereby designated as nuisances, scattered, stacked, or piled up or exposed,
enclosed by a building, or upon any street, alley, or lot within the fire
limits.
(Prior Code, § 92.30) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.36 PUBLIC BUILDINGS; REQUIREMENTS.
   The doors of all exits from buildings occupied as apartment houses,
churches, school buildings, theaters for dramatic, operatic, or similar
performances, or as picture shows, or used for any public gatherings or
meetings, shall swing outward, or be double acting. They shall, during every
performance, meeting or gathering within the building, be and remain unbarred
and unlocked. For every departing gathering they shall be fastened open. The
exits of all such buildings shall be not less than three feet wide by six and
one-half feet high. No temporary seats or obstructions of any character shall,
while such building is in use; be permitted to be or remain in any aisle,
passageway, exit, entrance, or stairway. No obstructions of any character,
either movable or immovable, shall, while any such building is in use, be
placed or left in any lobby or in front of any outer door or exit. No person
shall be permitted to remain in any aisle or on any stairway of the building
while it is in use. Every theater shall be equipped with an asbestos curtain
which shall be lowered between each act while shows or rehearsals are in
progress. All operating booths for apparatus involving the use of combustible
film more than ten inches in length shall be constructed of galvanized iron or
other metal lined with asbestos and otherwise constructed according to the
regulations of the State Fire Marshal. The hallways and stairways in public
buildings shall be well lighted. Every occupant or tenant of any such building
who shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this
section shall be deemed guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 92.31) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.37 CHIMNEYS; CONSTRUCTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter, or cause to be entered, any
stovepipe into an outlet other than a brick chimney constructed with what is
known as flue lining, well burnt clay, or terra cotta pipe, nor shall any
person run a stovepipe through any partition, floor, or roof, except through a
ventilator in the partition, floor, or roof. All chimneys hereafter constructed
shall be lined continuously on the inside with such materials as hereinbefore
provided, shall be made smooth on the inside from the bottom of the flue or
from the throat of the fireplace, if the flue starts from the latter, and shall
be carried up continuously to the extreme height of the flue. The ends of all
lining pipes shall be made to fit close together; the pipe shall be built in as
the flue is carried up and shall extend at least six inches above the cap of
the chimney. Each flue shall be enclosed on all sides with not less than four
inches of solid brickwork properly banded together, and the withes or brickwork
between the lined flues on the inside of the chimney shall be four inches in
thickness. All chimneys, flues, and fireplaces shall be kept at all times clean
and free from accumulation of soot, ashes and cinders, and in good and proper
repair, and no metal flues or stovepipes shall pass through any wooden
partition, ceiling, floor, or roof of any house or building.
(Prior Code, § 92.32) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.38 EXPLOSIVES; STORAGE; PERMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any buildings or tanks for
storage of large quantities of dynamite, nitroglycerin, giant powder,
explosives or inflammable oils or to store kerosene, gasoline, or other
petroleum products in large quantities in barrels for the purpose of carrying
on the oil business or to erect or construct any building, apparatus,
structure, or equipment, used or useful in the operation of any petroleum
refinery or skimming plant, unless the persons secure a permit so to do from
the Mayor and Council, in writing. The permit shall specify the exact location
where such petroleum refinery, skimming plant, or storage tanks may be placed
or where and under what conditions such kerosene, oil, and gasoline in barrels
may be stored. The Mayor and Council is hereby empowered, at any time the
public good demands to order the removal of kerosene tanks, gasoline tanks,
inflammable oil tanks, explosives, petroleum refinery, skimming plant, or any
building or house containing any of such products. Underground tanks, when
hereafter built for the storage of any gasoline or petroleum products shall be
constructed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the National Board
of Fire Underwriters which, according to law, are hereby incorporated and made
a part of this section the same as though set out at length herein.
(Prior Code, § 92.33) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.39 BURNING; RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to burn any
material substance, article, trash, rubbish, or waste on any lot, tract of
land, street, or alley, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed to prohibit:
      (1)   Burning done in a furnace or fireplace solely for the purpose of
heating the building in which the furnace or fireplace is situated, or burning
done in a space heater, water heater, or cooking stove, if the furnace,
fireplace, space heater, water heater, or cooking stove is so constructed that
the smoke and fumes are vented into a masonry or metal flue of a type which
complies with all provisions of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   Burning done in a furnace, stove, or incinerator incidental to a
business, commercial, or industrial process, or for the purpose of disposing of
business, commercial or industrial waste, if the furnace, stove or incinerator
is installed according to the Fire Prevention Code. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of said furnace, stove, or incinerator to comply
with all state and federal standards applicable to said furnace, stove, or
incinerator;
      (3)   Burning done by the Volunteer Fire Department in the course of the
training of members of such department; or
      (4)   Burning of weeds, brush, grass, or debris or caused to be done, by
the owner or occupant of premises pursuant to a permit issued by the Fire Chief
upon a written application of such person, if the Fire Chief shall in writing
determine that the applicant has shown that removal of the growth or
accumulated debris cannot reasonably be accomplished by other means, that the
safety of all persons and property will be assured. No such permit shall be
required for burning irrigation and drainage canals or ditches. The preceding
sentence shall not be construed to exempt any person or other entity doing such
burning from obtaining the necessary permits required by the statutes of the
state; provided, furnaces, stoves, or incinerators in which the burning of
rubbish or other readily combustible solid waste material is otherwise
permissible hereunder shall not be used for such purposes unless such furnace,
stove, or incinerator meets the requirement of the Fire Prevention Code. It
shall be the responsibility of the owner of said furnace stove or incinerator
to make sure that the device meets or exceeds all laws of the state or the
United States applicable to such device.
(Prior Code, § 92.34) (Ord. 1826, passed 4-24-2006) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 93: JUNKED AND ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
   
93.01   Abandoned vehicles
   
93.02   Unlicensed or inoperable vehicles
§ 93.01 ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ABANDONED VEHICLE.
         (a)   A motor vehicle is an ABANDONED VEHICLE:
            1.   If left unattended, with no license plates or valid “In
Transit” stickers issued pursuant to the Motor Vehicle Registration Act affixed
thereto, for more than six hours on any public property;
            2.   If left unattended for more than 24 hours on any public
property, except a portion thereof on which parking is legally permitted;
            3.   If left unattended for more than 48 hours, after the parking
of such vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of any public property
on which parking is legally permitted;
            4.   If left unattended for more than 7 days on private property if
left initially without permission of the owner, or after permission of the
owner is terminated;
            5.   If left for more than 30 days in the custody of a city law
enforcement agency after the agency has sent a letter to the last-registered
owner and lienholder under division (D) below; or
            6.   If removed from private property by the city pursuant to a
city ordinance or this code.
         (b)   An all-terrain vehicle or minibike is an ABANDONED VEHICLE:
            1.   If left unattended for more than 24 hours on any public
property, except a portion thereof on which parking is legally permitted;
            2.   If left unattended for more than 48 hours, after the parking
of such vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of any public property
on which parking is legally permitted;
            3.   If left unattended for more than 7 days on private property if
left initially without permission of the owner, or after permission of the
owner is terminated;
            4.   If left for more than 30 days in the custody of a city law
enforcement agency after the agency has sent a letter to the last-registered
owner and lienholder under division (D) below; or
            5.   If removed from private property by the city pursuant to a
city ordinance or this code.
         (c)   A mobile home is an ABANDONED VEHICLE if left in place on
private property for more than 30 days after a local governmental unit,
pursuant to an ordinance or resolution, has sent a certified letter to each of
the last-registered owners and posted a notice on the mobile home, stating that
the mobile home is subject to sale or auction or vesting of title as set forth
in Neb. RS 60-1903.
         (d)   No motor vehicle subject to forfeiture under Neb. RS 28-431
shall be an ABANDONED VEHICLE under this section.
      MOBILE HOME. A movable or portable dwelling constructed to be towed on
its own chassis, connected to utilities, and designed with or without a
permanent foundation for year-round living. It may consist of one or more units
that can be telescoped when towed and expanded later for additional capacity,
or of two or more units, separately towable but designed to be joined into one
integral unit, and shall include a manufactured home as defined in Neb. RS 71-
4603. MOBILE HOME does not include a mobile home or manufactured home for which
an affidavit of affixture has been recorded pursuant to Neb. RS 60-169.
      PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any privately owned property which is not included
within the definition of public property.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, or park
or other state, county, or city-owned property.
(Neb. RS 60-1901)
   (B)   If an abandoned vehicle, at the time of abandonment, has no license
plates of the current year or valid “In Transit” stickers issued pursuant to
Neb. RS 60-376 affixed and is of a wholesale value, taking into consideration
the condition of the vehicle, of $500 or less, title shall immediately vest in
the city. Any certificate of title issued under this section to the city shall
be issued at no cost to the city.
(Neb. RS 60-1902)
   (C)   (1)   Except for vehicles governed by division (B) above, the city
shall make an inquiry concerning the last-registered owner of such vehicle as
follows:
         (a) Abandoned vehicle with license plates affixed, to the jurisdiction
which issued such license plates; or
         (b) Abandoned vehicle with no license plates affixed, to the
Department of Motor Vehicles.
      (2)   The city shall notify the last-registered owner, if any, and any
lienholder, if any, within 15 business days that the vehicle in question has
been determined to be an abandoned vehicle and that, if unclaimed, either:
         (a)   It will be sold or will be offered at public auction after five
days from the date such notice was mailed; or
         (b)   Title will vest in the city 30 days after the date such notice
was mailed.
      (3)   If the agency described in division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) above
also notifies the city that a lien or mortgage exists, such notice shall also
be sent to the lienholder or mortgagee. Any person claiming such vehicle shall
be required to pay the cost of removal and storage of such vehicle.
      (4)   Title to an abandoned vehicle, if unclaimed, shall vest in the
city:
         (a)   Five days after the date the notice is mailed if the vehicle
will be sold or offered at public auction under division (C)(2)(a) above;
         (b)   Thirty days after the date the notice is mailed if the city will
retain the vehicle; or
         (c)   If the last-registered owner cannot be ascertained, when notice
of such fact is received.
      (5)   After title to the abandoned vehicle vests pursuant to division (C)
(4) above, the city may retain for use, sell, or auction the abandoned vehicle.
If the city has determined that the vehicle should be retained for use, the
city shall, at the same time that the notice, if any, is mailed, publish in a
newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction an announcement that the
city intends to retain the abandoned vehicle for its use and that title will
vest in the city 30 days after the publication.
(Neb. RS 60-1903)
   (D)   (1)   If a city law enforcement agency has custody of a motor vehicle
for investigatory purposes and has no further need to keep it in custody, it
shall send a certified letter to each of the last-registered owners, if any,
and lienholders, if any, within 15 calendar days stating that the vehicle is in
the custody of the law enforcement agency, that the vehicle is no longer needed
for law enforcement purposes, and that after 30 days the agency will dispose of
the vehicle.
      (2)   This division (D) shall not apply to motor vehicles subject to
forfeiture under Neb. RS 28-431.
      (3)   No storage fees shall be assessed against the registered owner of a
motor vehicle held in custody for investigatory purposes under this division
(D) unless the registered owner or the person in possession of the vehicle when
it is taken into custody is charged with a felony or misdemeanor related to the
offense for which the law enforcement agency took the vehicle into custody. If
a registered owner or the person in possession of the vehicle when it is taken
into custody is charged with a felony or misdemeanor but is not convicted, the
registered owner shall be entitled to a refund of the storage fees.
(Neb. RS 60-1903.01)
   (E)   (1)   A law enforcement agency is authorized to remove an abandoned or
trespassing vehicle from private property upon the request of the private
property owner on whose property the vehicle is located and upon information
indicating that the vehicle is an abandoned or trespassing vehicle. After
removal, the law enforcement agency with custody of the vehicle shall follow
the procedures in Neb. RS 60-1902 and 60-1903.
      (2)   A law enforcement agency is authorized to contact a private towing
service in order to remove an abandoned or trespassing vehicle from private
property upon the request of the private property owner on whose property the
vehicle is located and upon information indicating that the vehicle is an
abandoned or trespassing vehicle. A vehicle towed away under this subsection is
subject to Neb. RS 52-601.01 to 52-605 and 60-2410 by the private towing
service which towed the vehicle.
      (3)   A private property owner is authorized to remove or cause the
removal of an abandoned or trespassing vehicle from such property and may
contact a private towing service for such removal. A private towing service
that tows the vehicle shall notify, within 24 hours, the designated law
enforcement agency in the jurisdiction from which the vehicle is removed and
provide the registration plate number, the vehicle identification number, if
available, the make, model, and color of the vehicle, and the name of the
private towing service and the location, if applicable, where the private
towing service is storing the vehicle. A vehicle towed away under this
subsection is subject to Neb. RS 52-601.01 to 52-605 and 60-2410 by the private
towing service that towed the vehicle.
      (4)   For purposes of this section, a trespassing vehicle is a vehicle
that is parked without permission on private property that is not typically
made available for public parking.
(Neb. RS 60-1903.02)
   (F)   If a state agency caused an abandoned vehicle described in division
(A)(1)(a)5. or (A)(1)(b)4. above to be removed from public property in the
city, the state agency shall be entitled to custody of the vehicle. If a state
agency caused an abandoned vehicle described in division (A)(1) above to be
removed from public property in the city, the state agency shall deliver the
vehicle to the city which shall have custody.
(Neb. RS 60-1904)
   (G)   Any proceeds from the sale of an abandoned vehicle in the city’s
custody less any expenses incurred by the city shall be held by the city
without interest, for the benefit of the owner or lienholders of such vehicle
for a period of two years. If not claimed within such two-year period, the
proceeds shall be paid into the General Fund of the city.
(Neb. RS 60-1905)
   (H)   Neither the owner, owner’s agent, owner’s employee, lessee, nor
occupant of the premises from which any abandoned vehicle is removed, nor the
city, shall be liable for any loss or damage to such vehicle which occurs
during its removal or while in the possession of the city or its contractual
agent, while in the possession of a private towing service, or as a result of
any subsequent disposition.
(Neb. RS 60-1906)
   (H)   No person shall cause any vehicle to be an abandoned vehicle as
described in division (A)(1) above.
(Neb. RS 60-1907)
   (I)   No person other than one authorized by the city or appropriate state
agency shall destroy, deface, or remove any part of a vehicle which is left
unattended on a highway or other public place without license plates affixed or
which is abandoned. Anyone violating this division shall be guilty of an
offense.
(Neb. RS 60-1908)
   (J)   The last-registered owner of an abandoned vehicle shall be liable to
the city for the costs of removal and storage of such vehicle.
(Neb. RS 60-1909)
   (K)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of
an offense.
(Neb. RS 60-1911)
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Motor Vehicle Registration Act, see Neb. RS 60-301
§ 93.02 UNLICENSED OR INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person in charge or control of any property within the city, other
than city property, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise,
shall allow any partially dismantled, inoperable, wrecked, junked, or discarded
vehicle to remain on that property longer than 30 days.
   (B)   No unlicensed vehicle shall be permitted to remain on any private or
public property for any length of time; provided, that this section shall not
apply to the following:
      (1)   A vehicle bearing a valid “In Transit” sticker;
      (2)   A vehicle in an enclosed building;
      (3)   A vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a
lawful place and manner when the vehicle is necessary to the lawful operation
of the business; or
      (4)   A vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained
in a lawful place and manner by the city.
   (C)   Any vehicle allowed to remain on property in violation of this section
shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated, and any person violating this
section shall be guilty of an offense.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   “In Transit” stickers, see Neb. RS 60-376
CHAPTER 94: HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Property Maintenance Code adopted by reference; amendments
   
94.02   Health officer
   
94.03   Board of Health; jurisdiction; duties
Health Regulations
   
94.15   Contagious disease; notice
   
94.16   Minors; medical attention
   
94.17   Privies; cesspools
   
94.18   Stagnant water
   
94.19   Refuse in streets
   
94.20   Vacant lots; filth
   
94.21   Dead animals
   
94.22   Feed lots; stock pens
   
94.23   Food service; sterilization required
   
94.24   Littering
   
94.25   Owner of lot; duties
   
94.26   Spillage; scattering of solid waste
Nuisances
   
94.40   Definition
   
94.41   Abatement procedure
   
94.42   Jurisdiction
   
94.43   Adjoining land owners; intervention before trial
   
94.44   Dead or diseased trees
   
94.45   Noxious odors; unclean premises
   
94.46   Abandoned refrigerators and containers
   
94.47   Plastic bags; warning required; nuisance
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the
City Clerk, being marked and designated as Chapter 2, “Definitions” and Chapter
3, “General Requirements” of the “International Property Maintenance Code,”
current edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and
is hereby adopted by the city; for the maintenance of property, buildings, and
structures. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms
of said chapters of the “International Property Maintenance Code” are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in division (B) below. It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
to permit inoperative vehicles, junk, stagnant water, litter, noxious weeds,
unlicensed vehicles, or any other condition described in division (B) below
within the corporate or jurisdictional limits of the city.
   (B)   The “International Property Maintenance Code,” current edition, is
amended and revised in the following respects:
      (1)   Section 202. Amend the following definition:
         EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space of the premises and adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises. This
definition shall also include the property between the alley and/or paved edge
of the roadway and the property line of the property that abuts the right-of-
way and/or alley.
      (2)   Section 202. Insert the following definitions:
         INOPERATIVE VEHICLE. A vehicle that cannot be legally operated or
drawn by a motor vehicle on the streets and highways of the state in accordance
with the statutes of the state including, but not limited to, any motor vehicle
which does not have its major component parts so as to be fully operable, i.e.,
an engine in running condition, all tires inflated to their proper pressure
capable of supporting the motor vehicle independently, a battery with operative
electrical and ignition system, and the like.
         JUNK. Junk shall include, but not be limited to:
            1.   Any iron, glass, paper, rags, cordage, wood, machinery parts,
cloth, or other waste or discarded material of any nature of any substance
whatsoever which is so placed or strewn about as to give a reasonably prudent
person the impression that the owner thereof no longer intends to keep such
material for any immediate useful purpose or has demonstrated from a lengthy
period of disuse that he or she does not intend to use said material for a
useful purpose; and
            2.   Any machine or machines, vehicle or vehicles or parts of a
machine or vehicle which have lost their identity, character, utility, or
serviceability as such through deterioration, dismantling or the ravages of
time except a vehicle on the premises of a licensed enterprise when necessary
to the operation of such enterprise.
         LITTER. Garbage, trash, rubbish, tires, tire carcasses, waste
materials, debris, or like substances placed or allowed to be placed or to
remain on the ground in any manner; and any articles or materials that may be
likely to accumulate stale or stagnant water so as to be a breeding ground for
mosquitoes or other insects or that provides a haven for rodents or insects.
         NOXIOUS WEEDS. Include, but are not limited to, bindweed (convolvulus
arvensis), puncture vine (tribulus terrestris), leafy spurge (euphorbia esula),
Canada thistle (cirsium arvense), perennial peppergrass (lepidium draba),
Russian knapweek (centaurea picris), Johnson grass (sorghum halepense), nodding
or musk thistle, quack grass (agrpyron repens), perennial sow thistle (sonchus
arvensis), horse nettle (solanum carolinense), bull thistle (cirsium
lanceolatum), buckthorn (rahmnus sp. tourn), hemp plant (cannabis sativa), and
ragweed (ambrosiaceae).
         STAGNANT WATER. Any and all lots or pieces of ground within the
municipality shall be drained, filled, or covered so as to prevent STAGNANT
WATER from accumulating on any lot or property, including the accumulation of
such water, tires, and tire carcasses on any lot or properties.
         UNLICENSED VEHICLE. A vehicle that does not properly display current
registration as required for said vehicle to legally operate or to be legally
drawn by a motor vehicle on the streets and highways of the state.
         VEHICLE. A motor vehicle or trailer as defined by the statutes of the
state.
      (3)   Section 302.1. Insert after last line: No owner or occupant shall
permit or allow any garbage, manure, offal, rubbish, rubble, refuse, junk, or
waste paper to collect or lie upon or within any premises that such owner or
occupant owns or controls including the use of exterior property areas for the
storage or accumulation of wood and other used materials, or for the dumping,
disposal, or storage of junk, scrap metal, slag, or other industrial wastes or
by-products.
      (4)   Section 302.4. Insert the following section:
         302.4.1 Notice: The City Administrator or his or her designee shall
notify by certified mail and first class mail that the owner, as listed in the
most recent county property records, shall destroy or cut all weeds in
violation of § 302.4. The notice shall inform the owner that if such owner
fails to destroy or cut said weeds in violation of § 302.4 within ten days from
the date of mailing of the notice, the city or its contractor may enter upon
the property to destroy or cut such weeds as many times as is necessary to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare, in the current calendar year.
The cost and expenses of any such work plus an administrative fee shall be paid
by the owner and the city may levy and assess the costs and expenses of the
work upon the lot or property so benefitted in the same manner as other special
taxes for improvements are levied and assessed.
      (5)   Section 302.8. Amend to read as follows:
         302.8 Vehicles. No inoperative or unlicensed vehicle shall be parked,
kept, or stored outside on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in
a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or
dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an
approved spray booth.
         Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major
overhaul, including body work; provided, that such work is performed inside a
structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes.
      (6)   Section 303.14 (first line). Insert: April 1.
      (7)   Section 303.14 (second line). Insert: October 1.
(Prior Code, § 94.01) (Ord. 1686, passed 8-13-2001; Ord. 1760, passed 5-10-
2004; Ord. 1862, passed 3-10-2008)
§ 94.02 HEALTH OFFICER.
   The Chief of Police shall be the health officer of the city. As such, it
shall be his or her duty to enforce the provisions of this chapter; to execute
all the orders of the Board of Health; to notify the Mayor and the
Superintendent of the city schools of the existence within the city of every
case of contagious, infectious, or malignant disease; and to see to the posting
of the notices required by §
94.15. He or she shall have authority to arrest and confine any person who may
violate any of the rules or regulations prescribed by the Board of Health or by
the Mayor and Council.
(Prior Code, § 94.02)
§ 94.03 BOARD OF HEALTH; JURISDICTION; DUTIES.
   (A)   The jurisdiction of the Board of Health shall be coextensive with the
corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Board of Health from time to time to
examine the sanitary conditions of the city, and whenever the Board shall
ascertain that any accumulations of filth, vegetable, or animal substance
exists at any place within the city or its jurisdiction, which on account of
its decomposition or foulness the Board shall find tends to produce disease, or
facilitates the multiplication of germs of any disease, or in anywise infects
or contaminates any cistern or water supply, the Board shall issue its order
commanding the owner of the premises on which the filth or substance may be
found, to immediately remove the same and make a complete disposal of the same;
and if such owner fails forthwith to obey such order, such removal and disposal
shall be made by the Board and the expense thereof paid by such owner. If any
structure or building by the accumulation of filth and decay of its substance
be found by the Board within the city to be the source or center of infection
or spreading of the germs of any infections or contagious disease, or be found
by the Board to constitute a public health nuisance, the Board of Health shall
order its immediate removal and destruction, such order to be addressed to the
owner of the premises, whereupon such building or structure shall be found, and
on his or her refusal or neglect to forthwith remove the same from the
jurisdiction of the city, the same shall be destroyed and removed by the Board
and such owner shall pay the cost of such removal and destruction. It is hereby
made the duty of every person who may have knowledge of the existence of any
such accumulation of filth, vegetable, or animal matter or any such structure
or building, as specified in this section, immediately upon obtaining such
knowledge, to notify the Board of Health thereof.
(Prior Code, § 94.03) (Ord. passed 9-19-1939)
HEALTH REGULATIONS
§ 94.15 CONTAGIOUS DISEASE; NOTICE.
   It shall be the duty of each householder in the city to notify the
Superintendent of the city schools, physician, or the Chief of Police of any
case of contagious disease in the house occupied by him or her, and it shall
also be his or her duty to post in a conspicuous place upon the premises a
notice that can be read from the street, of the existence of such disease,
naming the same. It shall be unlawful for any such householder in any manner to
conceal the existence of any such disease upon his or her premises.
(Prior Code, § 94.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.16 MINORS; MEDICAL ATTENTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian or person having custody of
any child, to fail or neglect to secure proper medical attendance at the
illness of any such child from any contagious or infectious disease.
(Prior Code, § 94.11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.17 PRIVIES; CESSPOOLS.
   (A)   All privies, cesspools, or outhouses now existing or hereafter
suffered to remain within the corporate limits of the city must be kept clean.
All privies, outhouses, or cesspools must be cleaned whenever their condition
is, by the Board of Health, deemed detrimental to the public health. The
contents of privy vaults when covered must be buried under at least two feet of
earth.
   (B)   All cesspools, when abandoned, shall be cleaned to the bottom and be
filled with earth, ashes, brickbats, or other similar substances. Covers
attached to cesspools shall be maintained in a safe condition and shall be
airtight.
   (C)   Any person who shall refuse or neglect to clean or remove the contents
of any privy, cesspool, or outhouse on premises owned or occupied by him or her
within 48 hours after notice from the Chairperson of the Board of Health so to
do, shall be deemed guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 94.12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.18 STAGNANT WATER.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of land
within the corporate limits and zoning jurisdiction of the city to permit any
stagnant water or other deleterious substance to collect or remain thereon. It
is unlawful to allow any articles or materials that may be likely to accumulate
stale or stagnant water so as to be a breeding area for mosquitoes or other
insects or that provides a haven for rodents or insects. Every owner or
occupant of such lot or parcel of land, when the same is necessary, shall
drain, fill, or otherwise eliminate the condition so as to prevent any such
accumulation thereon.
(Prior Code, § 94.13) (Ord. 1760, passed 5-10-2004) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 94.19 REFUSE IN STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cast or pour, or cause to be cast or
poured, upon any lot, street, alley, avenue, or public ground within the limits
of the city any slop, refuse, matter, papers, old clothes, straw, manure, or
other substance, matter or liquid, calculated to befoul the air.
(Prior Code, § 94.14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.20 VACANT LOTS; FILTH.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to
wilfully, maliciously, or negligently place or throw, or cause to be paced or
thrown upon vacant lots or on the premises of another, any filth, refuse,
matter, or other things to the annoyance of the owner or occupant thereof and
any person so offending, shall be deemed guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 94.15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.21 DEAD ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place dead animals or fowls or permit
the same, which are his or hers, or under his or her control, to be placed on
any street, avenue, alley, park, or other public grounds, but such person shall
forthwith bury the same; provided, the dead animals or fowls shall not be
placed on the municipal dumping ground without permission of the Chief of
Police.
(Prior Code, § 94.16) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.22 FEED LOTS; STOCK PENS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city
to use or employ any building or premises, now or hereafter erected or existing
in the city, as a stockyards, animal weighing pen, whether temporarily used for
weighing, loading, or unloading during transportation or not, or as a
commercial cattle, hog, sheep, or animal feed lot. No cattle, hogs, sheep, or
other animals shall be kept or suffered to remain within the corporate limits
of the city unless the pens or other enclosures in which the animals are kept
shall at all times be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition so that no
deleterious or offensive odor is emitted therefrom which taints the air or
renders it unwholesome or offensive to the smell; provided, no live swine or
place for feeding or keeping swine shall hereafter be kept, maintained or
suffered to remain at any place within the corporate limits of the city which
is nearer or closer than 200 feet to any building, the property of another or
used by another for business or residential purposes. None of above is
prohibited if it is located in the industrial area north and northeast of the
Union Pacific Railroad right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 94.17) (Ord. 554, passed 7-19-1966) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.23 FOOD SERVICE; STERILIZATION REQUIRED.
   Every person, serving food or drinks to the public shall hereafter sterilize
all glasses, dishes, or other receptacles employed or used in connection with
the business before serving food or drink therein to each patron or customer.
(Prior Code, § 94.18)
§ 94.24 LITTERING.
   The throwing or depositing of litter on any property within the city is
prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 94.19) (Ord. 1686, passed 8-13-2001) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 94.25 OWNER OF LOT; DUTIES.
   The owner or occupant of any lot or piece of ground within the municipality
shall keep the lot or piece of ground and the adjoining streets and alleys free
of any growth of eight inches or more in height of weeds, grasses, or worthless
vegetation.
(Prior Code, § 94.20) (Ord. 1870, passed 7-14-2008)
§ 94.26 SPILLAGE; SCATTERING OF SOLID WASTE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to:
   (A)   Haul, transport, handle, or store solid waste within the city in such
a manner as to case or allow it to be strewn upon any street or alley or public
or private property; or
   (B)   Cause solid waste to be strewn upon any street or alley or public or
private property while filling an approved container or while removing solid
waste from an approved container.
(Prior Code, § 94.21) (Ord. 1979, passed 3-10-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
NUISANCES
§ 94.40 DEFINITION.
   (A)   General definition. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      NUISANCE. Consists in doing any unlawful act, or omitting to perform a
duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which
act, omission, condition, or thing either:
         (a)   Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or safety of
others;
         (b)   Offends decency;
         (c)   Is offensive to the senses;
         (d)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, tends to obstruct, or
renders dangerous for passage any stream, public park, parkway, square, street,
or highway in the city;
         (e)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of
property; or
         (f)   Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life
and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.
   (B)   Specific definition. The maintaining, using, placing, depositing,
leaving, or permitting of any of the following specific acts, omissions,
places, conditions, and things are hereby declared to be NUISANCES:
      (1)   Any odorous, putrid, unsound, or unwholesome grain, meat, hides,
skins, feathers, vegetable matter, or the whole or any part of any dead animal,
fish, or fowl;
      (2)   Privies, vaults, cesspools, dumps, pits, or like places which are
not securely protected from flies or rats, or which are foul or malodorous;
      (3)   Filthy, littered, or trash-covered cellars, houseyards, barnyards,
stableyards, factory yards, mill yards, vacant areas in rear of stores,
granaries, vacant lots, houses, buildings, or premises;
      (4)   Animal manure in any quantity which is not securely protected from
flies and the elements, or which is kept or handled in violation of any
ordinance of the city;
      (5)   Liquid household waste, human excreta, garbage, butcher’s trimmings
and offal, parts of fish, or any waste vegetable or animal matter in any
quantity; provided, that nothing herein contained shall prevent the temporary
retention of waste in receptacles in a manner provided by the health officer of
the city, nor the dumping of non-putrefying waste in a place and manner
approved by the health officer;
      (6)   Tin cans, bottles, glass, cans, ashes, small pieces of scrap iron,
wire metal articles, bric-a-brac, broken stone or cement, broken crockery,
broken glass, broken plaster, and all trash or abandoned material, unless the
same be kept in covered bins or galvanized iron receptacles;
      (7)   Trash, litter, rags, accumulations of barrels, boxes, crates,
packing crates, mattresses, bedding, excelsior, packing hay, straw, or other
packing material, lumber not neatly piled, scrap iron,
tin, or other metal not neatly piled, old automobiles or parts thereof, or any
other waste materials when any of the articles or materials create a condition
in which flies or rats may breed or multiply, or which may be a fire danger, or
which are so unsightly as to depreciate property values in the vicinity
thereof;
      (8)   Any unsightly building, billboard, or other structure, or any old,
abandoned, or partially destroyed building or structure or any building or
structure commenced and left unfinished, which buildings, billboards, or other
structures are either a fire hazard, a menace to the public health or safety,
or are so unsightly as to depreciate the value of property in the vicinity
thereof;
      (9)   All places used or maintained as junk yards, or dumping grounds, or
for the wrecking and disassembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors, or
machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn-out, wrecked, or
abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any kind, or of any of
the parts thereof, or for the storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment
used by contractors or builders or by other persons, which places are kept or
maintained so as to essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of
life or property by others, or which are so unsightly as to tend to depreciate
property values in the vicinity thereof;
      (10)   Stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of
ground;
      (11)   Stockyards, granaries, mills, pig pens, cattle pens, chicken pens,
or any other place, building, or enclosure, in which animals or fowl of any
kind are confined or on which is stored tankage or any other animal or
vegetable matter, or on which any animal or vegetable matter including grain is
being processed, when the places in which the animals are confined, or the
premises on which the vegetable or animal matter is located, are maintained and
kept in such a manner that foul and noxious odors are permitted to emanate
therefrom to the annoyance of inhabitants of the city or are maintained and
kept in such a manner as to be injurious to the public health;
      (12)   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance to permit, allow or
maintain any growth of eight inches or more in height of weeds, grasses, or
worthless vegetation or to litter or cause junk or litter to be deposited or
remain thereon except in proper receptacles; or
      (13)   All other things specifically designated as nuisances elsewhere in
this code.
(Prior Code, § 94.30) (Ord. 1870, passed 7-14-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.41 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of real estate in the
city to keep that real estate free of public nuisances. Upon determination by
the City Council that the owner or occupant has failed to keep the real estate
free of public nuisances, notice to abate and remove the nuisance and notice of
the right to a hearing before the City Council and the manner in which it may
be requested shall be given to the owner or occupant, or the owner’s or
occupant’s duly authorized agent, by personal service or certified mail. This
notice shall describe the condition as found by the City Council and state that
the condition has been declared a public nuisance and that the condition must
be remedied at once. Within ten days after the receipt of the notice, if the
owner or occupant of the real estate does not request a hearing or fails to
comply with the order to abate and remove the nuisance, the city shall have the
work done and may levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work upon the
real estate so benefitted in the same manner as other special taxes for
improvements are levied and assessed.
   (B)   If the owner or occupant requests in writing a hearing with the City
Council, the City Council shall fix a time and place at which a hearing will be
held. Notice of the hearing shall be given by personal service or certified
mail and require the owner or occupant to appear before the City Council to
show cause why the condition should not be found to be a public nuisance and
remedied. This notice shall be given not less than seven nor more than 14 days
before the time of the hearing. Upon the date fixed for the hearing and
pursuant to the notice, the City Council shall hear all objections made by the
owner or occupant and shall hear evidence submitted. If, after consideration of
all the evidence, the City Council finds that the condition is a public
nuisance, it shall, by resolution, order and direct the owner or occupant to
remedy the public nuisance at once. If the owner or occupant refuses or
neglects to promptly comply with the order of the City Council, the City
Council shall proceed to cause the abatement of the described public nuisance
and may levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work upon the real estate
so benefitted in the same manner as other special taxes for improvements are
levied and assessed.
   (C)   If after the City Council has determined that a public nuisance exists
in accord with the provisions and procedures set forth herein above, and the
property owner and or tenant fails or refuses to comply with the City Council’s
order to remedy the public nuisance within the time proscribed by the City
Council, and the City Council is forced to abate and remedy the nuisance, the
City Council may, in its discretion, employ the following procedure in its
abatement of the nuisance.
      (1)   Personal property which is reasonably estimated to have a value of
less than $250 or less shall be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by
the City Council or its agents. Personal property reasonably estimated to have
a value in excess of $250 shall be disposed of at public auction by competitive
bidding.
      (2)   Notice of the time and place of the public sale shall be given by
publishing the same once a week for no less than two consecutive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county where the public sale is to be
held. The sale shall be held at the nearest suitable place to the place where
the subject property is held or stored. The advertisement shall include a
description of the property to be sold, the name of the owner of the property,
and the time and place of the sale. The sale shall take place no sooner than
ten days after the first publication. The last publication shall be no less
than five days before the sale is to be held.
      (3)   In addition to the notice provided for herein, notice of public
sale shall be served personally or by first-class mail, postage prepaid, upon
the owner of the subject property prior to the first published notice of the
sale, and shall contain one of the following statements, as appropriate:
         (a)   “You are hereby notified that the Gering City Council has
elected to abate the public nuisance by public sale. If you fail to remedy or
remove the nuisance property, it will be sold at public sale after notice of
the sale has been given by publication. You have the right to bid on the
property at this sale. After the property is sold and the costs of storage,
advertising, and sale are deducted the remaining money will be turned over to
the State Treasurer pursuant to the Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property
Act, being Neb. RS 69-1329 et seq. You may claim the remaining money from the
office of the State Treasurer as provided in such act;” or
         (b)   “Because the property subject to abatement is believed to be
worth less than $250, it may be kept, sold, or destroyed without further notice
if you fail to remove the subject property within the time indicated in this
notice.”
      (4)   Any such notice of sale shall describe all or a portion of the
property to be sold in a manner reasonably adequate to permit the owner of the
property to identify the subject property.
       (5)   After deduction of the reasonable costs of storage, advertising,
and sale, any proceeds from the sale not claimed by the person(s) having an
interest in the sale proceeds shall, not later than 30 days after the date of
said sale, be remitted to the State Treasurer for disposition pursuant to the
Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act.
      (6)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the property
owner from bidding on the property which is subject to sale. The successful
bidder’s title shall be subject to the ownership rights, liens, and security
interests, if any, which have priority by law.
(Prior Code, § 94.31) (Ord. 1894, passed 7-27-2009)
§ 94.42 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The Mayor and Police Department are directed to enforce this municipal
code against all nuisances.
   (B)   The jurisdiction of the Mayor, Police Department, and court shall
extend to and the territorial application of this chapter shall include all
territory adjacent to the limits of the city within one mile thereof and all
territory within the corporate limits.
(Prior Code, § 94.32)
Statutory reference:
   Zoning jurisdiction, see Neb. RS 16-246
§ 94.43 ADJOINING LAND OWNERS; INTERVENTION BEFORE TRIAL.
   In cases of appeal from an action of the City Council condemning real
property as a nuisance or as dangerous under the police powers of the city, the
owners of the adjoining property may intervene in the action at any time before
trial.
(Neb. RS 19-710)
§ 94.44 DEAD OR DISEASED TREES.
   (A)   It is hereby declared a nuisance for a property owner to permit,
allow, or maintain any dead or diseased trees within the right-of-way of
streets within the corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   It is hereby declared a nuisance for a property owner to permit,
allow, or maintain any dead or diseased trees on private property within the
corporate limits of the city. For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of
this section, the Police Department shall have the authority to enter upon
private property to inspect the trees thereon.
   (C)   Notice to abate and remove such a nuisance and notice of the right to
a hearing and the manner in which it may be requested shall be given to each
owner or owner’s duly authorized agent and to the occupant, if any, by personal
service or certified mail. Within 30 days after the receipt of this notice, if
the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground does not request a hearing
or fails to comply with the order to abate and remove the nuisance, the city
may have the work done and may levy and assess all or any portion of the costs
and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground so benefitted in the
same manner as other special taxes for improvements are levied or assessed.
(Prior Code, § 94.34)
§ 94.45 NOXIOUS ODORS; UNCLEAN PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit to be emitted from any
premises, including buildings, structures, and grounds, owned, leased, or
otherwise controlled by such person within the city, any noxious, noisome, or
offensive exhalations, odors, smells, or fumes which are injurious or dangerous
to the health, comfort, or property of any persons within the city, or to
permit any such premises to be or become unclean, nauseous, foul, or offensive,
to the injury of or danger to the health, comfort, or property of any persons
within the city. Each day that such a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense. Any act of omission prohibited by this section shall
constitute a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 94.35) (Ord. 1170, passed 7-23-1979) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.46 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND CONTAINERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of
any dwelling, building, or other structure, or within any abandoned building,
structure, or dwelling under his or her control, any abandoned, unattended, or
discarded ice box, refrigerator, or similar appliance or any other container
which has a door or lid, snap lock, or other locking device which may not be
released from the inside of the ice box, refrigerator, similar appliance, or
other container, without either removing the door or lid from the ice box,
refrigerator, or similar appliance or other container, or affixing a lock
thereon so that the same cannot be opened without the key and, further, keeping
the same locked when unattended.
(Prior Code, § 94.36) (Ord. 647, passed 7-14-1969) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 94.47 PLASTIC BAGS; WARNING REQUIRED; NUISANCE.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      PLASTIC COVERINGS, PLASTIC BAG, or PLASTIC PACKAGE. Any covering,
package, or bag made of plastic material sufficiently thin and pliable to
respond to static electricity created by contact with the human body to the
extent that it clings to the human skin or body.
   (B)   Warning required. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his
or her possession, or to deliver as a cover or wrapper, any plastic bag that is
of sufficient size to fit over a child’s head, or any bag which, when open, has
an opening larger than 20 inches or a capacity of more than 125 cubic inches,
unless there is at all times clearly printed on such bag or covering, or on a
paper attached to such bag or covering, words in letters at least one-quarter-
inch high as follows: “Warning: To avoid danger of suffocation keep this bag
(or covering) away from babies and children. Do not use in cribs, beds,
carriages or play pens. This is not a toy.”
   (C)   Certain bags a nuisance. Any plastic bag, covering or package not
carrying or accompanied by the printed warning as provided in division (B)
above is hereby declared a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 94.37) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 95: STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC WAYS
Section
General Provisions
   
95.01   Snow, ice, sleet, and mud removal from sidewalks
   
95.02   Merchandise on sidewalks
   
95.03   Riding or driving on sidewalks
   
95.04   Overhanging branches
   
95.05   Basement entrances; outside stairways
   
95.06   Awnings
   
95.07   Utility right-of-way; requirements
   
95.08   Fences
Streets
   
95.20   Maintenance; numbering
   
95.21   Opening; improving; vacating
   
95.22   Paving; protection; street signs
   
95.23   Curb; driving over prohibited
   
95.24   Excavations; permit required
   
95.25   Barricades and lights
   
95.26   House numbering
   
95.27   Railroad grade crossings
Sidewalks; Curbs
   
95.40   Property owners; duty
   
95.41   New sidewalk; notice
   
95.42   Reconstruction; notice
   
95.43   Repairing sidewalk; notice
   
95.44   Failure to construct
   
95.45   Contracts
   
95.46   Materials
   
95.47   Parking; lot lines
   
95.48   Nonconformance; power of city
   
95.49   Assessment sheets
   
95.50   Special assessments
   
95.51   Uniformity required
   
95.52   Construction regulations
   
95.53   Curbs; specifications
   
95.54   Supervision of construction
 
   
95.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.01 SNOW, ICE, SLEET, AND MUD REMOVAL FROM SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Snow, ice, and mud. It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any lot
or lots, or the owner of any vacant lot or lots within the corporate limits of
the city, to allow snow, sleet, mud, ice, or other substance to accumulate on
the sidewalk contiguous thereto, or to permit any hard trodden snow, sleet,
ice, mud, or other substances to remain upon said sidewalk; but such sidewalk
shall be cleaned within 12 hours after the cessation of a storm. In addition,
any snow, sleet, ice, mud, or other substance which remains on a sidewalk
contrary to the provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance, in the discretion of the city Transportation Superintendent or other
agent of the city.
   (B)   Notice to remove and penalty. Notice to remove such substance shall be
made upon the owner or occupant of the premises, or their agent. If the person
owning or occupying such premises be unknown or cannot be found, or if any
reasonable service cannot be had upon any such owner, agent or occupant within
the city, then such service of said notice shall be made by posting a notice in
a conspicuous place on the premises.
   (C)   Emergency. If the Transportation Superintendent or another agent of
the city shall determine that an accumulation of snow, sleet, ice, or mud is so
unsafe, or is unsafe in a respect such that a delay in removal thereof would
result in undue danger or other hazard to the public, he or she may declare in
writing that there exists an emergency requiring that the snow, sleet, ice, or
mud be removed immediately and order the owner or occupant to remove the snow,
sleet, ice, or mud from public walkways and sidewalks.
(Prior Code, § 95.01) (Ord. 2038 passed 9-26-2016; Ord. 2059, passed 2-12-2018)
Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.02 MERCHANDISE ON SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, without first
having complied with §
113.10, to erect, maintain, or suffer to remain on any street or public
sidewalk or on any portion of the area between the lot line and the curb line
of any street, any stand, wagon, merchandise, machinery, or any other
obstruction injurious to, inconvenient, or inconsistent with the public use of
the same; provided that a reasonable time shall be allowed to remove goods,
wares, and merchandise being received and shipped.
(Prior Code, § 95.02) (Ord. 2124, passed - -2023) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.03 RIDING OR DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS.
   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to ride, drive, or permit to
pass, any animal or motor vehicle, bicycle, or motorcycle, or to coast with
express wagons or any other kindred pedaled vehicles over, upon, or across any
sidewalk or sidewalk space between the lot line and the curb, parked plot or
parking on or along any public street.
(Prior Code, § 95.03) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.04 OVERHANGING BRANCHES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of
ground within the city to allow the branches or limbs of any trees growing
thereon to extend over any sidewalk, street, or alley abutting or adjacent to
the lot or parcel of ground below a height of eight feet from the ground. The
owner or occupant of the lot or parcel of ground shall at all times keep the
branches or limbs of the trees trimmed to the height of at least eight feet
above the surface of the sidewalk, street, or alley.
   (B)   Whenever the limbs or branches of any tree extends over the sidewalk,
street, or alley contrary to the provisions of this section so as to interfere
with the convenience or safety of the public using the sidewalk, street, or
alley, it shall be the duty of the Street Superintendent or other appointive
officer designated by the Mayor to notify in writing the owner or occupant
whose lot or lands abut the sidewalk, street, or alley to cut, trim, and remove
the limbs or branches, and if the limbs or branches are not cut, trimmed, and
removed within five days after the notice is given, the limbs and branches
shall be cut, trimmed, and removed at the expense of the city. The money thus
expended shall be recovered by the city from the owner or occupant of aforesaid
before any court of competent jurisdiction, or shall be assessed as a special
tax upon the property owner and be collected as a special tax assessment.
   (C)   Branches of trees, whether the tree is a street tree or is on private
property abutting the right-of-way of a public street or alley, shall be kept
pruned in such manner as not to obstruct light from any street light on the
street, or the view from any street intersection on the part of the operator of
a vehicle approaching the intersection. Branches overhanging the sidewalk, a
portion of the street used by vehicles, or an alley shall be kept pruned to a
height not less than ten feet above the surface of the sidewalk, and not less
than 12 feet above the surface of such portion of the street and of alleys. Any
tree which, because of an unsafe condition is hazardous to persons or property
on a sidewalk or portion of a street used by vehicles; any tree which by its
nature is injurious to utility, sewer, water, or gas lines or other public
improvements situated within the right-of-way of a street or alley; and any
tree, whether a street tree or a tree situated on private property, which is
affected by any injurious insect, disease, dead or dying shall be removed. Any
branches referred to herein above which are not pruned as herein above
provided, and any trees referred to in the immediately preceding sentence, are
hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of any person who owns, occupies, or has the
control or management of any lot or tract of land on which is situated, or
which abuts a portion of the right-of-way of a public street or alley on which
is situated, a tree having branches referred to in §
97.04(A), to cause all such branches to be pruned as required in such section,
or any tree that is unsafe or injurious or affected by an insect or disease,
dead or dying as provided in such section, to cause such tree to be removed.
(Prior Code, § 95.04) (Ord. 467, passed 8-18-1964; Ord. 1417, passed 10-24-
1989) Penalty, see §
95.99 
§ 95.05 BASEMENT ENTRANCES; OUTSIDE STAIRWAYS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain or suffer to
remain any cellarway, window, door area, basement entrance, or outside stairway
in, through, over or upon any sidewalk, pavement, street, or alley within the
corporate limits.
(Prior Code, § 95.05) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.06 AWNINGS.
   All awnings hereafter erected or suffered to remain in the sidewalk space
shall be of canvas on iron frames. All awnings shall be elevated at least six
and one-half feet at their lowest part from the top of the public sidewalk and
shall not project over the sidewalk to exceed three-fourths of the width
thereof. They shall be supported without posts by iron brackets or by an iron
framework attached firmly to the building, so as to leave the sidewalk wholly
unobstructed thereby; provided, nothing herein shall be construed to prevent
the owner of any building from constructing a substantial awning or marquee of
noncombustible material supported without posts over the sidewalk space if
located flush with the outer edge thereof and if permission in writing shall
have first been secured from the Mayor and Council.
(Prior Code, § 95.06)
§ 95.07 UTILITY RIGHT-OF-WAY; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines, and other appurtenances of public
service companies shall be erected or located over, upon, or under the streets,
alleys, and common grounds, or elsewhere, within the corporate limits of the
city, only after application shall have been made to the Committee on Streets
and Alleys thereof and permission in writing shall have been given by the Mayor
and Council so to do. Public service companies heretofore or hereafter granted
right-of-way for the erection and maintenance of poles, conduits, gas mains,
pipe lines, and wires, and all appurtenances thereto, for the purpose of
transacting their business upon, under, and over the streets, alleys, and
public grounds of the city shall at all times, when requested by the Mayor and
Council, erect, locate, or relocate their poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines,
and other appurtenances to such places and in such manner as designated by the
Mayor and Council of the city. Such poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines, and
other appurtenances shall be removed or relocated by the companies at their own
expense when requested to do so by the Mayor and Council.
   (B)   Whenever it becomes necessary for the Mayor and Council to use the
ground where the poles,
wires, gas mains, pipe lines, and other appurtenances are located, or whenever
reasonable means of ingress or egress to private or public property or the
public safety or convenience requires the relocation of the poles, wires, gas
mains, pipe lines, or other appurtenances of public service companies which now
occupy any portion of the public street or alley from lot line to lot line, the
Mayor and Council shall notify the company and the company shall, within 24
hours after receiving the notice, at their own expense, cause the poles, wires,
gas mains, pipe lines, or other appurtenances to be removed. The Mayor and
Council of the city shall designate some place as close as possible where the
poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines, and/or other appurtenances may be reset or
placed.
   (C)   All poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines, and/or other appurtenances
shall be erected in such a manner that they will not interfere with the light
system or water system of the city located on the same street or alley, or with
the travel through the streets and alleys of the city, or with the buildings
now erected or which may be hereafter erected. When permitted, such pole lines,
wires, gas mains, pipe lines, and/or other appurtenances shall be confined to
the alleys, where possible.
(Prior Code, § 95.07) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.08 FENCES.
   No fence shall be erected in the area between the abutting lot line and the
curb line of any public street without first obtaining a permit granted by the
city upon an application in writing. Such permits shall be granted on the
conditions that the owner of the fence or the lot abutting the street shall
remove the fence whenever ordered to do so by the City Engineer, and that in
the event the owner does not comply with such order the city may remove the
fence without liability of any nature, kind or description to the owner.
(Prior Code, § 95.08) Penalty, see §
95.99
STREETS
§ 95.20 MAINTENANCE; NUMBERING.
   The Mayor and Council may, by resolution, order the grading, draining, or
ditching of streets within the corporate limits of the city whenever deemed
necessary and tax the cost thereof to the general fund or road fund. All
streets within the corporate limits of the city shall be designated by
appropriate name or number.
(Prior Code, § 95.20)
§ 95.21 OPENING; IMPROVING; VACATING.
   The Mayor and Council, whenever a majority of the Council may deem it
necessary, may open, widen, or otherwise improve or vacate any street, avenue,
alley, or lane, or otherwise create, open, and improve any new street, avenue,
alley, or lane within the corporate limits of this city in accordance with the
procedure established by law.
(Prior Code, § 95.21)
§ 95.22 PAVING; PROTECTION; STREET SIGNS.
   No person shall remove, destroy, or tear down any barricade, fence, railing,
or other device erected or constructed for the purpose of protecting paving or
any other work while in the course of construction or after it has been
constructed on any of the streets, alleys, or public grounds of the city. No
person shall drive over or upon or go upon any paving or other public works in
any of the streets, alleys, or public grounds of the city while the same is
protected by any barrier, fence, or railing, or until such barrier, fence, or
railing has been removed by the contractors having such work in charge, or by
the duly authorized officials of the city. It is hereby declared to be unlawful
for any person to mark, deface, destroy, remove, or carry away any street sign
or highway marker erected either by authority of the city or by the state
within the corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 95.22) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.23 CURB; DRIVING OVER PROHIBITED.
   It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to drive, propel, or haul any
truck, tractor, or other vehicle over any curb in any street or alley within
the corporate limits.
(Prior Code, § 95.23) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.24 EXCAVATIONS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any cut or excavation in or upon
any paved street or alley in the city without having received a permit in
writing from the Public Works Director; provided, no such permit shall be
granted except upon the written application of the party desiring the same,
which application shall have the written approval of the Public Works Director
endorsed thereon, shall specify the location of the proposed cut or excavation,
the superficial area of the surface to be displaced, and an estimate of time
required for the completion of the work, and the permit shall be limited to the
facts stated in the application. No person shall cut down, remove, or tear away
any sidewalk or curb abutting premises owned or occupied by him or her unless
he or she shall likewise receive a written permit from the Public Works
Director with the written approval of the Public Works Director endorsed
thereon; and such permit shall include a written condition to the effect that
such person shall replace or restore the curb at any time upon order of the
Public Works Director. Before any permit is issued by the Public Works
Director, the applicant shall deposit with the Treasurer a sum as set by the
City Council per square foot for all paving, curb, or sidewalk to be cut. The
deposit shall be retained by the Treasurer until the Engineer certifies to the
Treasurer the fact that the curb, sidewalk, or paving has been replaced in a
workmanlike manner by the applicant; whereupon the deposit shall be returned to
the applicant, otherwise as much thereof as necessary shall be retained by city
to reimburse it for the cost of replacing the curb, sidewalk, or paving in a
satisfactory manner.
(Prior Code, § 95.24) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.25 BARRICADES AND LIGHTS.
   Any owner or occupant engaged in construction or demolition of any building
or improvement upon or near the public ways and property shall protect all
excavations or exposures of any kind by suitable barricades or guards by day
and by warning lights at night. The failure, neglect, or refusal of the owner
or occupant to erect and maintain such protections shall constitute a violation
of this section, and the city may stop all work upon the buildings and
improvements until suitable protections are erected and maintained in the
required manner.
Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.26 HOUSE NUMBERING.
   The houses and buildings situated within the corporate limits of the city
shall be numbered, as follows: beginning with K Street in the city, 100 numbers
shall be set apart for each and every block on all streets north therefrom,
beginning with 1,000 in the first block on all of the streets; provided,
however, that five units shall be allowed and reserved for each lot of 50 feet,
or parcel of land of 50 feet; and provided further, that all odd numbers shall
be given to the buildings on the west side of the streets, and all even numbers
shall be given to the buildings on the east side of the streets. Beginning with
5th Street 100 numbers shall be set apart for each and every block on all
streets west thereof commencing with 500 in the first block on all of the
streets; provided, however, that five units shall be allowed and reserved for
each lot of 50 feet or parcel of land of 50 feet, and provided further, that
all odd numbers shall be given to the buildings on the south side of the
streets, and all even numbers shall be given to the buildings on the north side
of the streets. It shall be the duty of the Engineer to designate the correct
number of any house or building when applied to for the same. Property owners
shall number, cause to be numbered, and keep numbered such houses or buildings
as they may own in the city, using figures of substantial materials, not less
than three inches in height; and the numbers shall be placed in a conspicuous
place on the side of or above the front door of the house or building to which
the same is attached.
(Prior Code, § 95.26)
§ 95.27 RAILROAD GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   Railroad grade crossings shall conform to the general grade of 10th
Street, 7th Street, and Country Club Road. The grade shall be established by
surveying the grade elevation at the crown of the road of the intersecting
street for a minimum distance of 100 feet on both sides of the railroad tracks,
but not including the railroad right-of-way portions for determining elevation,
and determining the mean elevation. The grade for the intersecting railroad
tracks shall be consistent with the mean grade of the intersecting street and
approved by the city.
   (B)   If the railroad tracks are not level because of curve banking, the
grade and design shall conform with the State Department of Roads, Roadway
Design Manual, current edition, for the existing motor vehicle traffic speed
and approved by the city.
   (C)   Railroad grades shall not be raised to an elevation greater than they
exist at the time of the approval of this section. A no-fee permit from the
city is required for any construction on the railroad crossings. Applications
for a permit must be accompanied by plans and profile of the grade crossing for
100 feet each side of the railroad tracks; geometric alignments; a reference to
the design standard in the State Department of Roads, Roadway Design Manual,
latest edition, used to design the crossing.
(Prior Code, § 95.27) (Ord. 1669, passed 8-28-2000) Penalty, see §
95.99
SIDEWALKS; CURBS
§ 95.40 PROPERTY OWNERS; DUTY.
   (A)   The owner of any lot or pieces of land within the corporate limits of
the city shall at all times keep and maintain the sidewalks along and
contiguous to the lot or pieces of land, as the case may be, in good and proper
repair, and in condition reasonably safe for all travelers thereon, and in case
the owner of any lot or land abutting on any street or avenue or part thereof
shall fail to construct or repair any sidewalk in front of his or her lot or
land within the time and in the manner as directed and required by this
subchapter, after having received due notice to do so, they shall be liable for
all damages or injury occasioned by reason of the defective or dangerous
condition of any sidewalk, and the Mayor and Council shall have the power to
cause such sidewalks to be constructed or repaired and assess the costs thereof
against such property.
   (B)   All sidewalks and curbs hereafter erected within the city shall be
constructed in accordance with plans and specifications thereof, prepared by
the City Engineer, and now on file in the office of the Clerk, except as herein
after specifically provided. All persons hereafter desiring to erect sidewalks
or curbs shall, at their own expense, procure and cause the Engineer to
establish the grade of such sidewalk or curb, and to indicate the same by
stakes, and the whole work or constructing such sidewalk or curb shall be under
the supervision of the Engineer.
   (C)   In the event any person constructs or attempts to construct sidewalks
or curbs not in accordance with this subchapter or with these specifications,
the Engineer shall have the authority to order such work stopped, and to order
that the work already done shall be changed to conform to legal requirements.
(Prior Code, § 95.40)
§ 95.41 NEW SIDEWALK; NOTICE.
   (A)   Whenever three-fourths of the Council shall deem it necessary that a
sidewalk should be constructed, reconstructed, repaired, or widened in front of
any lot or piece of ground in the city in a place where there is no sidewalk,
they shall so order by resolution and the Street Superintendent or other agent
of the Council shall thereupon serve on the owner of such lot or piece of
ground, or his or her agent, a copy of the resolution, which shall be
substantially in form as follows:
 
   RESOLUTION
 
   Gering, Nebraska
 
                         , 20     
 
Be It Resolved by the Mayor and Council of the City of Gering, Nebraska:
 
   1.   That a sidewalk be within 30 days from and after the service or publication of the within resolution constructed (reconstructed,
repaired, widened) and laid to the established grade on the                                      side of                            Street
in the City of Gering, Scotts Bluff County, Nebraska, adjoining the following described premises, to-wit:
 
   
   
 
in accordance with the following specifications, to-wit:
 
   
 
under the supervision of the Mayor and Council of the City of Gering, Scotts Bluff County, Nebraska, its City Engineer or other agent, and
in accordance with the provisions of §§
95.40 through
95.54.
 
   2.   That in the event of the failure of the owner or his or her agent to have such walk constructed (reconstructed, repaired, widened),
the Mayor and Council of the city will cause the same to be constructed (reconstructed, repaired, widened) and the entire cost of
construction thereof will be taxed as a special assessment against the within described premises as provided by law.
 
   3.   The City Engineer’s estimate for the construction of the work of improvement is               Dollars.
 
Attest:
 
                                     
   Mayor
                  
City Clerk
 
(SEAL)”
 
   RETURN
 
   I
 
   “I (or we), the undersigned owner or owners of the within described premises, acknowledge receipt of a copy of the within resolution.
 
   Dated at                              , this             , day of                     , 20       ,
                                                      
                                                      “ or
 
   II
 
“State of Nebraska,       )
County of Scotts Bluff    )
 
   I,                                                   , City Engineer, or                                  of the City of Gering, Scotts
Bluff County, Nebraska, hereby certify that I served a copy of the within resolution on                         by delivering to
                                       personally a true and correct copy of the within resolution with all the endorsements thereon on the
                day of                   , 20     .
 
                                 “
 
   (B)   If the owner of such lot or piece of ground, or his or her agent, be a
resident of the city, personal service of the resolution on the owner or his or
her agent shall be deemed sufficient notice. If the owner or his or her agent
be a non-resident of the city, or if a resident thereof and cannot be found, or
if the Council shall elect to serve notice on the owner or his or her agent by
publication, the Clerk shall cause a copy of the resolution to be addressed to
“                          ,” legal owners of the following described property;
“                           ,” to be published in a legal newspaper, designated
by the Mayor and Council, and of general circulation in the city, one
publication. The publisher of such legal newspaper, or his or her agent, shall
file with the Clerk an affidavit of the publication of the resolution as soon
as the publication herein required is completed. Such publication shall be
deemed good and sufficient notice to the owners of property, resident or non-
resident, in front of, abutting, or adjacent to which the sidewalk is to be
constructed (reconstructed, repaired, widened). The affidavit of the printer or
his or her agent shall be prima facie evidence of the publication herein
required and shall be preserved and made a part of the records of the city.
(Prior Code, § 95.41)
§ 95.42 RECONSTRUCTION; NOTICE.
   When three-fourths of the Council shall deem it necessary that an old
sidewalk be replaced or reconstructed, it shall order the same to be done and
the Street Superintendent or other agent of the city shall give notice in the
manner and form as provided in §
95.41, to replace or reconstruct the same within 30 days from and after such
notice; provided, however, that if three-fifths of the resident owners of
property, subject to the assessment of such sidewalk improvements, shall
petition the Council to make the same, the Council shall have no discretion in
the matter, but shall order the improvements to be made as by the statutes of
the state provided, without delay.
(Prior Code, § 95.42)
§ 95.43 REPAIRING SIDEWALK; NOTICE.
   Whenever the Engineer or Street Superintendent shall deem it necessary that
any sidewalk be repaired, or it shall be required by the Council or other agent
of the Council, he or she shall notify the owner of the lot or piece of land
along and contiguous to which such sidewalk is situated, to repair the same
within 24 hours from and after the giving of such notice; provided, that oral
notice to the owner shall be deemed sufficient. If the owner cannot be found by
the Engineer or Street Superintendent, then a written notice left in the house
situated on such lot or piece of ground or posted upon the premises shall be
sufficient and the 24 hours shall begin to run from the leaving or posting of
such notice, as the case may be. The 24-hour notice shall apply for emergency
situations only.
(Prior Code, § 95.43)
§ 95.44 FAILURE TO CONSTRUCT.
   If any such owner whose duty it is to construct, rebuild, or repair such
walk shall neglect or refuse, or shall have failed after notice shall have been
given as provided in this subchapter, to construct, replace, reconstruct, or
repair any sidewalk within the time limited in the notice given in such cases,
then the Engineer, Street Superintendent, or other officer empowered herein to
act shall proceed at once without further notice against such owner or person
to have such sidewalk constructed, repaired, reconstructed or rebuilt, as the
case may be, by the persons who have agreed with the Council to perform the
work and furnish all necessary materials therefor in accordance with §
95.45 and the expense of such work shall be assessed to such lot or parcel of
land, and collected as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 95.44)
§ 95.45 CONTRACTS.
   At the first regular meeting, or at any regular or special meeting of the
Mayor and Council in each municipal year, or at any regular or special meeting
thereafter, the Clerk shall be instructed to advertise for bids to perform all
work and furnish material necessary for laying such sidewalks within the
corporate limits as the Mayor and Council may order from time to time laid
during the current municipal year. The work shall be performed and material
furnished strictly in accordance with the terms and provisions of this
subchapter. The contractor shall, unless otherwise ordered by the Council,
receive his or her compensation for such work and material from the assessments
against the real estate in front of which the work is done, and shall accept in
full payment thereof city warrants issued against such assessments. The
contract for laying all sidewalks ordered by the Mayor and Council during the
municipal year shall be let by the Council to the lowest bidder, after
advertising for such bids for ten days in a legal newspaper of general
circulation in the city. The Council reserves the right to reject any and all
bids. The Engineer or other agent of the Council shall, before letting the
contract, make an estimate of the cost of the work and no contract for a sum in
excess of the estimate shall be made. The notice shall require bids per square
foot for sidewalks constructed of concrete, including the performance of work
and the furnishing of materials; provided, however, where the work of sidewalk
improvement does not exceed $20,000 in cost, advertisement for bids may be
dispensed with and the Mayor and Council may let sidewalk contracts to any
person bidding within the amount of the estimate of the Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 95.45)
§ 95.46 MATERIALS.
   (A)   All sidewalks and curbs on either side of the streets and avenues of
the city, in front of or along any lot or lands abutting upon the same, which
shall be hereafter constructed, reconstructed, or replaced, shall be of
concrete stone, brick, asphalt, or approved hard surface.
   (B)   No person shall construct, reconstruct, or replace any sidewalk or
curb of any other material within the limits of the city. Whenever any person
shall desire to construct or repair any sidewalk or curb, he or she shall
secure a permit from the Public Works Director before such work shall be
undertaken.
(Prior Code, § 95.46) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.47 PARKING; LOT LINES.
   Hereafter, there shall be reserved on each side of every street in the
residence section outside the fire limits in the city for sidewalks and the
cultivation of trees and grass, such space as the Mayor and Council by
resolution or ordinance shall fix, taking into consideration the matter of
uniformity with respect to sidewalks and curbs in same and in adjoining blocks.
No park space shall be cultivated and no plantings shall be made therein by any
property owner or his or her agent, without the written permission of the
Engineer, approved by action of the Mayor and Council pursuant to written
application of the property owner.
(Prior Code, § 95.47) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.48 NONCONFORMANCE; POWER OF CITY.
   In case any lot owner or the owners of a piece of land within the corporate
limits, under notice given or otherwise, shall construct a sidewalk in
violation of this subchapter, the Public Works Director or the officer in
charge of streets and highways may stop the work such construction and order
the same to be constructed in accordance with this subchapter, and the work
already done to be changed, and on the failure of such owner to change any such
work, the Public Works Director, Street Superintendent, or other officer shall
forthwith change such work, and the expense of same shall be assessed and taxed
to the lot as a special assessment and collected as if taxed, as provided by
law.
(Prior Code, § 95.48)
§ 95.49 ASSESSMENT SHEETS.
   The Public Works Director shall certify to the Council a detailed schedule
of all walks laid, widened or rebuilt and the cost of same against each lot or
piece of ground, and such other facts as may be necessary to enable it to make
the proper levy; and shall also certify to the Council the acceptance of any
walk so improved, or what other action he or she has taken with reference to
the walk. The Public Works Director with the aid of the Street Superintendent,
and the Committee on Public Works Director shall allocate the cost of sidewalk
improvement to the adjoining lots or parcels of land and prepare all necessary
data for assessment sheets.
(Prior Code, § 95.49)
§ 95.50 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   In case of corner lots, such lots shall not be charged with the costs of so
much additional walk as was required to be laid for the intersection of the
walks abutting the frontage of such lots, but all walks beyond the outer edge
of the sidewalk line shall be laid at the cost of the city. The cost of
construction, widening, repairing, or rebuilding any sidewalks shall be levied
by resolution, upon the lot or parcel of ground fronting and adjoining which
such sidewalks are laid, widened, repaired, or rebuilt, which resolution shall
specify the street upon which such walk had been so constructed, widened,
repaired, or rebuilt, and the length and width of each walk constructed,
widened, repaired, or rebuilt fronting on any lot or piece of ground. Such
assessment shall be made by the Council, sitting as a Board of Equalization, at
a special meeting by resolution, fixing the valuation of the lots assessed,
taking into account the benefits derived or injuries sustained in consequence
of such improvement, and the amount charged against the same, which, with the
vote thereon, by yeas and nays, shall be spread upon the minutes. Notice of the
time and place of holding such meeting and the purpose for which it is to be
held shall be published in a legal newspaper published or of general
circulation in the city, at least four weeks before the same shall be held or
in lieu thereof, personal service may be made upon the person owning the
property to be assessed. All such assessments shall be known as “special
assessments for improvement” and shall be levied and collected as a separate
tax in addition to the tax for general purposes, to be placed upon the tax roll
for collection, subject to the same penalties and collected in like manner as
other city taxes. Whenever any such special tax is levied, the Clerk shall
forthwith deliver a certified copy of such resolution to the County Clerk who
shall place the same on the tax list to be collected by law as in such cases
made and provided.
(Prior Code, § 95.50)
§ 95.51 UNIFORMITY REQUIRED.
   All sidewalks in the fire limits shall be laid with the inner edges thereof
plumb with the lot line and of such width as the Mayor and Council shall, by
resolution, from time to time, fix. All other sidewalks within the city shall
be at least five feet in width and the inner edge of the walk shall be placed
at such distance from the lot line as the Mayor and Council by resolution,
shall, from time to time, fix; provided, however, nothing herein shall be
construed to apply to walks along public buildings outside the fire limits
which may be ordered by the Mayor and Council to be constructed of greater
width, and provided further, where sidewalks are hereafter constructed outside
the fire limits adjoining sidewalks previously put in place and not in
accordance with the requirements of this section, the Public Works Director in
his or her discretion, may authorize the placing of such new sidewalks so as to
conform insofar as possible with previous structures; and the Public Works
Director is hereby vested with authority to waive the requirements of this
section and to direct the width and location of sidewalks in such manner as he
or she may deem feasible to secure uniformity as to sidewalks in the same
block.
(Prior Code, § 95.51)
§ 95.52 CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS.
   All sidewalks and curbs or combination curb and gutter hereafter constructed
in the city shall be composed of concrete or artificial stone, and shall be
composed and constructed as follows: In the construction of all concrete walks,
the surface of the ground shall be reduced to the proper grade and solidly
tamped so as to give the walk when finished a slope toward the abutting street
of one inch, if possible, to every four feet in width. In this, a foundation
not less than four inches thick shall be laid, which shall be evenly and
smoothly troweled. All cement walks shall be laid with a cutoff in at least
every 50 feet of walk by inserting a strip of wood or an asphalt expansion
joint, one-half-inch thick extending through to the ground. One-course cement
construction in building sidewalks shall only be permitted and allowed.
(Prior Code, § 95.52)
§ 95.53 CURBS; SPECIFICATIONS.
   All curbs in the corporate limits, until established curb lines shall have
been run and adopted by action of the Council shall be constructed with the
inner edges thereof at such distance from the lot line as the Public Works
Director shall fix in the permit for their construction, as this subchapter
required; provided, whenever paving districts shall hereafter be created, the
curbs on such streets included therein shall be constructed at such distance
from the lot line as the plans and specifications for such street improvement
indicate. All curbs, combination curbs, and gutters and sidewalks hereafter
constructed shall be placed on lines established by and at the elevations
provided in such official table of grades as may hereafter be provided for and
adopted by the Council; provided, that in all cases where curbs on unpaved
streets are to be erected adjoining curbs previously put in place, and not in
accordance with the requirements of this section, the Public Works Director, in
his or her discretion, may authorize the placing of such new curbs so as to
conform in the best possible manner to previous structures, and the Public
Works Director shall have authority to waive the requirements of this section
and to direct the location of curbs in such manner as he or she may deem
feasible.
(Prior Code, § 95.53)
§ 95.54 SUPERVISION OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The construction of all sidewalks and curbs shall be in accordance with
plans and specifications prepared by the Engineer and their construction shall
be supervised by and under the control of the Engineer, Street Superintendent,
and/or Committee on Public Works Director. It shall be unlawful to construct
any sidewalk or curb until stakes have been set for line and grade by the
Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 95.54)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any owner or occupant who fails to clean off and remove ice, snow,
mud, sleet, or other substance which constitutes a nuisance as required in §
95.01, and upon conviction thereof shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and
shall be fined $100.
(Prior Code, § 95.01)
CHAPTER 96: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
96.01   Definitions
   
96.02   Ownership of dogs
   
96.03   Control of dogs
   
96.04   Running at large
   
96.05   Livestock; keeping of fowl and poultry generally and running at large
   
96.06   Dogs or cats in heat
   
96.07   Dog and cat tax; tag
   
96.08   Dogs; barking
   
96.09   Dog fighting prohibited
   
96.10   Dog kennels
   
96.11   Abandonment, neglect and cruelty
   
96.12   Prohibitions and duties
   
96.13   Equine; bovine; prohibited acts
Rabies Prevention
   
96.25   Rabies shots
   
96.26   Dogs suspected of rabies
Dangerous Animals
   
96.40   Definitions
   
96.41   Control of dangerous animals; duty of owner
   
96.42   Destruction of dangerous animals; prosecution of owner
   
96.43   Keeping dangerous animals
Administration and Enforcement
   
96.55   Enforcement; by whom
   
96.56   Impounding; release
   
96.57   Clerk; duties
   
96.58   Chief of Police; compensation
   
96.59   Animal Warden; duties
 
   
96.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 96.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any vertebrate member of the animal kingdom other than an uncaptured
wild creature.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any person authorized by law or employed or
appointed for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement of this chapter or any
other law or ordinance relating to the licensing, control, seizure, or
impoundment of animals.
   OWNER.
      (1)   Any person who owns, possesses, keeps, harbors, or has charge,
custody, or control of an animal or permits an animal to habitually remain or
be lodged or fed within his or her house, store, building, enclosure, yard,
lot, grounds, or premises.
      (2)   OWNER does not include any veterinarian or kennel operator
temporarily maintaining on his or her premises an animal owned by another
person for not more than 30 days.
   RUN AT LARGE. Not being under the actual control of the owner by means of:
      (1)   A leash, cord, chain, or other suitable means of physical restraint
which is securely fastened or tethered in a manner sufficient to keep the
animal on the premises where tethered;
      (2)   A leash, cord, chain, or other suitable means of physical restraint
of 6 feet or less in length physically held by the owner;
      (3)   Being confined within a cage, receptacle, enclosed vehicle, fenced
enclosure, or shelter; or
      (4)   Being within the real property limits of the owner and in the
owner’s presence and under direct and effective voice or other control.
§ 96.02 OWNERSHIP OF DOGS.
   Any person who shall harbor or permit any dog to be for ten days or more, or
let the same habitually remain and be fed for the period of ten days or more in
or about his or her house, store, or enclosure shall be deemed the owner of
such dog, and shall be liable to the penalties prescribed for the violation of
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 96.02) (Ord. 312, passed 1-5-1950)
§ 96.03 CONTROL OF DOGS.
   (A)   Any dog, while on a street, sidewalk, public way, park, or other
public space shall be secured by a leash or chain of not more than six feet in
length and sufficient tensile strength to restrain the dog.
   (B)   All owners of any dog shall exercise care and control of such animal
necessary to prevent the same from becoming a public nuisance and to prevent
the same from entering upon any private property without the consent of the
owner or occupant of the property.
(Prior Code, § 96.03) (Ord. 1685, passed 7-23-2001; Ord. 1852, passed 7-9-2007)
Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.04 RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   All persons possessing, harboring, or having the care, custody, or
control of any animal within the city, shall at all times, keep such animal
confined within an enclosure, or secured by tying or on a leash and shall not
allow the animal to run loose.
   (B)   The owner or owners of any dog or dogs shall be liable for any and all
damages that may accrue to any person not in the act of a crime, by reason of
having been bitten by any such dog or dogs, and to any person, firm or
corporation by reason of such dog or dogs killing, wounding, or chasing any
person or persons, or any sheep or other domestic animals belonging to or cared
for by any such person, firm, or corporation. Such damage may be recovered in
any court having jurisdiction of the amount claimed. If two or more dogs owned
by different persons shall kill, wound, chase, or worry any sheep or other
domestic animal, such person shall be jointly and severally liable for all
damage done by such dogs. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impose
any liability upon the city, its officers, agents, or employees, for any
damages to persons or property caused by any dog or its owner.
(Prior Code, § 96.04) (Ord. 1188, passed 2-11-1980; Ord. 1685, passed 7-23-
2001; Ord. 1852, passed 7-9-2007) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.05 LIVESTOCK; KEEPING OF FOWL AND POULTRY GENERALLY AND RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A) The running at large of herding of horses, mules, cattle, hogs, sheep,
or goats upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks, or public grounds within the
corporate limits of the city; or the picketing, lariating, tying, or securing
by a rope or otherwise, of any animal upon any public street, alley, park,
railroad right-of-way, private grounds or another, or vacant lot without the
consent of the owner thereof, or the herding or running at large of any such
animals upon open grounds within the city, is hereby prohibited and declared to
be a nuisance.
   (B) Subject to zoning subdivision regulations, and restrictive covenants, is
unlawful to own, keep or harbor any fowl in the city limits excluding to own,
keep, or harbor chickens according to the following requirements: any person
owning chickens may own, keep, or harbor them in the backyard in the following
designated zoning districts: AGG, RRE, RL, RM, GCE; provided, that the
principal use relates only to property comprising of a single family dwelling.
Owning, keeping, or harboring more than four chickens is prohibited. Owning,
keeping, or harboring roosters is prohibited. Slaughtering chickens within the
city limits is prohibited. Chickens must be kept in a covered enclosure of no
greater than 100 square feet at all times. The covered enclosure must be kept
within a fenced backyard of a single family dwelling. Commercial sale of eggs
is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 96.05) (Ord. 2061, passed - -2018) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.06 DOGS OR CATS IN HEAT.
   The owner of any female dog or cat in heat shall keep that dog or cat
confined in such a manner that such animal cannot come into contact with any
other animal except for planned breeding purposes. The owner of any female dog
or cat that permits such dog or cat to run at large while in heat shall be
deemed guilty of an offense. The Chief of Police or other officer designated by
the Mayor and Council is hereby authorized to apprehend and confine such dog or
cat if found running at large in such condition.
(Prior Code, § 96.06) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.07 DOG AND CAT TAX; TAG.
   (A)   Every possessor of a dog or cat in the city shall pay to the agent
designated by the Mayor and Council as a dog and cat tax, the following annual
fee:
      (1)   A neutered or spayed animal: $6; and
      (2)   Any unneutered or unspayed animal: $11.
   (B)   The dog and cat tax shall be an annual fee. The dog and cat taxes
shall be collected on an annual basis and shall expire one year from the date
of issue. No owner of a spayed female dog or cat or neutered male dog or cat
shall be entitled to pay the tax assessed against such animal aforesaid, unless
he or she shall exhibit to the City Clerk or other officer designated for that
purpose, a sworn certificate by a veterinarian surgeon, duly licensed and
practicing in the state, to the effect that the dog or cat has been properly
spayed or neutered; provided further, that each person so paying shall have a
metallic tag attached to the collar of the dog or cat showing the number and no
dog or cat shall be permitted to roam at large without such tag being affixed
to the collar worn by such animal; such tag shall be furnished by the city or
its designated agent; and provided further, that the possessor of any animal
brought into or harbored within the corporate limits of the city shall be
liable for a dog or cat tax levy provided for herein.
   (C)   A 10% discount of the animal tax may be given to the owner of any
animal covered by this section upon verification with a photo identification
indicating the purchaser is 60 years of age or older.
   (D)   No license tax may be charged for certain dog guides, hearing and aid
dogs, and service dogs.
(Prior Code, § 96.07) (Ord. 1599, passed 1-12-1998; Ord. 1921, passed 9-27-
2010) Penalty, see §
96.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 54-603
§ 96.08 DOGS; BARKING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who is the owner of a dog to permit,
suffer, or allow any dog to bark continually or repeatedly with such frequency
and volume that such barking shall disturb the peace and quiet of any other
person within the city. Such barking of such dog is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 96.08) (Ord. 1389, passed 6-13-1988) Penalty, see §
96.99 
§ 96.09 DOG FIGHTING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons within the city to set dogs
to fighting by agreement or otherwise, or in any manner to urge, forward, or
encourage the same.
(Prior Code, § 96.09) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.10 DOG KENNELS.
   (A)   License required. No person shall conduct a dog kennel within the city
without first having secured a license therefor in accordance with the
provisions of this section; and when so licensed, such person shall operate
such dog kennel only during the term of the license.
   (B)   Application. An application for a license to operate a dog kennel
shall be made to the City Clerk by the owner or operator of the kennel. The
application shall state the name of the person desiring to operate the kennel,
the kind of breed, the number of dogs to be kept, the location of the kennel
and such additional information as may be required by the Clerk. No license
shall be issued until the Clerk has ascertained that the location of the kennel
complies with applicable zoning regulations.
   (C)   Term. Such license, if granted, shall remain in effect, unless
revoked, for a period of one year from the date of issuance.
   (D)   Regulations; general. For the purpose of regulating the operation and
conduct of dog kennels with the city, the following rules are hereby
established:
      (1)   All dogs shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times;
      (2)   All kennels shall be thoroughly disinfected with a recognized
disinfectant, not less than every 30 days during the months of November,
December, January, February, March, and April and not less than every 15 days
during the months of May, June, July, August, September, and October; and
      (3)   All dogs kept in kennels shall, at all times, be securely penned
up, except when in charge of the owner of the kennel or some employee thereof.
   (E)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, a DOG KENNEL shall be
defined as an enclosure where dogs are kept for the purpose of sale or an
enclosure where three or more dogs are confined for any purpose.
(Prior Code, § 96.10) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.11 ABANDONMENT, NEGLECT AND CRUELTY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ABANDON. To leave any animal in one’s care, whether as owner or
custodian, for any length of time without making effective provision for its
food, water, or other care as is reasonably necessary for the animal’s health.
      ANIMAL. Any vertebrate member of the animal kingdom. ANIMAL does not
include an uncaptured wild creature or a livestock animal as defined in this
section.
      BOVINE. A cow, an ox, or a bison.
      CRUELLY MISTREAT. To knowingly and intentionally kill, maim, disfigure,
torture, beat, mutilate, burn, scald, or otherwise inflict harm upon any
animal.
      CRUELLY NEGLECT. To fail to provide any animal in one’s care, whether as
owner or custodian, with food, water, or other care as is reasonably necessary
for the animal’s health.
      HUMANE KILLING. The destruction of an animal by a method which causes the
animal a minimum of pain and suffering.
      LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any member of the State Patrol, any county or
deputy sheriff, any member of the police force of the city or any other city or
village, or any other public official authorized by the city or any other city
or village to enforce state or local animal control laws, rules, regulations,
or ordinances. LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER also includes a special investigator
appointed as a deputy state sheriff as authorized pursuant to Neb. RS 81-201
while acting within the authority of the Director of Agriculture.
      LIVESTOCK ANIMAL. Any bovine, equine, swine, sheep, goats, domesticated
cervine animals, ratite birds, or poultry.
      OWNER or CUSTODIAN. Any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring, or
knowingly permitting an animal to remain on or about any premises owned or
occupied by such person.
      POLICE ANIMAL. A horse or dog owned or controlled by the state or any
county, city, or village for the purpose of assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of his or her official enforcement duties.
(Neb. RS 28-1008)
   (B)   Enforcement powers; immunity.
      (1)   A law enforcement officer who has reason to believe that an animal
has been abandoned or is being cruelly neglected or cruelly mistreated may seek
a warrant authorizing entry upon private property to inspect, care for, or
impound the animal.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of a law enforcement officer who has reason to
believe that an animal has been abandoned or is being cruelly neglected or
cruelly mistreated to make prompt investigation of such violation. A law
enforcement officer may, in lieu of making an arrest, issue a citation to the
owner or custodian as prescribed in Neb. RS 29-422 to 29-429.
      (3)   Any law enforcement officer acting under this section shall not be
liable for damage to property if such damage is not the result of the officer’s
negligence.
(Neb. RS 28-1012)
   (C)   Violation.
      (1)   A person who intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly abandons,
cruelly neglects, or cruelly mistreats an animal is guilty of an offense.
      (2)   A person commits harassment of a police animal if he or she
knowingly and intentionally teases or harasses a police animal in order to
distract, agitate, or harm the police animal for the purpose of preventing such
animal from performing its legitimate official duties.
(Neb. RS 28-1009)
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
Exemptions, see Neb. RS 28-1013 
   Serious illness or injury to animal; death of animal; felony, see Neb. RS
28-1008 and 28-1009
§ 96.12 PROHIBITIONS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The definition of OWNER in §
96.40 shall apply to this section.
   (B)   No person shall aid or cause any animal whether owned by such person
or not, to escape confinement or impoundment, whether such confinement or
impoundment be upon such person’s property or that of another, by opening any
gate, door, window, or by making any opening in any fence, enclosure, or
structure, or by unleashing the animal.
   (C)   It shall be prohibited for any person to permit or allow an animal
owned by that person or under that person’s custody or control to defecate upon
public property, park property, public right-of-way, or the property of
another, unless such person shall immediately thereafter clean up, remove, and
dispose of the feces so deposited.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of every person owning or having the custody or
control of an animal to clean up, remove, and dispose of the feces deposited by
such animal upon public property, park property, public right-of-way, or the
property of another.
   (E)   No person, owning, or having an animal under his or her control or
within his or her care or custody, shall permit such animal to bark or make any
loud or unusual noises during times when such owner knows or should expect that
such noises will disturb one or more neighbors, or otherwise disturb the peace.
   (F)   It shall be prohibited for any person in any manner to interfere with
any employee or designee of the city so as to hinder, delay, or prevent his or
her executing his or her duties pursuant to this subchapter.
   (G)   No person may set traps in the city for purpose of apprehending wild
or domesticated animals. The section does not prohibit:
      (1)   Trapping mice, rats, or other household vermin;
      (2)   The setting of traps to destroy moles and other underground pests
so long as the traps used may be triggered only by subsurface action; or
      (3)   The setting of traps in the line of duty by an Animal Control
Officer or with written permission from and under supervision of an Animal
Control officer or with written permission from and under supervision of an
Animal Control officer or licensed pest control operators.
(Prior Code, § 96.12) (Ord. 1372, passed 8-24-1987; Ord. 1852, passed 7-9-2007)
Penalty, see §
96.99 
§ 96.13 EQUINE; BOVINE; PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall intentionally trip or cause to fall, or lasso or
rope the legs of, any equine by any means for the purpose of entertainment,
sport, practice, or contest.
      (2)   The intentional tripping or causing to fall, or lassoing or roping
the legs of, any equine by any means for the purpose of entertainment, sport,
practice, or contest shall not be considered a commonly accepted practice
occurring in conjunction with sanctioned rodeos, animal racing, or pulling
contests.
(Neb. RS 54-911)
   (B)   (1)   No person shall intentionally trip, cause to fall, or drag any
bovine by its tail by any means for the purpose of entertainment, sport,
practice, or contest.
      (2)   The intentional tripping, causing to fall, or dragging of any
bovine by its tail by any means for the purpose of entertainment, sport,
practice, or contest shall not be considered a commonly accepted practice
occurring in conjunction with sanctioned rodeos, animal racing, or pulling
contests.
(Neb. RS 54-912)
Penalty, see §
96.99
Statutory reference:
   Livestock Animal Welfare Act, see Neb. RS 54-907 through 54-912
RABIES PREVENTION
§ 96.25 RABIES SHOTS.
   No dog or cat shall be licensed as provided in §
96.07 unless the owner or applicant thereof shall first provide satisfactory
proof from the office of a veterinary surgeon, duly licensed and practicing in
the state, to the effect that the dog or cat has been vaccinated for rabies and
that such vaccine is regarded by such veterinary surgeon to be effective
throughout the full licensing period sought by the applicant as described by
Neb. RS 71-4403.
(Prior Code, § 96.20) (Ord. 1340, passed 1-13-1986) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 96.26 DOGS SUSPECTED OF RABIES.
   (A)   Any dogs suspected by the Animal Warden or any officer of the Police
Department, of being affected with rabies, or any dog that has bitten any
person, causing an abrasion of the skin of the person, and for which a valid
certificate of rabies vaccination is not exhibited, shall be impounded by such
officer, under the supervision of a veterinarian or public health authority
designated by the City Administrator, for a period of not less than ten days.
   (B)   Any dog that has bitten any person, causing an abrasion of the skin of
the person, but for which a valid certificate of rabies vaccination is
exhibited, shall be confined by the owner or some other responsible person as
required by the Animal Warden or police officer for a period of not less than
ten days.
   (C)   At the expiration of such period, the dog shall be examined by a
veterinarian. If no symptoms of rabies then are observed by the veterinarian,
the dog, upon payment of fees and charges, may be released; otherwise, the dog
shall be destroyed. Fees shall be paid and, if the dog has not been licensed or
a valid certificate of rabies vaccination is not exhibited, the person to whom
the dog is to be released shall first make the necessary arrangements and
obtain a valid license and a valid certificate of rabies vaccination prior to
the release. In addition, the person shall either exhibit to the Animal Warden,
a receipt from the veterinarian of payment in full of the charges of the
veterinarian for his or her service in examining the dog or pay to the Animal
Warden an amount equal to the charges made by the veterinarian.
(Prior Code, § 96.21) (Ord. 884, passed 4-28-1975)
DANGEROUS ANIMALS
§ 96.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal which is not naturally tamed or gentle, or
which is of a naturally wild disposition, or which is capable of inflicting
serious injury upon or killing human beings and having known tendencies,
individually or as a species, to do so, or which because of its size or other
characteristics, would constitute a danger to human life or property if it is
not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in secure quarters, including but
not limited to the following animals which shall be deemed to be DANGEROUS per
se: bears, wolves, lions, tigers, panthers, bobcats, elephants, bison,
poisonous snakes and spiders, alligators, crocodiles, anacondas, pythons, boa
constrictors, and piranhas.
   OWNER. Any person or persons, firm, association, or corporation owning,
keeping, sheltering, harboring, or in immediate control of the property where
an animal is kept or allowed to stay.
(Prior Code, § 96.30) (Ord. 1372, passed 8-24-1987)
§ 96.41 CONTROL OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS; DUTY OF OWNER.
   (A)   All persons owning or having custody of, or control over an animal or
animals, whether licensed or unlicensed, which attack, bite, or attempt to bite
a person or persons, or domestic animals or fowl, or is dangerous, or chases,
maims, or kills domestic animals or fowl, are required to keep such animal or
animals from running at large and from going into the streets and other public
places within the city unless muzzled and on a leash, and shall keep such
animal or animals under control and prevent such animal or animals from
attacking or injuring persons lawfully on the premises of the owner.
   (B)   The City Administrator or his or her designee, upon being satisfied
that there is a dangerous animal or animals at large, shall, if practicable,
notify in writing the owner or person in control or in charge of such animal or
animals to restrain the same from going at large and to control them on the
premises of the owner and he or she may or may not at his or her discretion
institute a prosecution for violation of division (A) above occurring before
such notice is given. The right of the City Administrator or his or her
designee to prosecute for the violation of division (A) above, shall not be
exclusive.
(Prior Code, § 96.31) (Ord. 1372, passed 8-24-1987) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.42 DESTRUCTION OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS; PROSECUTION OF OWNER.
   If satisfied that an animal is dangerous and has without provocation
actually bitten or attacked a person or a domestic animal or fowl, the City
Administrator may, if the animal is found at large within the city, cause the
animal to be destroyed without previous notice to the owner, or he or she may,
if he or she sees fit, without killing the animal, notify the owner as provided
in §
96.41(B) and prosecute the owner for violation of §
96.41(A).
(Prior Code, § 96.32) (Ord. 1372, passed 8-24-1987)
§ 96.43 KEEPING DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Every person, firm, or corporation owning, keeping, sheltering, or
harboring a dangerous animal shall report such fact to the Animal Control
Officer at the Police Department and to the City Administrator together with
the following information:
      (1)   The species name of each such animal;
      (2)   The number of such animal of each such species kept on the
premises;
      (3)   A physical description of each such animal, including any pet name
to which it might respond;
      (4)   The location of such animal or animals within the city, including
the location of the cage or place of confinement upon or in the premises
wherein the animal or animals are kept; and
      (5)   In the case of poisonous dangerous animals, the location of the
nearest source of anti-venom for that species.
   (B)   Every person, firm, or corporation keeping, sheltering, or harboring a
dangerous animal shall at all times keep such animals securely confined within
a cage or other enclosure.
   (C)   No person, firm, or corporation owning, keeping, harboring, or
sheltering a dangerous animal shall permit or allow such animal to enter upon
or traverse any public property, park property, public right-of-way, or the
property of another, except when such animal is being transported while caged
or confined.
   (D)   In the event that a dangerous animal is found at large and unattended
upon public property, park property, public right-of-way, or on the property of
someone other than its owner, such animal may, in the discretion of the City
Administrator or his or her designee, or the Chief of Police, be destroyed if
it cannot be confined or captured thereby creating a hazard to life or
property. The city, its officers, employees and designees shall be under no
duty to attempt the confinement or capture of a dangerous animal found at
large, nor shall they have a duty to notify the owner of such animal prior to
its destruction.
(Prior Code, § 96.33) (Ord. 1372, passed 8-24-1987) Penalty, see §
96.99 
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 96.55 ENFORCEMENT; BY WHOM.
   The Animal Warden, the police and any other special officer designated by
the Mayor and City Council to enforce provisions of this chapter shall have
concurrent authority to enforce this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 96.90)
§ 96.56 IMPOUNDING; RELEASE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to cause to be captured
and impounded in the city pound or some other appropriate place, all animals
found running at large in the city, not having a tag on their collar showing
them to be licensed. Upon the capture and impounding of any animal, it shall be
the duty of the Chief of Police to notify the owner thereof, if such owner can
be ascertained, which notice shall advise of the fact of the capture and the
date of the impounding and the amount of the license tax due and penalty due
thereon; and that in case the tax and penalty be not paid within three days
after service of such notice, the animal impounded shall be destroyed. In case
the owner cannot be ascertained, a notice containing a description of the
animal taken; the date of impounding, and the amount of the license, tax, and
penalty thereon shall be posted in the office of the City Clerk, which shall
advise all whom it may concern that in case the tax due upon such animal and
the penalty due be not paid within three days from the date of the notice, the
animal shall be destroyed. At the expiration of three days, in any case, if the
license and penalty be not paid, it thereupon shall become the duty of the
Chief of Police to cause such animal to be destroyed. In case payment be made
of such license, tax and penalty, the owner of the animal taken and impounded
under this chapter shall be entitled to a delivery of such animal. In case it
be shown that a license tax for the current year has in fact been paid upon any
animal, though it has no tag, the animal, upon proof of such fact, shall be
delivered to its owner; provided, the owner secures a tag for the animal and
affixes the tag to a collar worn by the animal.
   (B)   Prior to any animals impounded under the provisions of this section
being surrendered to its owner, the owner shall first pay an impoundment fee as
follows:
      (1)   Dogs, cats, and similarly sized domestic animals:
         (a)   Impoundment charge: $20; and
         (b)   Boarding fee: $7.50 per day.
      (2)   All other animals, including but not limited to horses, goats,
mules, asses, cattle, sheep, or swine:
         (a)   Impoundment charge: $75; and
         (b)   Boarding fee: $17.50 per day.
(Prior Code, § 96.91) (Ord. 1450, passed 4-29-1991)
§ 96.57 CLERK; DUTIES.
   The Clerk shall keep a record of such plates or tags furnished by him or her
containing the date when and to whom delivered and the number of the same, and
shall on the first day of each month turn over the dog tax collected, as herein
provided, to the Treasurer, who shall credit the moneys so received to the
General Fund of the city. It shall be the duty of the Clerk to keep a book in
which shall be recorded the name of the owner and the name, description, and
sex of each dog upon which the tax has been paid, and the number thereof.
(Prior Code, § 96.92)
§ 96.58 CHIEF OF POLICE; COMPENSATION.
   For each and every dog killed, buried, or otherwise disposed of under the
authority of this chapter, the Chief of Police or other authorized person shall
receive, as compensation for the disposal of each dog, such compensation being
in addition to any other compensation due such officer from the city. Such
additional compensation shall be paid from the General Fund of the city upon
the presentation and allowance of a claim made therefor.
(Prior Code, § 96.93) (Ord. 312, passed 1-5-1950)
§ 96.59 ANIMAL WARDEN; DUTIES.
   The Animal Warden shall have concurrent authority with that of the police
officers for the city in the control, impounding, and destruction of dogs,
cats, and other animals within the corporate limits of the city. The Animal
Warden shall receive complaints of and make an investigation concerning any
domestic animal running at large injuring property or otherwise creating a
danger or annoyance for the citizens of the city. The Animal Warden shall make
periodic reports to the Chief of Police in writing of complaints received,
investigations made, and his or her activities in carrying out the duties of
his or her position. The Animal Warden shall at all times be under the direct
supervision and control of the Chief of Police. He or she shall notify the
Clerk of any dog or cat not licensed in compliance with the city code, and
shall assist the official in the collection of dog and cat license tags. The
Animal Warden shall have such further authority and duties as the Mayor and
City Council may, from time to time, prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 96.94) (Ord. 862, passed 12-9-1974)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Upon conviction of violation of §
96.04, it shall be the duty of the court to assess a fine of at least $10 for
the first offense within a 12-month period; a minimum fine of at least $25 for
a second offense within a 12-month period; and a minimum fine of at least $50
for a third and subsequent offenses within a 12-month period.
(Prior Code, § 96.04) (Ord. 1188, passed 2-11-1980; Ord. 1685, passed 7-23-
2001; Ord. 1852, passed 7-9-2007)
CHAPTER 97: TREES
Section
   
97.01   Definitions
   
97.02   City Tree Plan
   
97.03   Spacing of trees, shrubs; height
   
97.04   Pruning; notice
   
97.05   Stumps; removal
   
97.06   Obstruction of streets; requirements
   
97.07   Cutting, injuring prohibited
   
97.08   Street trees; planting; permit required
   
97.09   Tree trimmers; license required
   
97.10   Inspections
§ 97.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Parks and Recreation.
   PARK TREES. Trees and shrubs in public parks of the city and other areas in
the city which are owned by the city or in which the city owns an interest (not
including public streets and alleys), or which are leased to the city.
   SHRUBS. Bushes or other woody vegetation used in landscaping which by their
nature do not normally attain heights in excess of 15 feet.
   SMALL, MEDIUM, AND LARGE TREES. Trees which by their nature normally attain
heights at maturity of:
      (1)   Small trees: Not in excess of 25 feet;
      (2)   Medium trees: From 25 to 45 feet; and
      (3)   Large trees: In excess of 45 feet.
   STREET TREES. All trees and shrubs situated within the right-of-way of any
public street or alley of the city. A tree shall be deemed to be so situated if
the trunk, or any part thereof, is situated within the right-of-way. A shrub
shall be deemed to be so situated if any stem thereof, at the level of
emergence from the ground, is situated within the right-of-way. Trees and
shrubs which in the course of normal growth will become so situated shall be
deemed to be so situated at the time of planting.
   TOPPING. Cutting back limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter
within the tree’s crown to such a degree as to remove the normal canopy and
disfigure the tree.
(Prior Code, § 97.01) (Ord. 1417, passed 10-24-1989; Ord. 1728, passed 6-23-
2003; Ord. 1732, passed 7-28-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.02 CITY TREE PLAN.
   (A)   (1)   The Park, Cemetery, and Tree Board shall develop a written plan
for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or
disposition of park and street trees, which it shall recommend to the City
Council for adoption by the City Council. Upon adoption of such a plan by the
City Council by ordinance, with or without amendments, the plan shall
constitute the official comprehensive City Tree Plan of the city.
      (2)   The Board shall review the plan not less often than annually, and
shall recommend to the City Council amendments, if any, which the Board deems
to be in the public interest, and the City Council shall by ordinance enact
such amendments, if any, as the Council deems to be in the public interest.
   (B)   (1)   The Park, Cemetery, and Tree Board shall recommend to the City
Council for adoption a list of tree and shrub species for planting as park
trees, and a list of tree and shrub species for planting as street trees. The
trees and shrubs shall be listed by common name and include species recommended
by the State Forester’s office for planting in this geographical area.
      (2)   The lists shall include small, medium, and large trees and include
spacing requirements for each species of street trees. Upon adoption of such
lists by the City Council by ordinance, with or without amendments, the lists
shall constitute comprehensive official lists of permissible park and street
trees. Copies of such lists shall be available at the office of the Director of
Public Works, who also shall distribute such copies to nurseries and other
businesses in the city which sell trees to the general public. The official
lists shall be updated on a regular basis by the Park, Cemetery, and Tree Board
and City Council in the manner herein provided for the original lists.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant any species of tree or
shrub other than those included on the official list of street trees in any
location such that the tree or shrub, upon planting, shall constitute a street
tree within the meaning of §
97.01.
(Prior Code, § 97.02) (Ord. 1417, passed 10-24-1989; Ord. 1728, passed 6-23-
2003) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 97.03 SPACING OF TREES, SHRUBS; HEIGHT.
   (A)   Trees constituting street trees may be planted no closer together than
15 feet for small trees, 20 feet for medium trees, and 25 feet for large trees;
provided, the Park, Cemetery, and Tree Board may approve proposals for
alternative spacing as part of an application for a special exception that is
proposed to be included in a formal landscape plan, if the Board shall
determine that such spacing will not be substantially inconsistent with the
purpose of the City Tree Plan.
   (B)   Street and park trees shall be planted not less than 35 feet from any
street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb
lines, three feet from any curb or sidewalk, and eight feet from any hydrant.
No street or park tree shall be allowed to grow in such a manner that it shall
interfere with any private or public utility line either above or below ground.
A public or private utility may trim or remove, if necessary, any street or
park tree which obstructs its lines, wires, or pipes, including house service
lines, wires, or pipes.
   (C)   Shrubs constituting street trees shall be trimmed to a height not
greater than 30 inches above the top or the curb (or, if there be no curb, the
surface of the street or alley), unless the Park, Cemetery, and Tree Board
determines that a greater height would not constitute a hazard to pedestrians
or vehicular traffic.
(Prior Code, § 97.03) (Ord. 1417, passed 10-24-1989; Ord. 1728, passed 6-23-
2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.04 PRUNING; NOTICE.
   (A)   Routine pruning performed by the city of a tree located in the right-
of-way or in the utility easement or interfering with utility lines can be done
after giving notice. The notice will be in the form of a door hanger at the lot
or tract of land occupied by the residence or business at least five days prior
to the trimming. In an emergency situation where the tree or branch is
obstructing the road, alley, sidewalk, and/or interfering with utility service
it can be pruned or removed without notice.
   (B)   If any branches have not been pruned or trees removed on private
property or in the right-of-way or utility easements, the Director of Public
Works, or his or her designated official, shall give notice by certified mail
or personal service to each owner or owner’s duly authorized agent at the last
known address, and to the occupant, if any, to abate and remove such nuisance,
and notice of the right to a hearing and the manner in which it, the hearing,
may be requested. Within 30 days after the receipt of such notice, if the owner
or occupant of the lot or piece of ground does not request a hearing or fails
to comply with the order to abate and remove the nuisance, the city may have
such work done and may levy and assess all or any portion of the costs and
expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground so benefitted in the same
manner as other special taxes for improvements are levied and assessed.
(Prior Code, § 97.04) (Ord. 1417, passed 10-24-1989; Ord. 1542, passed 9-12-
1994; Ord. 1728, passed 6-23-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.05 STUMPS; REMOVAL.
   All stumps of street trees shall be removed to a depth of at least seven
inches below the surface of the ground, and the hole refilled with good top
soil so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the
ground.
(Prior Code, § 97.05) (Ord. 1417, passed 10-24-1989; Ord. 1728, passed 6-23-
2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.06 OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Obstruction of street; permit; bond. No person shall remove any tree
which may obstruct a street, alley or sidewalk during removal without obtaining
a permit from the Director of Public Works. No permit may be issued until a
bond is filed with the City Clerk, in an amount to be fixed by the Director of
Public Works, signed by such person and an approved surety company and
conditioned that such person will indemnify and keep harmless the city from any
and all liability from accidents, injuries, and damage suits caused by the
removal of such tree.
   (B)   Closure of street; permit barricades; markers. If, for public safety,
it shall be necessary to close any street, sidewalk, or alley during the
removal of any trees, a permit shall be issued by the Director of Public Works
for such closure after due application therefore is endorsed by the Fire Chief
and the Police Chief, or their authorized representative. The person in charge
of such work shall furnish all barricades, red flags, and flares necessary for
the closing of such street, sidewalk, or alley, with a sign posted signifying
such closure, and shall display the name of the person doing the work.
(Prior Code, § 97.06) (Ord. 1417, passed 10-24-1989; Ord. 1728, passed 6-23-
2003) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 97.07 CUTTING, INJURING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully, maliciously, or wantonly
cut down, destroy, or injure, by topping, girdling, tapping, or otherwise, any
street or park trees within the city except in compliance with requirements in
the chapter; provided, trees severally damaged by storms or other causes, or
trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices
are impractical may be exempted from this prohibition by rules and regulations
prescribed by the Park, Cemetery, and Tree Board, or by an order entered by
such Board pursuant to a written application.
(Prior Code, § 97.07) (Ord. 1417, passed 10-24-1989; Ord. 1728, passed 6-23-
2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.08 STREET TREES; PLANTING; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, other than an employee of the city acting in the course of
such person’s employment, shall plant a street tree without obtaining a permit
for such planting not less than 48 hours before planting from the City Clerk on
a form provided for that purpose.
   (B)   The terms of the permit, if granted, shall be strictly followed.
(Prior Code, § 97.08) (Ord. 1417, passed 10-24-1989; Ord. 1474, passed 5-28-
1992; Ord. 1728, passed 6-23-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.09 TREE TRIMMERS; LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person for hire to plant, prune,
treat or remove any street or park tree within the city unless the person holds
a tree trimmer’s license issued by the City Clerk. No license shall be required
of any utility company doing this work in the course of its business, except
that a license shall be required of a person that contracts to do this work for
a utility. All applications for a tree trimmer’s license shall be made to the
City Clerk on forms approved for that purpose. In order to be issued a license,
an applicant must:
         (a)   Pay an annual license fee of $10;
         (b)   Provide a certificate of insurance evidencing liability
insurance covering acts performed in connection with such activities in the
minimum amounts of $500,000 for bodily injury and $300,000 for property damage;
and
         (c)   Attend a tree care and preservation class as required by the
city.
      (2)   All licenses shall expire one year from the date they are issued.
   (B)   Every person who is the holder of a license for the immediately
preceding year may renew the license for an additional year upon:
      (1)   Filing an application for renewal with the City Clerk on forms
provided for that purpose;
      (2)   Providing evidence of continuing insurance coverage as required by
division (A) above;
      (3)   Payment of a $10 license fee; and
      (4)   Attend a tree care and preservation course, as required by the
city.
(Prior Code, § 97.09) (Ord. 1417, passed 10-24-1989; Ord. 1474, passed 5-28-
1992; Ord. 1728, passed 6-23-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.10 INSPECTIONS.
   In order to accomplish the purpose of this chapter, the Director of Public
Works or his or her designated official is hereby authorized to go upon any
property in the city for the purpose of inspecting trees, shrubs, and other
plants.
(Prior Code, § 97.10) (Ord. 1417, passed 10-24-1989; Ord. 1728, passed 6-23-
2003)
CHAPTER 98: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
98.01   Definitions
   
98.02   Classifications of alarm systems
   
98.03   Class I alarm systems
   
98.04   Class II alarm systems
   
98.05   Class III alarm systems
   
98.06   Alarm system requirements, generally
   
98.07   Permits required
   
98.08   Permit application
   
98.09   Permit fees
   
98.10   Issuance of permit
   
98.11   Term of permit and renewal
   
98.12   Alarm system inspection, installation and maintenance
   
98.13   Permit suspension and appeal
   
98.14   Regulations of automatic dialers to select any city and/or Consolidated
Communications Center phone numbers
   
98.15   Current information required
   
98.16   Alarms and response by Police Department and owner or lessee
   
98.17   False alarms, fees, penalties, and billing
   
98.18   Administration of provisions and violations
§ 98.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT. A natural person, who is designated by the principal to be
responsible for the premises protected by an alarm system during the
principal’s absence or unavailability.
   ALARM SYSTEM. A device or system of interconnected devices, including
hardware and related appurtenances, designed to give warning of activities
indicative of felony or criminal conduct.
   ANNUCIATOR. The part of an alarm system, other than an automatic dialer,
which communicates the fact that the system has been triggered.
   AUDIBLE ANNUCIATOR. An annuciator which gives alarm by means of a bell,
siren, bussing, or similar sound producing device mounted at some location
other than wholly within a building; or which, when activated, is clearly
audible at a distance of 50 feet or more outside of any building in which it is
mounted.
   AUTOMATIC DIALER. A device which is programmed to select a telephone number
and deliver a warning message or signal over standard telephone lines using
telephone voice communication equipment.
   CHIEF. The Chief of Police of the city or any member under his or her
jurisdiction designated by him or her to exercise any power or duty conferred
under this chapter.
   CITY TELEPHONE LINES. A telephone line which rings or terminates on a
municipal premises of the city.
   CONSOLIDATED COMMUNICATION CENTER. The department of the county established
by an interlocal cooperation agreement between the City of Scottsbluff, the
City of Gering, and the County of Scotts Bluff dated October 1, 1990, and any
subsequent amendments thereto.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Consolidated Communications Center.
   FALSE ALARM. 
      (1)   An activation of an alarm system upon or following which
communication is made to the city’s Police Department, that an alarm has been
triggered, except alarms, resulting from one of the following causes:
         (a)   Criminal activity or unauthorized entry;
         (b)   Earthquake causing structural damage to the protected premises;
         (c)   Tornado winds causing structural damage to the protected
premises;
         (d)   Flooding of the premises due to an overflow of natural drainage;
         (e)   A lightning bolt causing physical damage to the protected
premises;
         (f)   Fire causing structural damage to the protected premises
verified by the Fire Department; and/or
         (g)   Telephone line malfunction verified in writing to the Chief by
at least a first line telephone company supervisor within seven days of the
occurrence.
      (2)   If an alarm, when communicated to the city’s Police Department
before an officer is dispatched to investigate, is clearly identified as
resulting from authorized entry, authorized system test, or other noncriminal
cause, it shall not be considered as a FALSE ALARM. If police units, responding
to an alarm and checking the protected premises according to standard
Department operating procedure, do not discover any evidence of unauthorized
entry or criminal activity, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the
alarm is FALSE. Entries on the city’s Police Department dispatcher’s record
shall be prima facie evidence of the facts stated therein with regard to alarms
and responses.
   ON-PREMISES ANNUCIATOR. An annuciator which is designed to give warning only
to a person or persons on the protected premises, and which is neither an
audible or remote annuciator as those terms are defined in this section.
   OWNER/LESSEE. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity who or
which purchases, leases, contracts, for or obtains an alarm system.
   PRINCIPAL. The person, firm, or corporation whose premises are protected by
an alarm system. In the event that a building having more than one tenant is
protected by a single alarm system, the PRINCIPAL means the building owner.
   PROTECTED PREMISES. All of that contiguous area, including building,
protected by a single alarm system and under common ownership and use.
   PUBLIC SAFETY PERSONNEL. Officers and other members of law enforcement.
   REMOTE ANNUCIATOR. An annuciator located at a terminal on the premises of a
burglar alarm company, or other location not a part of the protected premises.
   SENSOR. The part of an alarm system which is designated to detect the
happenings of some event or existence of some condition indicative of criminal
activity or unauthorized entry.
   VENDOR. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity associated
with an alarm business or company, either indirectly or directly, whose duties
include but are not limited to, any of the following: selling, replacing,
moving, repairing, maintaining, and/or installing an alarm system on or in any
structure, building, or facility.
(Prior Code, § 98.01) (Ord. 1853, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 98.02 CLASSIFICATIONS OF ALARM SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Alarm systems shall be classified as follows:
      (1)   Class I. Class I alarm systems incorporate a remote annuciator
installed at a place other than on the protected premises, and which does not
incorporate an automatic dialer;
      (2)   Class II. Class II alarm systems incorporate an automatic dialer;
and
      (3)   Class III. Class III alarm systems have only an audible annuciator
located at the protected premises, and which does not incorporate an automatic
dialer.
   (B)   Exempt alarm systems are:
      (1)   Those which incorporate only an on-premises annuciator, a visible
annuciator, or any combination thereof;
      (2)   Alarms systems owned, maintained, or monitored by any government
law enforcement agency to protect their premises; and
      (3)   Alarm systems protecting property of the city.
(Prior Code, § 98.02) (Ord. 1853, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 98.03 CLASS I ALARM SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Any person reporting to the Director of the Consolidated
Communications Center on any alarm from a Class I alarm system shall provide
and regularly update the following information:
      (1)   The alarm system permit number and principal or business name;
      (2)   The type of premises and the name, if any, by which the premises
are known;
      (3)   The address of the protected premises, which shall be repeated a
second time at the end of the message;
      (4)   The name and telephone number of some local responsible person
having ready access to the protected premises; and
      (5)   The type of criminal activity indicated.
   (B)   If the Class I alarm system incorporates an audible annuciator, it
shall be subject to the requirements specified in §
98.05.
(Prior Code, § 98.03) (Ord. 1853, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 98.04 CLASS II ALARM SYSTEMS.
   Any person reporting to the Director of the Consolidated Communications
Center on any alarm from a Class II alarm system shall provide and regularly
update the following information:
   (A)   Information specified in §
98.03;
   (B)   No Class II alarm system shall be programmed to select any telephone
line the user of which has not previously given consent to such programming;
and
   (C)   If the Class II alarm system incorporates an audible annuciator, it
shall be subject to the requirements in §
98.05.
(Prior Code, § 98.04) (Ord. 1853, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 98.05 CLASS III ALARM SYSTEMS.
   Any person reporting to the Director of the Consolidated Communications
Center on any alarm from a Class III alarm system shall provide and regularly
update the following information.
   (A)   Each Class III alarm system shall be so programmed that each audible
annuciator will automatically silence within 15 minutes after being activated,
and will not sound again unless a new act or circumstance triggers a sensor.
   (B)   No test of a Class III alarm system shall be conducted between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. of any day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day.
   (C)   (1)   The application for a Class III alarm system permit shall list
the name and phone number of at least one person responsible (other than the
principal or a member of his or her household) having access to the premises
who may be notified and assist the police in the event the alarm is activated.
      (2)   The principal shall immediately notify the Director of the
Consolidated Communications Center of any changes in this information.
   (D)   The Chief of Police of the city by written notice may require the
posting of the information required by division (C) above on the protected
premises.
(Prior Code, § 98.05) (Ord. 1853, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 98.06 ALARM SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS, GENERALLY.
   (A)   No alarm system shall be installed, used, or maintained in violation
of any of the requirements of this code, or of any applicable statute, law or
administrative regulation of the United States, the state, or any
administrative rule-making body thereof.
   (B)   The holder of an alarm system permit shall be responsible for training
and re-training all employees, family members, and other persons who may make
regular use of the protected premises and who may, in the normal course of
their activities, be in a position to accidentally trigger a sensor. Such
training shall include procedures and practices to avoid accidental alarms and
steps to follow in the event the system is accidentally triggered.
   (C)   The holder of an alarm system permit shall, at all times, be
responsible for the proper maintenance and repair of the system, and for the
repair or replacement of any component, method of installment, design feature,
or like condition which may give rise to a false alarm.
(Prior Code, § 98.06) (Ord. 1853, passed 7-9-2007) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 98.07 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use maintain any alarm system,
within the city limits of the city, without a current valid permit.
   (B)   No permit shall be required for an exempt alarm system as defined in §
98.02, and the provisions of this section shall not apply to such systems.
   (C)   Each day during which a violation of this provision shall continue
shall be deemed a separate violation.
(Prior Code, § 98.07) (Ord. 1853, passed 7-9-2007) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 98.08 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Each application for an alarm system shall be made by submitting a form
designated by the Director and shall contain the following information:
   (A)   The name, address, and current contact phone number of the owner or
lessee, who shall be an adult occupant of the protected premises;
   (B)   The type of premises, whether home, office, business, other, and any
business name by which the premises are known;
   (C)   The address of the protected premises, including, if the premises are
in a multiple unit residential, commercial, or the industrial structure or
complex, any name by which the structure or complex is commonly known;
   (D)   The name, addresses, and current contact phone numbers, of all agents
having authority or responsibility with respect to the structure or complex;
   (E)   If the alarm system component consists of automatic dialers, the
number and type, location of all remote annuciators, and the names and current
phone numbers of all persons or businesses which are or may be preselected for
automatic dialer contact;
   (F)   The name, address, and current contact phone numbers of the person
with whom the owner or lessee has contracted for maintenance of the alarm
system;
   (G)   The name, addresses, and current contact phone numbers of those
persons (not less than two) who can be contacted by the Director or his or her
designee 24 hours a day, seven days a week to turn off and/or deactivate the
alarm system; and
   (H)   A statement that the owner or lessee, in consideration of the issuance
of the requested permit, has read and agrees to be bound by the terms of this
section.
(Prior Code, § 98.08) (Ord. 1853, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 98.09 PERMIT FEES.
   If an alarm system component is to be connected to an alarm panel in the
Consolidated Communications Center:
   (A)   The application for an alarm system permit shall be accompanied by a
connection fee of $120;
   (B)   In addition, the owner or lessee shall pay annually a maintenance and
monitoring fee;
   (C)   If the alarm component is an automatic dialer to be interconnected to
the telephone system in the Consolidated Communications Center, or is a system
which provides for a third party relay of calls to such a telephone, the owner
or lessee shall pay to the Consolidated Communications Center annually a
monitoring fee in the amount of $75; and
   (D)   If a permit is to be issued, fees which accompany the application
shall be retained, otherwise, the fees will be refunded. This section shall not
apply to alarm systems owned or leased by the city, and state, or federal
agency, or other public law enforcement officials or department.
(Prior Code, § 98.09) (Ord. 1853, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 98.10 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   Upon receipt of a permit application and fees, if any, the Director shall
request an investigation as he or she deems necessary. If it appears to the
Director that the proposed system will comply with the provisions of this
chapter, he or she shall issue a permit bearing an identifying number and
specifying the applicant and alarm for which it is issued.
(Prior Code, § 98.10) (Ord. 1853, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 98.11 TERM OF PERMIT AND RENEWAL.
   Alarm systems shall not be extendable or renewable as a matter of right
beyond the period for which a maintenance or monitoring fee has been paid as
provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 98.11) (Ord. 1853, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 98.12 ALARM SYSTEM INSPECTION, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   The Director may inspect, or cause to be inspected, any alarm system
for which a permit has been applied for and/or issued, for the purpose of
ascertaining that information furnished by the application or permittee is
correct, and that a system for which a permit has been applied for and/or
issued is being maintained.
   (B)   Any vendor installing or maintaining an alarm system shall cause such
installation or maintenance to conform to the requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   The holder of an alarm system permit shall, at all times, be
responsible for the proper installation, maintenance, and/or repair of the
system, including, but not limited to, design features, method of installation,
the repair or replacement of any component, or any condition which may activate
false alarms.
(Prior Code, § 98.12) (Ord. 1853, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 98.13 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND APPEAL.
   (A)   (1)   If the Director or Chief of Police determines that there is a
cause for suspension of a permit, he or she shall mail a notice of suspension
to the owner or lessee at the last known address, stating that the suspension
will be effective 30 days after the date contained in the letter, unless a
notice of appeal is filed with the Director or city Police Department on or
before the effective date.
      (2)   The Notice of Suspension shall be signed by both the Director and
the Chief of Police.
   (B)   The following will be grounds for suspension by the Director or Chief
of Police, for any permit issued pursuant to this chapter:
      (1)   Any false or incomplete statement made on the permit application;
      (2)   Programming an automatic dialer to select any City of Gering, City
of Scottsbluff, or Consolidated Communications Center phone number without
prior approval;
      (3)   Failure to pay an annual maintenance or monitoring fee as
established in this chapter;
      (4)   Failure to pay a false alarm charge within the time required,
maintenance, installation, and/or use of the alarm system in violation of any
applicable law, ordinance, or regulation, including the requirements of this
chapter;
      (5)   Failure to provide current information as required; and/or
      (6)   Any owner or lessee given notice of a permit suspension as provided
in this chapter, may appeal the suspension to the Director and/or city Police
Department. The filing of a notice of appeal shall stay the suspension until
disposition of the appeal by the Director and/or city Police Department after
notice and hearing.
(Prior Code, § 98.13) (Ord. 1853, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 98.14 REGULATIONS OF AUTOMATIC DIALERS TO SELECT ANY CITY AND/OR CONSOLIDATED
COMMUNICATIONS CENTER PHONE NUMBERS.
   Alarm systems that automatically dial or call a phone number that has been
designated by the city and/or the Consolidated Communications Center as
provided in this chapter shall comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   The total length of the recorded message being transmitted shall not
exceed 30 seconds, including repetition of message.
   (B)   The recorded message shall be repeated no less than two times and not
more than three times.
   (C)   The recorded message shall specifically identify the message as a
recording and identify the street number and address, name, of the location,
and the nature of emergency for which the alarm has been activated. If the
location of the alarm is in a multi-family dwelling, a multi-unit office, and/
or a commercial building, the message shall also identify the unit by number,
floor, and/or section of the building in which the event occurred.
   (D)   The recorded message being transmitted shall be appropriate for the
purpose for which the alarm was installed and the message in its entirety shall
be intelligible and spoken in the English language.
(Prior Code, § 98.14) (Ord. 1853, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 98.15 CURRENT INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any owner or lessee is required to submit information as provided in
§§
98.02 through
98.05.
   (B)   This information must be current and updated regularly with each
change or to confirm on file information at least annually:
      (1)   Within ten days following any change of circumstances which render
obsolete any of the information submitted on an application or renewal for an
alarm system permit, the holder of the permit shall file an amendment to his or
her application; and
      (2)   No additional fee shall be required, unless the change is such that
the information of the original application and permit is no longer applicable
for the guidelines under which the original application and permit were issued.
(Prior Code, § 98.15) (Ord. 1853, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 98.16 ALARMS AND RESPONSE BY POLICE DEPARTMENT AND OWNER OR LESSEE.
   (A)   The Consolidated Communications Center may elect not to respond to an
alarm from an alarm system which does not comply with all of the provisions set
forth in this chapter.
   (B)   The issuance of an alarm system permit under this chapter shall not
impose an obligation to respond, liability for failure to respond, and shall
not require priority to any alarm.
   (C)   Upon receiving an emergency alarm signal, the Director or his or her
designee, shall promptly notify the owner or lessee, or his or her authorized
representative, by information received for current contact information on
applications and application amendments, and instruct him or her to come to the
protected premises in person.
(Prior Code, § 98.16) (Ord. 1853, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 98.17 FALSE ALARMS, FEES, PENALTIES, AND BILLING.
   (A)   In the event that, within a calendar year, an excess of two false
alarms as provisioned in §
98.01 under the definition for FALSE ALARMS, are transmitted by an alarm system
component in the Consolidated Communications Center, automatic dialer, and/or a
third party relay to a phone in the Consolidated Communications Center or city
Police Department, and such alarms result in response from law enforcement
personnel, the following fees will be assessed:
 
Number of False Alarms Fee Assessed
3 to 10                $25 each
11 to 20               $50 each
21 or more             $100 each
 
   (B)   The first two false alarms are not billable. If a third false alarm
occurs in a calendar year, an invoice for penalty fees assessed for that alarm
will be issued to the owner or lessee with payment due within 60 days. Any
subsequent alarms will result in a final billing in January following the
completion of the calendar year.
(Prior Code, § 98.17) (Ord. 1853, passed 7-9-2007) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 98.18 ADMINISTRATION OF PROVISIONS AND VIOLATIONS.
   The Director, the Director’s designee, Chief of Police, and/or any
designated city official shall administer the provisions of this chapter. Any
violation of any provisions of this chapter is a Class II violation. Each day a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 98.18) (Ord. 1853, passed 7-9-2007) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   BUSINESS LICENSING
      
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
112.   HOTELS
      
113.   SPECIAL EVENTS
      
114.   PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS
      
115.   JUNK SHOPS, PAWNBROKERS, AND SECONDHAND STORES
      
116.   PLUMBERS
      
117.   CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
      
118.   CONTRACTOR’S LICENSE
      
119.   MECHANICAL CONTRACTORS
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS LICENSING
Section
Occupation Taxes
   
110.01   Fire Insurance Companies
Pool Halls, Bowling Alleys, Arcades
   
110.15   Definitions
   
110.16   License required; application
   
110.17   Disturbing the peace prohibited
   
110.18   View of premises; locked rooms
   
110.19   Hours of operation
Slaughterhouses
   
110.30   Definitions
   
110.31   Building requirements
   
110.32   License
   
110.33   Certificate of approval required
   
110.34   License fee; revocation
   
110.35   Inspections
OCCUPATION TAXES
§ 110.01 FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES.
   (A)   Tax imposed. For the use, support and maintenance of the Volunteer
Fire Department of the city regularly organized under the laws of the state, an
occupation tax of $5 per annum shall be and is hereby levied upon each and
every fire insurance company, doing business in the city.
   (B)   When due. Such occupation tax shall be due and payable on May 1 of
each year, and upon the payment thereof by any person to the Clerk, the Clerk
shall give a receipt therefor, properly dated and specifying the person paying,
the name of the fire insurance company, the amount and for what time the tax is
paid.
   (C)   Funds; use. The money paid to the Clerk under the provisions of this
section shall be paid over to the Treasurer, shall constitute and be known as
the “Special Occupation Tax Fund of the Volunteer Fire Department of the City
of Gering, Nebraska,” and the sum shall be used exclusively for the purposes
and support of such Department.
   (D)   Payment to Fire Department; conditions. The Treasurer, on October 1 of
each year, shall upon proper receipt being given, pay to the Chief of the
Volunteer Fire Department all moneys collected from such special occupation
tax; provided, however, that before the Treasurer shall pay over the fund to
the Chief of the Volunteer Fire Department, a copy of a motion or resolution
passed by the Mayor and Council and authenticated by the Clerk, shall be
presented to him or her authorizing such payment. The Chief of the Volunteer
Fire Department shall be entitled to the order for the payment of the money
when he or she shall show to the satisfaction of the Council, at its regular
meeting in September, or within three months thereafter, that the fire hose has
been pressure tested at least twice during the preceding 12 months, and that
fire drills have been held as required in §
32.055.
   (E)   Failure to pay tax. Should any fire insurance company fail to pay the
tax provided for in division (A) above on the day it becomes due and payable,
the city may recover the same in a civil action brought against such fire
insurance company.
(Prior Code, § 110.01)
POOL HALLS, BOWLING ALLEYS, ARCADES
§ 110.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ARCADE. Any room or place in which electronic or mechanical games or
amusements are kept and maintained for profit or hire, including but not
limited to video games, pinball machines, and other similar devices, either
kept separately or in connection with any other existing business.
   BOWLING ALLEY. Any room or place in which bowling is conducted for profit or
hire or kept in connection with any other business.
   POOL and BILLIARDS. A game played on a table in which the object is to drive
balls into pockets, and which is conducted for profit or gain.
   POOL HALL or   BILLIARD HALL. Any room or place in which any pool or
billiard tables shall be kept in connection with any other business or shall be
used or offered for hire, profit, or gain.
(Prior Code, § 110.20)
§ 110.16 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, maintain, or operate any pool
hall, billiard hall, bowling alley, or arcade for profit or gain without first
having obtained a license from the city. Any person desiring a license to
operate, maintain, or own a pool hall, billiard hall, bowling alley, or arcade
shall file a written application with the City Clerk. The application form
shall contain such information and documents, or copies thereof, as the Mayor
and Council deem necessary to determine whether to grant or reject the
application. Upon the determination that the granting of the license would be
beneficial to the city, the Mayor and Council shall immediately direct the City
Clerk to issue the license to the applicant upon the payment of a fee set forth
by resolution of the Mayor and City Council. The license shall be subject to
revocation at any time for good and sufficient cause by the Mayor and Council
upon the issuance of a proper notice, and a hearing if the licensee should make
a request. Any person so licensed shall be subject to any bond, fees, or other
rules and regulations as may be set by resolution or ordinance of the Mayor and
Council of the city.
(Prior Code, § 110.21) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 110.17 DISTURBING THE PEACE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any pool hall, billiard
hall, bowling alley, or arcade to allow or permit any disturbance of the peace,
fighting, gambling, drunkenness, use of profanity, obscene books or pictures on
the premises.
(Prior Code, § 110.22) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 110.18 VIEW OF PREMISES; LOCKED ROOMS.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any pool hall, billiard
hall, bowling alley, or arcade to obstruct the view from the outside into the
establishment by the use of screens, blinds, paint, or other means. It shall
further be unlawful for the owner or operator of a pool hall, billiard hall,
bowling alley, or arcade to close or lock any room or rooms, except rooms used
for storage purposes only, while the establishment is open and available for
public use.
(Prior Code, § 110.23) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.19 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any pool hall, billiard
hall, bowling alley, or arcade to be open or available for public use between
the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day of the week, except Sunday when
the pool hall, billiard hall, bowling alley, or arcade shall not be open or
available to the public use from 1:00 a.m. until 1:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 110.24) Penalty, see §
10.99
SLAUGHTERHOUSES
§ 110.30 DEFINITIONS.
   Definitions of words used in the terms of this subchapter shall be the same
as those set out in the statutes of the state as they are now in force or may
hereafter be amended insofar as they apply to the city; the same shall include
the definitions of words set by the Department of Agriculture and the Bureau of
Animal Industry of the state.
(Prior Code, § 110.30)
§ 110.31 BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No license for the operation of any slaughterhouse or abattoir within
the city shall be granted outside of the fire limits as established in §
92.01; and a building in which the same shall be housed shall not only conform
with the regulations creating the fire limits but must also conform with the
regulations set out by the Bureau of Agricultural and Industry Inspection.
   (B)   All operations in connection with the loading, unloading, processing
of livestock and refuse shall be conducted completely within the confines of
one building. Live animals shall not be held more than 12 hours and in no case
after 9:00 p.m. in the building, and there shall be no open pens permitted
outside of the confines of the building.
(Prior Code, § 110.31) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.32 LICENSE.
   The Mayor and Council shall be authorized to issue licenses for the
operation and maintenance of slaughterhouses and abattoirs within the city
limits; the license shall run and be in full force and effect from July 1 in
which the same is issued until the July 1 following, unless the same be revoked
or surrendered or rescinded according to the terms of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 110.32)
§ 110.33 CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   Applications of licenses or for the renewal of same shall be made not more
than 30 days prior to July 1 of each year, and shall be acted upon by the Mayor
and Council at the next regular meeting thereof; provided, however, that all
applications for licenses or for a renewal shall be accompanied by a
certificate approving the issuance of the license by the County Health
Department and the City Physician.
(Prior Code, § 110.33)
§ 110.34 LICENSE FEE; REVOCATION.
   The license fee for the operation of the slaughterhouse, or abattoir shall
be $10 per year, from July 1 to July 1 of following year, payable when the
application is made. In case of any violation of this subchapter, the City
Physician shall have the right and power immediately to suspend all operations
conducted under the license, and such suspension shall be enforced by the Chief
of Police upon notice to him or her of the action of the City Physician. At the
next regular meeting of the Council or at a special meeting called for such
purpose, a hearing shall be had before the Council to determine whether or not
the license granted shall be revoked, at which hearing the licensee shall have
the right to be heard in his or her own behalf.
(Prior Code, § 110.34) (Ord. 271, passed 7-6-1948)
§ 110.35 INSPECTIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the City Physician to inspect such premises monthly,
and at such times as he or she may be called upon to do so by the Mayor and
Council, and he or she shall submit a written report of the inspection to the
Mayor and Council.
(Prior Code, § 110.35)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Occupation tax
   
111.03   Hours of sale
   
111.04   Consumption on public property prohibited
   
111.05   Nudity; sexual or simulated sexual acts; prohibited
   
111.06   Licensee or employees; drinking while on duty
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context otherwise requires, the words and phrases used in this
chapter shall have the meaning as defined in the State Liquor Control Act.
   STATE LIQUOR CONTROL ACT. Neb. RS 53-101 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 111.01) (Ord. 1348, passed 7-28-1986)
§ 111.02 OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   For the purpose of raising revenue within the city, there is hereby
levied upon the following described businesses conducted in the city, the
following described occupation taxes:
Business/License Type Tax
Business/License Type                                                             Tax
Alcoholic liquor wholesale license (except beer)                                  $1,000
Beer wholesale license:                                                           $500
   Class A: Beer only except for brewpubs, for consumption on the premises     $100
   Class B: Beer only, except for brewpubs, for consumption off the premises   $50
   Class C: Alcoholic liquors for consumption on and off the premises          $500
   Class D: Alcoholic liquors, including beer for consumption off the premises $300
   Class I: Alcoholic liquors, for consumption on the premises                 $400
   Class J: Beer and wine only, for consumption on the premises of restaurants $250
only
Catering permit                                                                   $150
Manufacture of beer, excluding beer produced by a brewpub:
   1 to 100 barrel daily capacity, or any part thereof                         $200
   100 to 150 barrel daily capacity                                            $400
   150 to 200 barrel daily capacity                                            $700
   200 to 300 barrel daily capacity                                            $1,000
   300 to 400 barrel daily capacity                                            $1,300
   400 to 500 barrel daily capacity                                            $1,400
   500 barrel daily capacity, or more                                          $1,600
Manufacture of wines                                                              $500
Manufacture of alcohol and spirits                                                $2,000
Non-beverage user:
   Class 1                                                                     $5
   Class 2                                                                     $25
   Class 3                                                                     $50
   Class 4                                                                     $100
   Class 5                                                                     $250
Operation of a brewpub                                                            $500
Operation of a farm winery                                                        $500
Retailer of alcoholic liquor, including beer for consumption on and off the       150
premises, non-profit corporation which is a club
Retailer of beer only, off and on sale                                            $250
Special designated permit                                                         $50
Wine only, for consumption off the premises                                       $250
 
   (B)   Such occupation tax so levied shall be paid to the Clerk for the
benefit of the General Fund of said city immediately after the final issuance
of a liquor license under the State Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 et
seq., for any such business.
   (C)   (1)   The City Council hereby designates the City Administrator as the
agent to determine whether a special designated license, submitted by a Class C
and D liquor license holder, is to be approved or denied.
      (2)   The determination by the agent shall be considered the
determination of the City Council, unless otherwise provided by the City
Council. The agent’s determination may be reviewed by or otherwise ratified by
the City Council at a later date. Special designated license applications
submitted by non-profit organizations require City Council approval.
(Prior Code, § 111.02) (Ord. 1560, passed 2-12-1996; Ord. 1815, passed 10-10-
2005; Ord. 2016, passed 10-12-2015)
§ 111.03 HOURS OF SALE.
   (A)   No alcoholic liquors, including beer, shall be sold at retail or
dispensed on any day between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   (B)   In addition to the restriction set forth in division (A) above, no
alcoholic liquor, other than beer or wine, shall be sold at retail or dispensed
on Sunday between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. Alcoholic liquor may be
sold at retail or dispensed on Sunday after 12:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 111.03) (Ord. 1464, passed 10-14-1991; Ord. 1469, passed 3-23-
1992; Ord. 1815, passed 10-10-2005) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 111.04 CONSUMPTION ON PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except when the State Liquor Control Commission has issued a license
as provided in Neb. RS 53-186(2) or as provided in Neb. RS 60-6,211.08, it is
unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquor upon property owned or
controlled by the state or any governmental subdivision thereof unless
authorized by the governing bodies having jurisdiction over such property.
(Neb. RS 53-186)
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person owning, operating, managing, or
conducting any bottle club, dance hall, restaurant, café, or club or any place
open to the general public to permit or allow any person to consume alcoholic
liquor upon the premises except as permitted by a license issued for such
premises pursuant to the State Liquor Control Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 et seq.
It is unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquor in any dance hall,
restaurant, café, or club or any place open to the general public except as
permitted by a license issued for such premises pursuant to the Act. This
division (B) does not apply to a retail licensee while lawfully engaged in the
catering of alcoholic beverages or to limousines or buses operated under Neb.
RS 60-6,211.08.
(Neb. RS 53-186.01)
Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 111.05 NUDITY; SEXUAL OR SIMULATED SEXUAL ACTS; PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee under the State Liquor Control
Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 et seq., to appear or to allow any live person to
appear, in any licensed premises in a state of nudity while providing
entertainment, providing service, acting as hostess, manager or owner, or
serving as an employee in any capacity. For the purpose of this section the
term NUDITY shall mean the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
area, buttocks, anus, or the human female breast including the areola or any
portion below the areola with less than a full opaque covering.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee under the State Liquor Control
Act to perform or to allow any live person to perform on the licensed premises
acts of or acts which simulate:
      (1)   Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral
copulation, flagellation, or any sexual acts that are prohibited by law;
      (2)   The touching, caressing, or fondling on the breast, buttocks, anus,
or genitals; and/or
      (3)   The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva, or genitals.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee under the State Liquor Control
Act to show or allow to be shown the licensed premises any film, video, still
picture, electronic reproduction, or other visual reproductions depicting:
      (1)   Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy,
bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any other sexual acts;
      (2)   Any person being touched, caressed, or fondled on the breast,
buttocks, anus, or genitals;
      (3)   Scenes wherein a person displays the vulva or the anus or the
genitals; and/or
      (4)   Scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are employed
to depict, or drawings are employed to portray, any of the prohibited
activities described above.
(Prior Code, § 111.05) (Ord. 1702, passed 1-28-2002) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 111.06 LICENSEE OR EMPLOYEES; DRINKING WHILE ON DUTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, manager, or employee of any licensee
to consume any alcoholic liquor during the time such person is on duty and in
the conduct of their business; and it shall be unlawful for any licensee,
manager, or employee to serve or sell alcoholic liquor while under the
influence of such liquor.
(Prior Code, § 111.06) (Ord. 1871, passed 7-14-2008; Ord. 1880, passed 10-27-
2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 112: HOTELS
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Definition
   
112.02   Fire protection equipment
   
112.03   Inspections
   
112.04   Register
Lodging Tax
   
112.15   Purpose
   
112.16   Definitions
   
112.17   Tax imposed; collection of tax
   
112.18   Return
   
112.19   Tax cumulative
   
112.20   Use of revenue
   
112.21   Failure to file return; delinquency; assessment by City Finance
Director
   
112.22   Administration of subchapter; miscellaneous provisions
   
112.23   Recovery of unpaid tax by action at law
   
112.24   Suspension or revocation of licenses for failure to pay tax; hearing
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 DEFINITION.
   Every building maintained or advertised as a public lodging house or where
more than six rooms are provided for sleeping accommodations shall be known as
a hotel.
(Prior Code, § 112.01)
§ 112.02 FIRE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   The Fire Chief, or other officer designated by the governing body,
shall survey each hotel and specify suitable fire detecting devices or
extinguishing appliances which shall be provided.
   (B)   Fire protective or extinguishing systems or appliances which have been
installed in compliance with any permit or order, or according to any
provisions of this code, shall be maintained in operative condition at all
times and it shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to reduce the
effectiveness of the protection so required.
(Prior Code, § 112.02) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 112.03 INSPECTIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief and the Health Officer, or other
officers so designated by the governing body, to make periodic and regular
inspections of every hotel and to make regular reports to the governing body of
such hotel or hotels concerning regulations imposed by this code.
(Prior Code, § 112.03)
§ 112.04 REGISTER.
   A register shall be maintained at every hotel and each guest shall be
required to register his or her name and home address. The date of arrival and
departure shall be clearly indicated and the register shall be maintained for a
period of at least one year following registration. The register shall be open
for inspection to any authorized person.
(Prior Code, § 112.04)
LODGING TAX
§ 112.15 PURPOSE.
   Pursuant to the authority of Neb. RS 16-205, the City Council finds,
determines, and declares that it is appropriate that a tax be imposed on all
hotels, as herein defined in §
112.16, for the purpose of raising revenues. The forgoing determination is made
with due consideration of business in the city and the relation of business to
the municipal welfare, together with relation thereof to expenditures required
by the city, and with consideration of just, proper, and equitable distribution
of the tax burdens within the city and other properly associated matters.
(Ord. 2078, passed - -2019)
§ 112.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Gering and the area within the corporate limits of the
City of Gering.
   HOTEL. Any commercial, non-profit, or state-owned facility where the public
may obtain sleeping accommodations for payment. This includes any hotel, motel,
tourist hotel, bed and breakfast, RV park, campground (charges for RV pads or
tent sites), or inn. HOTEL does not include the portion of a health care
facility (licensed under the Health Care Facility Licensure Act) which provides
rooms, lodging, or sleeping accommodations for a charge; or a facility operated
by an approved educational institution used to house students.
   PERSON. Any natural person, individual, partnership, association,
organization, or corporation of any kind or character engaging in the business
of operating a hotel.
   ROOM. Any space ordinarily used for sleeping accommodations and for which
any occupant has, for consideration, obtained the use or possession, or the
right to use or possess, for a period not to exceed 30 contiguous days. The
term shall include camping space, trailer space, or recreational vehicle space.
The term does not include a function room, such as a ballroom, banquet room,
reception room, or meeting room; provided, it is not used as temporary sleeping
accommodations, nor for complimentary or other sleeping accommodations for
which no consideration is charged or for sleeping accommodations for which the
consideration is paid by a person not subject to the sales and use tax imposed
by the Nebraska Revenue Act of 1967.
   TAXPAYER. Any person or entity in the hotel business herein defined who is
required to pay the tax herein imposed.
   TOTAL CONSIDERATION CHARGED FOR OCCUPANCY. Any and all charges that are
subject to the lodging tax under the Nebraska Visitors Development Act, Neb. RS
81-1245 et seq., excluding the city’s lodging occupation tax.
(Ord. 2078, passed - -2019)
§ 112.17 TAX IMPOSED; COLLECTION OF TAX.
   (A)   On or after June 1, 2019, each person engaged in the business of
operating a hotel in the city shall pay an occupancy tax in the amount of 4% of
the hotel consideration charged for occupancy per occupied room per night.   
   (B)   The tax imposed by this subchapter may be shown as an add-on to the
charge for occupancy of the rooms. The hotel operator shall remain responsible
for payment of all taxes imposed, whether or not the taxes are actually
collected from the guests.
(Ord. 2078, passed - -2019)
§ 112.18 RETURN.
   Each and every person engaged in the business of operating a hotel within
the city for the calendar month beginning June 2019, and for each and every
month thereafter, shall prepare and file, on or before the twenty-fifth day of
the following month on a form prescribed and furnished by the city, a return
for the taxable calendar month, and at the same time pay to the city the tax
herein imposed. The return shall be verified and sworn to by an owner or
officer of the business. The return shall be considered filed on time if mailed
with payment enclosed in an envelope properly addressed to the City Finance
Director, postage prepaid and postmarked before midnight of the twenty-fifth of
the appropriate month. If the city offers online filing, the return will also
be considered filed on time if filed online and electronic payment submitted to
the city by midnight the twenty-fifth of the appropriate month.
(Ord. 2078, passed - -2019)
§ 112.19 TAX CUMULATIVE.
   (A)   The levy of tax under this subchapter is in addition to all other
fees, taxes, excises, and licenses levied and imposed under any contract or any
other provisions of this code or ordinances of the city, in addition to any
fee, tax, excise, or licenses imposed by the state.
   (B)   Payment of the tax imposed by this subchapter shall not relieve the
person paying the same from payment of any other tax now or hereafter imposed
by contract or ordinance or by this code, including those imposed for any
business or occupation he or she may carry on, unless so provided therein. The
occupational taxes imposed by this subchapter shall be cumulative, except where
otherwise specifically provided.
(Ord. 2078, passed - -2019)
§ 112.20 USE OF REVENUE.
   The 4% occupation tax imposed by this subchapter shall be used to pay for
the following, including, but not limited to, these activities: historic
restoration; education interpretive sites/facilities, such as museums;
participatory sports facilities; facilities for pedestrians and bicycles that
provide transportation; convention centers; community centers; cultural and
heritage recreational sites and facilities; debt service with respect to
activities outlined in this subchapter; and all related supporting activities,
including ongoing operational and maintenance necessary to staff and run the
facilities/projects at the discretion of the City Council.
(Ord. 2078, passed - -2019)
§ 112.21 FAILURE TO FILE RETURN; DELINQUENCY; ASSESSMENT BY CITY FINANCE
DIRECTOR.
   (A)   If any person neglects or refuses to file a return or make payment of
the taxes as required by this subchapter, the City Finance Director shall make
an estimate, based upon such information as may be reasonable available, of the
amount of taxes due for the period or periods for which the taxpayer is
delinquent, and upon the basis of such estimated amount, compute and assess in
addition thereto a penalty equal to 2% per month or fraction thereof from date
when due, together with interest on such delinquent taxes, at the rate of 1%
per month or fraction thereof from the date when due.
   (B)   The City Finance Director shall give the delinquent taxpayer written
notice of such estimated taxes, penalty, and interest, which notice must be
served personally or by certified mail.
   (C)   Such estimate shall thereupon become an assessment, and such
assessment shall be final and due and payable from the taxpayer to the City
Finance Director ten days from the date of service of the notice or the date of
mailing by certified mail; however, within such ten-day period the delinquent
taxpayer may petition the City Finance Director for the revision or
modification of such assessment and shall, within such ten-day period, furnish
the City Finance Director the facts and correct figures showing the correct
amount of such taxes.
   (D)   Such petition shall be in writing, and the facts and figures submitted
shall be submitted in writing and shall be given under oath of the taxpayer.
   (E)   The City Finance Director may then modify such assessment in
accordance with the facts which he or she deems correct. Such adjusted
assessment shall be made in writing, and notice thereof shall be mailed to the
taxpayer within ten days; and all such decisions shall become final upon the
expiration of 30 days from the date of service, unless proceedings are
commenced within that time for appeal in the District Court.
   (F)   It shall be an offense for any person to fail to file a return or make
payment of the taxes as required by this subchapter.
(Ord. 2078, passed - -2019)
§ 112.22 ADMINISTRATION OF SUBCHAPTER; MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The administration of the provisions of this subchapter are hereby
vested in the City Finance Director or his or her designee who shall prescribe
forms in conformity with this subchapter for the making of returns; for the
ascertainment, assessment, and collection of the tax imposed hereunder; and for
the proper administration and enforcement hereof.
   (B)   All notices required to be given to the taxpayer under the provisions
of this subchapter shall be in writing. Notices shall be mailed by registered
or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the taxpayer
at his or her last known address.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of every taxpayer to keep and preserve suitable
records and other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount
of tax for which he or she is liable hereunder.
      (1)   Records of the gross revenue by which the tax is measured shall be
kept separate and apart from the records of other sales or receipts in order to
facilitate the examination of books and records as necessary for the collection
of this tax.   
      (2)   It shall be the duty of every such taxpayer to keep and preserve
for a period of three years all such books, invoices, and other records, which
shall be open for examination at any time by the City Finance Director or his
or her duly designated persons. If such taxpayer keeps or maintains the books,
invoices, accounts, or other records, or any part thereof, outside of the
state, upon demand of the City Finance Director, such taxpayer shall make the
same available at a suitable place within the city, to be designated by the
City Finance Director, for examination, inspection, and audit by the City
Finance Director or his or her duly authorized persons. The taxpayer shall
reimburse the city for the reasonable costs of the examination, inspection, and
audit if the City Finance Director determines that the taxpayer paid 90% or
less of the tax owing for the period of the examination.
      (3)   The City Finance Director, in his or her discretion, may make,
permit, or cause to be made the examination, inspection, or audit of books,
invoices, accounts, or their records so kept or maintained by such taxpayer
outside the state where the same may be made available; provided, such taxpayer
shall have entered into a binding agreement with the city to reimburse it for
all costs and expenses incurred by it in order to have such examination,
inspection, or audit made in such place.    
   (D)   For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of a return, or for
the purpose of determining the amount of tax due from any taxpayer, the City
Finance Director or his or her duly authorized persons may conduct
investigations concerning any matters covered by this subchapter; and may
examine any relevant books, papers, records, or memoranda of any such taxpayer.
(Ord. 2078, passed - -2019)
§ 112.23 RECOVERY OF UNPAID TAX BY ACTION AT LAW.
   (A)   The City Finance Director may also treat any such taxes, penalties, or
interest due and unpaid as a debt due the city.   
   (B)   In case of failure to pay the taxes, or any portion thereof, or any
penalty or interest thereon when due, the city may recover at law the amount of
such taxes, penalties, and interest in any court of the county or of the county
wherein the taxpayer resides or has its principal place of business having
jurisdiction of the amounts sought to be collected.   
   (C)   The return of the taxpayer or the assessment made by the City Finance
Director, as herein provided, shall be prima facie proof of the amount due.   
   (D)   The City Attorney may commence an action for the recovery of taxes due
under this subchapter and this remedy shall be in addition to all other
existing remedies, or remedies provided in this subchapter.
(Ord. 2078, passed - -2019)
§ 112.24 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES FOR FAILURE TO PAY TAX; HEARING.
   If the City Council, after holding a hearing, shall find that any person has
willfully evaded payment of collection and remittance of the tax imposed by
this subchapter, such official may suspend or revoke any license, permit, or
other approval held by such tax evader. Said person shall have an opportunity
to be heard at such hearing to be held not less than seven days after notice is
given of the time and place of the hearing to be held, addressed to the last
known place of business of such person. Pending the notice, hearing, and
finding, any license, permit, or other approval issued by the city to the
person may be temporarily suspended. No suspension or revocation hereunder
shall release or discharge the person from civil liability for the payment or
collection and remittance of the tax, nor from prosecution for such offense.
(Ord. 2078, passed - -2019)
CHAPTER 113: SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
   
113.01   Use of city property or facilities for special events
   
113.02   Permit required
   
113.03   Permit application
   
113.04   Permit conditions
   
113.05   Authorization for individual or organization to issue vending permits
during special events
   
113.06   Vending permit monitoring
   
113.07   Permit compliance
   
113.08   Insurance required
   
113.09   Permit revoked
   
113.10   Use of right-of-way; temporary and permanent use; permission required;
Engineering Department rules and regulations; nuisance
   
113.11   Rules and regulations for applications and permits for the use of
right-of-way in the city
   
113.12   License agreement
§ 113.01 USE OF CITY PROPERTY OR FACILITIES FOR SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   Community or business. Public streets, sidewalks, parks, parking lots
and other public property and facilities may be used temporarily for the
purpose of conducting an organized community or business event.
   (B)   Block party. Public streets and sidewalks are not to be used for the
purpose of a festive gathering including barbecues, picnics, and games.
   (C)   Sidewalk café. Public sidewalks may be used for extended periods for
the purpose of operating a sidewalk café as an accessory use for an adjacent
food service business.
   (D)   Administration. The City Council hereby authorizes the City
Administrator to administer at his or her discretion, this chapter, unless
otherwise directed by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 113.01) (Ord. 1408, passed 5-22-1989; Ord. 1712, passed 6-24-
2002; Ord. 1997, passed 6-29-2015)
§ 113.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No community or business special event shall be conducted on city
property and facilities unless a permit is obtained from the office of the City
Clerk and approved by the City Administrator.
   (B)   No sidewalk café or similar use may operate on a public sidewalk
unless a permit is obtained from the office of the City Clerk and approved by
the City Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 113.02) (Ord. 1408, passed 5-22-1989; Ord. 1712, passed 6-24-
2002; Ord. 1905, passed 11-23-2009; Ord. 1997, passed 6-29-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 113.03 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   An organization or individual seeking a permit to request use of city
property or facilities for a special event shall file an application with the
City Clerk on forms provided for a permit. The application shall be filed not
less than 30 days before the date of the proposed special event. The City
Administrator may, if good cause is shown by the organization or individual,
consider an application which has been filed less than 30 days before the date
of the proposed special event.
   (B)   A business seeking a sidewalk café permit shall file an application
with the City Clerk on forms provided for the permit. The application shall be
filed not less than ten days before the operation of the café.
(Prior Code, § 113.03) (Ord. 1408, passed 5-22-1989; Ord. 1712, passed 6-24-
2002; Ord. 1905, passed 11-23-2009; Ord. 1997, passed 6-29-2015)
§ 113.04 PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   (A)   The City Administrator may approve the permit as submitted or may set
additional conditions upon the request for use of city property or facilities.
   (B)   The City Administrator may approve the permit as submitted or may set
additional conditions upon the request for use of the public street or
sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 113.04) (Ord. 1408, passed 5-22-1989; Ord. 1712, passed 6-24-
2002; Ord. 1905, passed 11-23-2009; Ord. 1997, passed 6-29-2015)
§ 113.05 AUTHORIZATION FOR INDIVIDUAL OR ORGANIZATION TO ISSUE VENDING PERMITS
DURING SPECIAL EVENTS.
   An organization or individual may request exclusive rights to issue vending
permits in the designated area or facility of the special event. The City
Administrator may authorize the organization or individual exclusive rights to
issue vending permits in the designated area or facility of the special event.
If such exclusive right is not requested or if the City Administrator denies
the request, then vending permits cannot be issued.
(Prior Code, § 113.05) (Ord. 1408, passed 5-22-1989; Ord. 1712, passed 6-24-
2002; Ord. 1905, passed 11-23-2009; Ord. 1997, passed 6-29-2015)
§ 113.06 VENDING PERMIT MONITORING.
   The organization or individual to which the City Administrator has
authorized exclusive rights to issue vending permits shall be responsible for
monitoring those permits.
(Prior Code, § 113.06) (Ord. 1408, passed 5-22-1989; Ord. 1712, passed 6-24-
2002; Ord. 1905, passed 11-23-2009; Ord. 1997, passed 6-29-2015)
§ 113.07 PERMIT COMPLIANCE.
   An organization or individual to which a permit has been issued for a
special event shall comply with all permit conditions and with all applicable
laws and ordinances, unless otherwise directed by the City Administrator in his
or her discretion.
(Prior Code, § 113.07) (Ord. 1408, passed 5-22-1989; Ord. 1712, passed 6-24-
2002; Ord. 1997, passed 6-29-2015)
§ 113.08 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   An organization or individual should name the city as an additional
insured on general liability policy effective on the requested use date(s)
covering any acts of negligence on the part of person or organization or by any
of his, her or its agents, officers, servants, employees, or by persons on city
property because of city property and facility use request in the amount of
$500,000 in bodily injury liability and $500,000 in property damage liability
or a combined limit of $1,000,000.
   (B)   Upon a written showing of good cause, the above insurance requirement
may be waived in the discretion of the City Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 113.08) (Ord. 1408, passed 5-22-1989; Ord. 1712, passed 6-24-
2002; Ord. 1997, passed 6-29-2015)
§ 113.09 PERMIT REVOKED.
   (A)   Any permit issued to an organization or individual for use of city
property or facility for a special event may be revoked by the municipal police
or City Administrator in the event that the permittee is or has engaged in
deceitful, shady, or unlawful practices.
   (B)   A sidewalk café permit may be revoked by the municipal police or City
Administrator in the event that the party becomes a nuisance or any deceitful,
shady, or unlawful practices occur.
(Prior Code, § 113.09) (Ord. 1408, passed 5-22-1989; Ord. 1712, passed 6-24-
2002; Ord. 1997, passed 6-29-2015)
§ 113.10 USE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY; TEMPORARY AND PERMANENT USE; PERMISSION REQUIRED;
ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT RULES AND REGULATIONS; NUISANCE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PERMANENT. Any such land use of a long-term nature or unlimited duration,
which requires construction that is not readily removable and which complies
with all rules and regulations of the City Planning/Engineering Department.
      TEMPORARY. Any such land use of a short-term nature or fixed duration,
which does not require permanent construction is readily removable and which
complies with all rules and regulations of the City Planning/Engineering
Department.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
exercise a permanent land use of city right-of-way, or to place in or upon any
right-of-way, street, alley, sidewalk, or municipal parking lot of the city,
any permanent substance or thing obstructing or encroaching upon such right-of-
way, street, alley, or sidewalk, or to obstruct the same in any permanent
manner whatsoever, without first obtaining permission from the City Planning/
Engineering Department to do so. An application for such permit, along with any
fee required under this code, shall be delivered to the City Planning/
Engineering Department. A City Planning/Engineering Department official will
review the application as well as the rules and regulations governing the
permanent use of any right-of-way, street, alley, sidewalk, or municipal
parking lot and, if it appears to the City Planning/Engineering Department
official that the proposed use complies with all rules and regulations, and
that the public safety, convenience, and welfare will not be adversely
affected, the City Planning/Engineering Department official may issue a permit
to the applicant. The permit shall be valid for one calendar year, beginning on
January 1 of each year and expiring on December 31 of each year. Any permit
issued by the City Planning/Engineering Department official shall be subject to
the condition that the permit may be revoked at any time the official finds
that public safety, convenience, and welfare would be enhanced by the
revocation of such permit. If the City Planning/Engineering Department official
grants the application, the applicant shall be given a written permit signed by
the City Planning/Engineering Department official. Such permit shall state in
writing that it may be revoked at any time the City Planning/Engineering
Department official finds that public safety, convenience, and welfare will be
enhanced by the revocation of the permit. If the official has imposed
conditions on the granting of the permit, such conditions shall be specified in
the permit. Any permanent use of the city right-of-way or any permanent
obstruction or encroachment upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or municipal
parking lot in the city without having obtained a permit as provided in this
section or as otherwise provided in this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
exercise a temporary land use of city right-of-way, or to place in or upon any
right-of-way, street, alley, sidewalk, or municipal parking lot of the city any
temporary substance or thing obstructing or encroaching upon such right-of-way,
street, alley, or sidewalk, or to obstruct the same in any temporary manner
whatsoever, without first complying with all applicable rules and regulations
of the City Planning/Engineering Department. Any temporary land use of the city
right-of-way or any temporary obstruction or encroachment upon any street,
alley, sidewalk, or municipal parking lot in the city without having first
complied with all applicable rules and regulations of the City Planning/
Engineering Department shall be deemed a nuisance.
(Ord. 2124, passed - -2023)
§ 113.11 RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS FOR THE USE OF
RIGHT-OF-WAY IN THE CITY.
   (A)   Applicability and purpose. These rules and regulations shall apply to
all city-owned lands and public rights-of-way, sidewalks, streets, alleys, and
parking lots (“lands or right-of-way”) located within the city and shall
operate to allow certain uses of the lands and public rights-of-way of the city
but only when located within commercial zoning districts of the city.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      SANDWICH BOARD SIGN. Any portable sandwich board, hinged sign, or other
stand-alone sign intended for use upon any public sidewalks, alleys, streets,
or lands other right-of-way in the city.
      SIDEWALK. Any public sidewalk, right-of-way, or land located within or
directly abutting a city street, but shall not include any portion of a street,
alley, or public parking lot used for vehicular traffic and/or parking.
      STORE FRONT. A single tract of commercial property fronting upon a
sidewalk. In the case of a corner property which contains more than one
business establishment, one private usage will be allowed for each business.
   (C)   Sidewalk displays.
      (1)   The following types of sidewalk displays shall be allowed:
         (a)   Park benches usable by the public of a historic style or such
style as is compatible with the identity and theme of the area in which it is
located; and
         (b)   Decorative plants and planters. Decorative plants and planters
may not be used for advertising.
      (2)   Sidewalk displays shall comply with the following conditions.
         (a)   The area of private display usage must be on the sidewalk
immediately adjacent to the store front and shall not block or impede access to
or from doors, emergency exits, or fire escapes.
         (b)   Displays must allow a clear sidewalk width not less than five
feet for pedestrians between the sidewalk display and any other impediment near
the curb side of the sidewalk.
         (c)   Displays, whether in one or more parts, shall be limited to a
total length of not greater than ten feet and a total square footage of not
greater than 30 square feet, for any single store front.
         (d)   No part of any display may exceed a total height of 48 inches.
   (D)   Sidewalk sandwich board sign.
      (1)   The following types of sidewalk sandwich board signs may be allowed
within the city.
         (a)   Sandwich board signs may be used, subject to design review and
approval by the Department of the city.
         (b)   No walking sandwich board signs are allowed.
      (2)   Sandwich board signs shall comply with the following conditions.
         (a)   Sandwich board signs may be displayed only during the open hours
of the business to which the sign advertises.
         (b)   The sandwich board sign must be located within the three foot
width of sidewalk immediately adjacent to the store front of which the sign
advertises and must allow a clear sidewalk width of not less than five feet for
pedestrians between the sandwich board sign and any other impediment near the
curb side of the sidewalk.
         (c)   Sandwich board signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 48
inches and a maximum width of 36 inches in order to maintain visibility for
pedestrians.
         (d)   Only one sandwich board sign is allowable per store front.
   (E)   Sidewalk cafes.
      (1)   The following types of sidewalk cafes may be allowed.
         (a)   All sidewalk cafes shall function in conjunction with and
adjacent to an operating restaurant or coffee shop and shall not exceed the
width of the restaurant or coffee shop store front.
         (b)   Sidewalk cafes may be bordered with removable bollards with
connecting ropes or chains to define the perimeter; however, bollards, ropes,
chains, tables, storage units, and any other equipment and furnishings must be
removable and stored in a manner that will not impede pedestrians or their
movement on the sidewalk, as determined solely by an official of the
Department.
         (c)   All sidewalk cafes shall have and maintain at all times, in full
force and effect, all applicable health, food, and drink permits and all
licenses required by law.
      (2)   Sidewalk cafes shall comply with the following conditions.
         (a)   Sidewalk cafes may occupy only the area of private usage on the
sidewalk immediately adjacent to the store front to allow for safe pedestrian
travel and as set forth by the city in the application for a permit.
         (b)   The owner and/or operator of a sidewalk cafe is responsible for
maintaining a clean sidewalk cafe area during business hours and at the close
of each operating business day.
         (c)   Sidewalk cafes must allow a clear sidewalk width of not less
that five feet for pedestrians between the perimeter of the sidewalk cafe area
and any other impediment near the curb side of the sidewalk.
         (d)   Sidewalk café and furniture must be removable, durable, and
attractive and may be stored in the cafe area outside of operating hours if it
is stored so that it does not impede pedestrians and does not appear unkept or
become a nuisance.
         (e)   Sidewalk cafes must file and maintain at all times during
operation on sidewalks proof of liability insurance with the Department in an
amount of not less than $1,000,000 per person per occurrence.
      (3)   No sidewalk cafe may be operated or located on any sidewalk prior
to issuance of a permit in conformity with the following.
         (a)   The application for a permit must be filed with the Department,
using a form provided by the Department.
         (b)   The application shall be reviewed and approved by an official of
the Department, in conjunction with the City Fire Department and City Police
Department.
         (c)   Upon approval of the application and payment of applicable fees,
as are established by the city, the permit shall be issued to the applicant.
The fee shall not be subject to proration or refund irrespective of the date of
issuance or surrender.
         (d)   The permit issued pursuant to this division (E) shall remain in
full force and effect until 11:59 p.m. on December 31 following the date of
issuance.
   (F)   License agreement for permanent fixtures.
      (1)   In the event any person obtains a permit to occupy or obstruct any
portion of any street, alley, sidewalk, easement, or other public right-of-way
or lands owned by or under the control of the city, if that use will require
placement of fixtures permanently attached to the lands or right-of-way, that
person must, in addition to securing a right-of-way permit, agree to enter into
a license agreement and pay a processing fee in accordance with the city’s fee
schedule, which fee shall not be refundable. The procedure for application and
review of the request for a license agreement shall be as follows.
         (a)   An applicant or his, her, or their agent shall file an
application and processing fee shall be paid to an official of the Engineering
Department on forms to be provided by the city.
         (b)   An official of the Engineering Department shall review the
information provided on the application and shall distribute copies of said
application to such departments and agencies within the city as may have an
interest in or be affected by the proposed use set out in the application for
review and/or recommendations.
         (c)   The application for license agreement shall be approved, unless
a department or agency of the city finds that the proposed use and permanent
fixtures violates any federal, state, or local statute, regulation, ordinance,
code, rule, regulation, or policy or impedes, impairs, or diminishes the use of
the lands or right-of-way of the city, the public, or other person which has a
lawful right to and/or occupy said lands or right-of-way.
      (2)   An official of the City Planning/Engineering Department, upon
receipt of comments and/or recommendations from the aforementioned departments
and agencies may approve or disapprove, in whole or in part, an application for
license agreement to place fixtures permanently on city lands or right-of-way.
The official of the City Planning/Engineering Department may specify such
conditions and terms to be included in the requested license agreement as are
necessary and prudent to protect the interest of the city, public, or any
person which has a lawful right to use and/or occupy the lands or right-of-way.
The official shall inform the applicant or his, her, or their agent in writing
on any decision disapproving in whole or in part the application for license
agreement, said decision to be sent to the address shown on the application.
      (3)   In the event an application submitted under division (F)(1) above
is disapproved in whole or in part, the applicant, within 15 days of the date
of the decision by the official of the Department, may request that the
application be placed on the agenda at a regular meeting of the City Council
for review and final decision. The request for review shall be made in writing
and filed with the Department, along with the appeal fee set out in the city’s
fee schedule.
      (4)   This shall not apply to personal property which is not affixed or
attached to any real estate except movable buildings or structures.
      (5)   An owner of an underground sprinkling system encroaching into the
public right-of-way on any improvement project that is to receive federal
transportation funds shall obtain a license agreement subject to the
requirements pursuant to these rules and regulations. A processing fee is not
required for a license agreement for underground sprinkling systems encroaching
into lands or public right-of-way so long as it is in connection with federal
transportation funded projects.
      (6)   Any occupancy of lands or public right-of-way granted by the city
under this section shall be at the pleasure of the city and shall be limited to
the uses or occupancy set forth in these rules and regulations.
      (7)   All license agreements shall provide:
         (a)   That such use or occupancy is at the licensee’s sole risk;
         (b)   The licensee shall waive any claim for damages against the city,
its officials, employees, agents, and contractors for any damage or injury that
may result to the licensee’s property within the area occupied pursuant to said
license agreement;
         (c)   The licensee shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from and
against any and all loss or damage, and any and all claims, demands, suits,
liabilities, and payments and contract or tort, penal or otherwise, resulting
from or in connection with the use or occupancy of lands and public right-of-
way pursuant to said license agreement;
         (d)   That such use or occupancy is at the pleasure of the city and
may be revoked at any time; and
         (e)   Such other conditions as the city deems necessary to protect the
interests of the city and the general public’s use of the public right-of-way.
   (G)   Suspension or termination of permit.
      (1)   Any City Planning/Engineering Department official may suspend or
terminate the permit of any permit holder found to be in violation of any
provision of this code or this section with respect to the permit holder’s use
and/or occupancy of any part of the rights-of-way, sidewalks, streets, alleys,
or parking lots within the city.
      (2)   The City Planning/Engineering Department official shall deliver a
notice of suspension or termination of permit to the permit holder which states
the basis for and evidence underlying the termination or suspension.
      (3)   Any City Planning/Engineering Department official may suspend the
permit of any permit holder for not less than one day nor more than seven days
for violations. Upon termination of a permit, the permit holder may not re-
apply for a new permit until after December 31 following the date of issuance
of the revoked permit.
      (4)   Any permit holder aggrieved by suspension or termination of said
permit may request a hearing before the City Council at its next regularly
scheduled meeting, provided said request is filed in writing with the
Department not less than four business days prior to said meeting.
         (a)   The hearing shall be conducted informally. The permit holder and
the City Planning/Engineering Department official may present oral or written
statements of evidence supporting or opposing the suspension or termination of
the permit to the City Council. Presentations by each participant shall be
limited to a total time of 30 minutes or less.
         (b)   Upon conclusion of the hearing, the City Council may reverse,
modify, or affirm the decision of the City Planning/Engineering Department
official. Written notice of the determination of the City Council shall be
given to the permit holder either personally or sent by United States mail to
the address listed on the permit application.
(Ord. 2124, passed - -2023)
§ 113.12 LICENSE AGREEMENT.
 
LICENSE AGREEMENT
This License Agreement (“Agreement”) is made by and between the City of Gering, Nebraska, a
Municipal Corporation, hereinafter referred to as “Licensor”, and                             ,
hereinafter referred to as “Licensee”.
   1.   Purpose. The purpose of this Agreement is to set forth the terms and conditions under which
the Licensee may construct, maintain, repair, and utilize the following described improvement which
will infringe upon real estate owned by the Licensor:
         To install a sidewalk café enclosed with a three-foot tall wrought iron railing system.
Licensee must maintain five feet of access for pedestrian walkway from any obstruction, such as
posts, tree grades, or flange plates. An 8' vertical clearance above the walkway must be maintained.
This Agreement shall pertain to only the area in front of the property at                   .
   2.   Description of Real Estate. The Licensee owns the following described real estate adjacent
to Licensor’s real estate to which this Agreement shall apply:
   3.   Duties and Risks. It is understood and agreed that the Licensee may construct, maintain,
repair, and utilize the above-described improvement at the Licensee’s sole risk. The Licensee hereby
waives any claim for damages against the Licensor, its officers, employees, agents, and independent
contractors, for any damage or injury that might result to said improvement. If the Licensor, in its
sole discretion, determines that any part or all of the improvement must be removed or is damaged by
the Licensor, its employees, agents or independent contractors working for Licensor during the
course of their employment or duties with the Licensor, Licensee agrees to assume and pay all costs
relating to the replacement or repair of the improvement. The Licensee indemnifies and holds the
City harmless from and against all claims arising out of the use or occupancy allowed under this
Agreement.
   4.   Existing Utilities. The Licensee is responsible for locating and coordinating original
construction and future maintenance work on the described improvement. No excavation work will be
permitted in the area of underground utility facilities until all such facilities have been located
and identified to the satisfaction of all parties. The excavation must be done with care in order to
avoid any possibility of damage to the utility facility. The Licensee shall be responsible for any
and all damage.
   5.   Restoration of Property. If the construction or maintenance of the improvement identified in
paragraph 1 above requires the excavation of earth, removal of hard surfacing, grass, vegetation,
landscaping, or any other disruption of the service of the public right-of-way or neighboring
property, the Licensee shall restore the surface of the area to the same condition as it existed
immediately prior to the Licensee’s work in the area.
   6.   Effective. This License Agreement shall take effect on the date it is executed by the Mayor
of the City of Gering as dated below. It shall continue for an indefinite term or until such time as
it is terminated as provided hereinafter.
   7.   Termination. This Agreement shall terminate upon one or more of the following occurrences:
      (a)   The service of written notice of intention to terminate by Licensee and the removal of
any improvements infringing upon the City’s lands or right-of-way.
      (b)   The Licensee’s application for a permit to occupy right-of-way, has expired.
      (c)   The Licensee’s construction or installation of any structure and improvement of any
nature upon the real estate owned by the Licensor except that described in paragraph 1 above, or the
Licensee’s failure to apply for and obtain a permit to alter or make improvement to its property.
      (d)   The City may revoke this Agreement at any time.
      (e)   Upon the termination of this Agreement, the Licensee shall be required, and hereby
agrees, to remove any improvements or fixtures from the Licensor’s real estate at its own expense
and without cost to the Licensor. Said removal shall occur no later than thirty (30) days after
receipt of the notice of intention to terminate or of any occurrences set forth in this paragraph.
Should the Licensee fail to do so, the Licensor may remove or cause the removal of any improvements
or fixtures from the Licensor’s real estate and the Licensee agrees to reimburse the Licensor for
all of its costs.
   8.   Assigns. This Agreement shall be binding upon the parties hereto, their successors and
assigns.
   9.   Entire Agreement. This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement between the parties
notwithstanding any oral or written agreements to the contrary. This License Agreement shall be
amended only in writing and executed by all parties.
   10.   Law. This Agreement shall be construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Nebraska
and the City of Gering, Nebraska.
 
(Ord. 2124, passed - -2023)
CHAPTER 114: PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   License requirement
   
114.03   Application procedure
   
114.04   Standards for issuance
   
114.05   Revocation procedure
   
114.06   Standards for revocation
   
114.07   Appeal procedure
   
114.08   Exhibition of identification
   
114.09   City policy on soliciting
   
114.10   Notice regulating soliciting
   
114.11   Posted notice; solicitors to comply
   
114.12   Prohibited solicitation
   114.13   Mobile food/beverage truck/trailer vending
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. The business carried on by any person who is an itinerant
merchant, peddler, or solicitor as defined in this section.
   GOODS. Merchandise of any description whatsoever, and includes, but is not
restricted to, wares and foodstuffs.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT. Any person, whether as owner, agent, or consignee, who
engages in a temporary business of selling goods within the city and who, in
the furtherance of such business, uses any building, structure, vehicle, or any
place within the city.
   PEDDLER. Any person, not an itinerant merchant, who:
      (1)   Travels from place to place by any means carrying goods for sale,
or making sales, or making deliveries; or
      (2)   Without traveling from place to place, sells or offers goods for
sale from any public place within the city.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who travels by any means from place to place, taking
or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the future or
for services to be performed in the future. A person who is a SOLICITOR is not
a peddler.
§ 114.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor shall
obtain a license before engaging in such activity within the city.
   (B)   The fee for the license required by this chapter shall be as set from
time to time by the city.
   (C)   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable.
   (D)   All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire 90 days after the
date of issuance thereof.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.03 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall file an
application with the City Clerk. This application shall be signed by the
applicant if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by the
president if a corporation. The applicant may be requested to provide
information concerning the following items:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   (a)   The name of the individual having management authority or
supervision of the applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed to
be carried on in the city;
         (b)   The local address of such individual;
         (c)   The permanent address of such individual;
         (d)   The capacity in which such individual will act;
      (3)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose purpose the
business will be carried on, and, if a corporation, the state of incorporation;
      (4)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed to carry on
applicant’s business;
      (5)   (a)   The nature, character, and quality of the goods or services
to be offered for sale or delivered;
         (b)   If goods, their invoice value and whether they are to be sold by
sample as well as from stock; and
         (c)   If goods, where and by whom such goods are manufactured or
grown, and where such goods are at the time of application.
      (6)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for the business;
      (7)   Whether or not the applicant, or the individual identified in
division (A)(2)(a) above, or the person identified in division (A)(3) above has
been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor and, if so, the nature of each
offense and the penalty assessed for each offense.
   (B)   Applicants for peddler or solicitor licenses may be required to
provide further information concerning the following items, in addition to that
requested under division (A) above:
      (1)   A description of the applicant; and
      (2)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the business,
including its registration number, if any.
   (C)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall attach to
their application, if required by the city, credentials from the person, if
any, for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant
to act as such representative.
   (D)   Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs shall also attach to their
application, in addition to any attachments required under division (C) above,
a statement from a licensed physician, dated not more than ten days prior to
the date of application, certifying the applicant to be free of contagious or
communicable disease.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.04 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the applicant’s
business reputation and moral character shall be made.
   (B)   The application shall be approved unless such investigation discloses
tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant’s business would pose a
substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. In
particular, tangible evidence that the applicant has done the following will
constitute valid reasons for disapproval of an application:
      (1)   Has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude;
      (2)   Has made willful misstatements in the application;
      (3)   Has committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining to
itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors, and the like; or
      (4)   Has committed prior fraudulent acts; or
      (5)   Has a record of continual breaches of solicited contracts.
§ 114.05 REVOCATION PROCEDURE.
   Any license or permit granted under this chapter may be revoked by the City
Clerk after notice and hearing, pursuant to the standards in §
114.06. Notice of hearing for revocation shall be given in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his or her last known
address, at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 114.06 STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION.
   A license granted under this chapter may be revoked for any of the following
reasons:
   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license application;
   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in connection
with the business being conducted under the license;
   (C)   Any violation of this chapter;
   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or conviction of the
licensee of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in such a
way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, or general welfare
of the public.
§ 114.07 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under §§
114.04 or
114.06 shall have the right to appeal to the City Council. The appeal shall be
taken by filing with the City Council, within 14 days after notice of the
decision has been mailed to such person’s last known address, a written
statement setting forth the grounds for appeal. The City Council shall set the
time and place for a hearing, and notice for such hearing shall be given to
such person in the same manner as provided in §
114.05.
   (B)   The order of the City Council after the hearing shall be final.
§ 114.08 EXHIBITION OF IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any license issued to an itinerant merchant under this chapter shall
be posted conspicuously in or at the place named therein. In the event more
than one place within the city shall be used to conduct the business licensed,
separate licenses shall be issued for each place.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall issue a license to each peddler or solicitor
licensed under this chapter. The license shall contain the words “Licensed
Peddler” or “Licensed Solicitor,” the expiration date of the license, and the
number of the license. The license shall be kept with the licensee during such
time as he or she is engaged in the business licensed.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.09 CITY POLICY ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the occupants of the
residences in the city shall make the determination of whether solicitors shall
be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences.
§ 114.10 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.
   (A)   Notice of the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence,
shall be given on a weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four
inches in size, exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence,
indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words,
as follows: “No solicitors invited.”
   (B)   The letters shall be at least one-third-inch in height.
   (C)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
§ 114.11 POSTED NOTICE; SOLICITORS TO COMPLY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises
in the city upon which a residence is located to first examine the notice
provided for in §
114.10 if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on the
notice. If the notice states “No solicitors invited,” then the solicitor,
whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises.
   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.12 PROHIBITED SOLICITATION.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in soliciting in defiance of the notice exhibited
at the residence in accordance with the provisions of §
114.10.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.13 MOBILE FOOD/BEVERAGE TRUCK/TRAILER VENDING.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
      MOBILE FOOD/BEVERAGE TRUCK/TRAILER. A licensed and operable vehicle or
concession trailer, which is enclosed and self-contained, independent with
respect to water, sewer, and power utilities, that contains equipment for the
preparation and sale or service of food or beverages with or without a charge
which is designed for immediate consumption. This includes any mobile food
vehicle as defined by the 2018 International Fire Code.
      MOBILE FOOD/BEVERAGE VENDING. The act of preparation and sale or service
of food or beverages with or without charge that are designed for immediate
consumption from a mobile food/beverage truck or mobile food/beverage vending
unit/trailer.
   (B)   Permit required.
      (1)    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in mobile food/
beverage vending on public property owned by the city or on city public right
of way without first obtaining a mobile food/beverage vending permit and all
applicable state and city permits and licenses, unless exempted under division
(D), below.
      (2)    In the event that a mobile food/beverage vendor, selling from a
mobile food/beverage truck/trailer, participates at a special event held in the
city under a special event permit obtained by the event organizer, the mobile
food/beverage vendor must also obtain, if they haven't already, a mobile food/
beverage vending permit from the city prior to participating with any special
event held in the city limits of the city. The event organizer may charge an
additional fee to said vendor, which is not under the purview of the city.
   (C)   Permit types. Applicants for a permit under this section may apply
for:
      (1)    Annual mobile food/beverage (truck/trailer) vendor permit;
      (2)   Weekly mobile food/beverage (truck/trailer) vendor permit;
   (D)   Permit exemptions. For purposes of this section, the following
activities shall be exempt from the permit requirement.
      (1)    Mobile food/beverage vending on private property, except that a
vendor on private property is still required to comply with all local, state,
and federal code, including 2018 IFC and Nebraska Department of Agricultural.
In addition, a vendor is exempt from obtaining a mobile food/beverage vending
permit only if applicant has an executed contract with the city leasing city-
owned property and has agreed to indemnify and hold the city harmless for any
and all liability related to the operation of mobile food/beverage trucks or
mobile food/beverage vending. Insurance certificate shall remain valid for the
duration of the permit.
      (2)   Children's neighborhood beverage stand, so long as the stand is:
operated by a child or children 18 years of age or younger; is located in a
neighborhood zoned for single family or multi-family residential use; provides
beverages only; and is operated on a temporary basis which does not obstruct
the public right of way
   (E)   Applications.
      (1)   An applicant for an annual or weekly mobile food/beverage vendor
permit shall file with the City Clerk a signed application on a form to be
furnished by the City Clerk, not less than two business days prior to issuance,
which shall contain the following information:
         (a)    The applicant's business name, address, phone number, and e-
mail address;
         (b)    The vehicle license plate numbers and descriptions of all
vehicles from which the applicant proposes to sell food or beverages;
         (c)    The description of the general type of food/beverage items to
be sold;
         (d)    A copy of the vehicle registration and proof of insurance;
         (e)    Proof of commercial liability insurance with a minimum coverage
amount of $1,000,000 together with an insurance certificate listing the city as
an additional insured;
         (f)    A copy of the State of Nebraska sales tax permit, or proof of
an applicable sales tax exemption for the mobile food/beverage vendor;
         (g)   A signed waiver of liability holding harmless the city and
indemnifying the city, its officials, and employees, for any claims for damages
to property or injury to persons, which may occur in connection with any
activity carried or pursuant to any activities associated with mobile food/
beverage vending;
         (h)   Proof of State of Nebraska food establishment inspection;
         (i)   A non-refundable application fee shall accompany all
applications;
         (j)   Such other information as the City Clerk may require and as
requested in the application form; and
         (k)   Proof of current inspection by the City Fire Marshal or his/her
designated agent (if applicable) or proof of current inspection from another
Nebraska municipality. Inspections are required annually.
      (2)   At the discretion of the City Administrator or his/her designee,
applications received less than two business days prior to issuance may be
denied.
   (F)   Issuance or denial. After receipt of the completed application and
application fee, the City Administrator or his/her designee shall either
approve or deny the annual or weekly mobile food/beverage vendor permit.
Grounds for denial may include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   A finding that the application is incomplete;
      (2)   The non-payment of applicable fees;
      (3)   A finding that the application is not in conformance with any
applicable laws or any provisions of this code;
      (4)   A finding that the statements within the application are materially
untrue or incorrect;
      (5)   Previous revocations or suspensions of a mobile food/beverage
vending permit;
      (6)   When the location for food/beverage vending is within an area
authorized for a city sanctioned event, or an event for which the city has
issued a special event permit, or within 300 feet of any boundary of such
authorized area or within city right of way or on city property, unless the
mobile food/beverage vendor possesses written consent from the event organizer
to sell or offer to sell food/beverages from that location; or
      (7)   When the location for the permit requested is within a city park,
unless the mobile food/beverage vendor possesses the written consent of the
City Administrator or his/her designee.
   (G)   Transferability. Permits issued under this section shall be
nontransferable and no such permit shall be used at any time by any person
other than the one to whom it was issued.
   (H)   Permit fee.
      (1)   A weekly mobile food/beverage vending permit fee shall be $25.
      (2)   An annual mobile food/beverage vending permit fee shall be $100 and
shall renew on a calendar year regardless of date of issue. Permit fees may not
be prorated.
   (I)   Waiver of liability. Before a weekly or annual mobile food/beverage
vending permit is granted, the applicant shall sign a waiver of liability
holding harmless the city and indemnifying the city, its officials, and
employees, for any claims for damages to property or injury to persons, which
may occur in connection with any activity carried or pursuant to any activities
associated with mobile food/beverage vending.
   (J)   Permit renewal.
      (1)   Annual mobile food/beverage vending permits issued under this
section shall expire on December 31 of each year. The permit holder may renew
the permit for the following year by filing with the City Clerk a renewal
application updating or confirming the information provided in the immediately
preceding permit application. At the time of permit renewal, the permit holder
shall pay a renewal fee adopted by the City Council.
      (2)    Weekly mobile food/beverage vending permits issued under this
section shall expire at 5:00 p.m. on the sixth calendar day after the permit
begins. The permit holder may renew the permit for an additional six calendar
days by filing a renewal application updating or confirming the information
provided in the immediately preceding permit application. At the time of permit
renewal, the permit holder shall pay a renewal fee adopted by the City Council.
   (K)   Sales regulations. All mobile food/beverage vendors shall comply with
the following regulations:
      (1)   Mobile food/beverage vending is allowed within the corporate limits
of the city unless otherwise prohibited under city zoning regulations and this
section.
      (2)   While engaging in mobile food/beverage vending, mobile food/
beverage vendors shall not be in violation of any city ordinances including any
zoning, health, fire, building, or safety requirements.
      (3)   A mobile food/beverage vendor shall not sell or offer to sell food/
beverages from a location which would involve customers to wait in line, to be
waited on, or to be served while standing in a portion of a street that is open
to be traversed by motor vehicle traffic.
      (4)   The city may order a mobile food/beverage vendor to move from or
leave a specific location if the mobile food/beverage vending at that location
causes an obstruction to a business or obstruction to vehicular or pedestrian
traffic or otherwise endangers the health, safety, or welfare of the public.
The city may tow or otherwise move, at the vendor's expense, any vehicles or
equipment of a mobile food/beverage vendor if the vehicle or equipment presents
a danger to public safety and the mobile food/beverage vendor fails to move the
same; or if a mobile food/beverage vendor is engaged in mobile food/beverage
vending without a valid mobile food/beverage vending permit where such permit
is required.
       (5)   A mobile food/beverage vendor shall maintain in operable condition
all fire suppression equipment or devices as required by local, state or
federal law and keep their vehicle in operable condition and comply with all
local, state and federal code, including 2018 IFC and Nebraska Department of
Agricultural.
      (6)   It shall be unlawful for a mobile food/beverage vendor to sell or
offer to sell alcoholic drinks without obtaining the appropriate permits.
      (7)   A mobile food/beverage vendor shall provide trash receptacles for
the collection of trash, in sizes sufficient to serve his/her customers. Prior
to leaving a location, the mobile food/beverage vendor shall pick up and
properly dispose of any trash and litter.
      (8)   No mobile food/beverage vendor shall utilize any electricity or
power without the prior written authorization of the electrical customer; no
power cable or similar device shall be extended at or across any street or
sidewalk except in a safe manner. If a mobile food/beverage vendor requires
electric service, a request must be submitted to the City Electric Department.
      (9)   The following regulations apply only to mobile food/beverage
vendors engaging in mobile food/beverage vending on public property owned by
the city or on city right of way:
         (a)   A mobile food/beverage vendor may sell or offer to sell food/
beverage from a mobile food/beverage truck or mobile food/beverage vending unit
at a location on a city right-of-way open to traffic or parking, but only from
a mobile food/beverage truck or mobile food/beverage vending unit parked in a
location where a mobile food/beverage truck or mobile food/beverage vending
unit is authorized to park by law, signage, or city permit. Such a mobile food/
beverage truck or mobile food/beverage vending unit and auxiliary equipment
shall not be parked in a parking space adjacent to the corner of a street
intersection. No mobile food/beverage truck, mobile food/beverage vending unit,
or auxiliary equipment shall be parked in any parking stall designated for
handicap parking.
         (b)   An individual representative of a mobile food/beverage vendor
shall be present with the mobile food/beverage truck, mobile food/beverage
vending unit, and auxiliary equipment of the mobile food/beverage vendor at all
times that it is engaged in mobile food/beverage vending.
         (c)   Upon evidence of endangerment of public safety, the Chief of
Police or his/her designee may limit hours of operation for any mobile food/
beverage vendor within the city, as needed for the protection of public safety.
   (L)   Penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions
of this article. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of
this section shall, upon conviction be fined according to §
10.99.
   (M)   Notice of violations. For purposes of revocation or suspension of
mobile food/beverage vending permits or upon discovery of any violation under
this section, the City Clerk, or his/her designee, shall provide written notice
to the permit holder of such violation. Such notice shall be served personally
upon the permit holder or shall be sent by regular U.S. mail to the permit
holder's address as stated in his/her application.
   (N)   Revocation or suspension. A permit issued under this section may be
revoked or suspended by the City Clerk or his/her designee for any of the
following reasons:
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for permit;
      (2)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in connection
with the selling of food/beverages;
      (3)   Receipt of notices of violations; or
      (4)   Mobile food/beverage vending in an unlawful manner or in such a
manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or a menace to the health,
safety, or general welfare of the public.
   (O)   Notice of revocation or suspension; re-application.
      (1)   Notice to revoke or suspend a permit, the City Clerk or his/her
designee shall provide written notice to the permit holder stating the
revocation or suspension action taken, the grounds for such action, and the
availability of an appeal under this section. Such notice shall be served
personally upon the permit holder or sent by regular U.S. mail to the permit
holder's address as stated in his/her application.
      (2)   The City Clerk or his/her designee shall revoke a permit issued
under this section for any mobile food/beverage vendor who has received notice
for one or more violations of the provisions of this section on three separate
occasions, or who has received notice of three or more violations of the
provisions of this section in total, or any combination thereof, within any
consecutive 12-month period.
      (3)   A person whose permit has been revoked under this section may not
re-apply for a new permit for a period of six months after the effective date
of the revocation.
   (P)   Appeal hearing.
      (1)   Violations. A permit holder aggrieved by the decision of the City
Clerk or his/her designee under this section may file an appeal with the City
Administrator or his/her designee. Such request for appeal shall be in writing
to the City Clerk or his/her designee. Such appeal shall be heard by the City
Administrator or his/her designee. The City Administrator or his/her designee
shall set such hearing within 30 calendar days from the date of receipt the
written request.
      (2)   Denials, suspensions, or revocations of permits, mobile food/
beverage vendors whose permits under this section have been denied, suspended,
or revoked may file an appeal of such decision within 20 calendar days of
receipt of the notice. Such request for appeal shall be in writing to the City
Clerk or his/her designee. Such appeal shall be heard by the City Council. The
City Council shall set such hearing within 30 calendar days from the date of
receipt the written request.
      (3)   A written notice of the decision by the City Administrator or his/
her designee, or the City Council, decision following the hearing shall be sent
to the mobile food/beverage vendor by regular U.S. mail or shall be provided at
the conclusion of the meeting.
(Ord. 2154, passed - -2025)
CHAPTER 115: JUNK SHOPS, PAWNBROKERS, AND SECONDHAND STORES
Section
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   License; application
   
115.03   License
   
115.04   Minors; purchases from
   
115.05   Inspection
   
115.06   Records
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUNK SHOP. Any enterprise engaged in the processing of junk, waste,
discarded or salvaged materials, machinery or equipment including automobile
wrecking and dismantling.
   PAWNBROKER. Every person who makes a business of lending money on the
security of personal property deposited in his or her keeping.
   SECONDHAND STORE. Every person who deals in the purchase and sale of goods
of any type that has been used or previously sold at retail one or more times.
(Prior Code, § 115.01)
§ 115.02 LICENSE; APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for a license to be issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall be made to the Clerk and shall contain a description of the
location of the applicant together with a statement concerning the type of
business contemplated.
   (B)   The governing body may provide regulations requiring such other
information as it may deem advisable.
(Prior Code, § 115.02)
§ 115.03 LICENSE.
   Upon receipt of proper application and the payment of a fee of $10, the
Clerk may issue a license for a junk shop, pawnbroker, or secondhand store,
subject to all of the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 115.03)
§ 115.04 MINORS; PURCHASES FROM.
   No person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall make any
purchase from any minor without first obtaining approval from the Chief of
Police.
(Prior Code, § 115.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.05 INSPECTION.
   The Chief of Police or other designated official shall be permitted at any
reasonable time to inspect any property contained on the premises of any person
licensed under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 115.05)
§ 115.06 RECORDS.
   Any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall maintain a
written record of all business transactions, including the time of purchase and
description of any article and the name and address of the person from whom
such article was purchased. This record shall be in the English language and
shall be available at any reasonable time for inspection by the Chief of Police
or other designated official.
(Prior Code, § 115.06)
CHAPTER 116: PLUMBERS
Section
   
116.01   Plumbers; requirements
   
116.02   Plumbing contractor; bond, certificate of liability insurance,
business license fee and business license
   
116.03   Plumbing license; terms, conditions and fees
   
116.04   Plumbing and Examining Board and oversight of licenses
   
116.05   Plumbing contractor; requirements
   
116.06   Master plumber; license; application; qualifications; proof
   
116.07   Gas fitters
   
116.08   Water fitter’s license, bond, certificate of general liability
insurance, business license and license fee
   
116.09   Underground sprinkler system business registration and fee
   
116.10   Reciprocity
   
116.11   License; revocation
§ 116.01 PLUMBERS; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any individual to do any plumbing within the
corporate limits of the city, or the area outside the city within which the
city has exercised its zoning jurisdiction unless such individual:
      (1)   Holds a master plumber's license issued by the city and does the
actual installation or repair work; or
      (2)   Works under the supervision of an individual who holds a master
plumber's license meeting the requirements of §
116.06 of this code.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any individual, partnership, corporation or
other firm engaged in the business of plumbing or in the doing of plumbing for
hire to cause any plumbing to be done, within the corporate limits of the city
or area outside the city within which the city has exercised its zoning
jurisdiction otherwise than in the manner provided in §
116.06.
   (C)   A permit and inspection shall be required for all work described in
this chapter.
(Ord. 2156, passed - 2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 116.02 PLUMBING CONTRACTOR; BOND, CERTIFICATE OF LIABILITY INSURANCE,
BUSINESS LICENSE FEE AND BUSINESS LICENSE.
   (A)   A plumbing contractor business license shall be granted every business
making application to the Clerk therefor and filing with such application:
      (1)   A bond of a surety company in the penal sum of $5,000 conditioned
that the licensee will indemnify and keep harmless the city in case of any
accident or damage arising from negligence or unskillfulness in doing or
protecting his or her work or from any unfinished or inadequate work done in
pursuance of the license, and that the licensee will restore the alley, street,
sidewalk, gravel and pavements over all work that they or he or she might lay
and fill all excavations made, so as to leave all alleys, streets, sidewalks,
and pavement in as good condition as they were when found, and will maintain
the same to the satisfaction of engineer for the period of 12 months
thereafter.
      (2)   A certificate of general liability insurance of $2,000,000 (add
bodily injury and property damage) must be provided with the application.
      (3)   The annual fee for plumbing contractor's first and initial business
license granted shall be $50 and for each renewal of the license the annual fee
shall be $10, and such fees shall be due and payable to the Clerk on or before
May 1 of each calendar year; the license to be for one year or any fraction
thereof expiring on April 30. If a license is not renewed within 30 days of
expiration, it will be treated as a new application.
   (B)   Every plumbing contractor shall be registered as a contractor with the
State of Nebraska Department of Labor.
(Ord. 2156, passed - -2025)
§ 116.03 PLUMBING LICENSE; TERMS, CONDITIONS AND FEES.
   (A)   Applicants for a master plumbing license must have had at least three
years' actual experience as a licensed journeyman plumber working under the
supervision of a master license and shall present documentary proof thereof in
the form of letters or affidavits from employers, or former employers of such
other qualified persons attesting to such fact, or be a graduate of a
recognized trade school conducting regular courses in the mechanics of the
plumbing trade.
   (B)   Applicants for a journeyman plumber's license must have had at least
three years' actual experience as a plumber's apprentice or plumber's helper
and shall present documentary proof thereof in the form of letters or
affidavits from employers or former employers or such other qualified persons
attesting to such fact, or shall have completed at least two years' instruction
in a recognized trade school conducting regular courses in the mechanics of the
plumbing trade.
   (C)   Applicants for an apprentice plumber's certificate shall, on filing of
application, be issued a certificate by the City Clerk.
   (D)   License fees.
      (1)   The license fee for master plumbers shall be $25 per year.
      (2)   The license fee for journeyman plumbers shall be $20.
      (3)   There shall be no certificate fee for apprentice plumbers.
      (4)   License fees are due and payable on or before May 1 of each year.
If a license is not renewed within 30 days of expiration, it will be treated as
a new application and must be approved by the Plumbing and Examining Board.
(Ord. 2156, passed - 2025)
§ 116.04 PLUMBING AND EXAMINING BOARD AND OVERSIGHT OF LICENSES.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Plumbing Board consisting of the Chief
Health Officer of the city, City Engineer or a representative of the firm
acting as City Engineer, one master plumber who shall be licensed in the city,
one journeyman plumber who shall be licensed in the city, one member who has a
mechanical license in the city, one member who serves in such position of
Public Works Director or Water/Wastewater Superintendent, and the City Building
Inspector. The master plumber, journeyman plumber, and the mechanical
contractor shall be from different businesses. All members shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. Four members of the Plumbing
Board shall constitute a quorum. The Board shall organize by selecting a
Chairperson and the City Building Inspector shall be the Secretary of said
Board. All vacancies in the Board may be filled by the Mayor and Council. The
terms of the City Building Inspector, City Engineer and Public Works Director
or Water/ Wastewater Superintendent shall coincide with the term of the Mayor.
The term of the master plumber, journeyman plumber, and mechanical contractor
shall be for three years.
   (B)   The Plumbing Board shall have power and it shall be its duty, to adopt
rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the laws of the state or the
ordinances of the city, for the sanitary construction, alteration and
inspection of plumbing and sewage connections and drains placed in or in
connection with any and every building in the city in which it will prescribe
the kind and size of material to be used in such plumbing and the manner in
which such work shall be done, which rules and regulations, except such as are
adopted for its own convenience only, shall be approved by ordinance by the
Mayor and Council of the city. The Board shall have the power to amend or
repeal its rules and regulations, subject, except such as relate to its own
convenience only, to the approval of the Mayor and Council. The Board shall
have power to compel the owner or contractor to first submit the plans and
specifications for plumbing that is to be placed in any building or adjoining
premises to the Board for approval before it shall be installed in such
building or premises. When an owner or contractor submits a request for a
variance, the Plumbing Board shall charge a reasonable fee, payable to the
General Fund, not to exceed $25.
   (C)   Board of Examiners shall propound such examinations to each applicant
as to ascertain his or her knowledge of plumbing, gas fitting, pipe fitting,
house drainage, plumbing, ventilation and related subjects. The Examining Board
shall examine or cause to be examined or utilize nationally recognized test as
the examination. If satisfied of the competency of such applicant, the Board
shall thereupon issue a master plumbers, journeyman plumbers, or water fitters
license, as the case may be, authorizing such applicant to engage in the
calling or trade for which he or she has made application.
   (D)   Application shall be made in writing on forms furnished by the City
Clerk's office and shall state the name of the applicant, the location of his
or her place of business or employment and such other information as may be
required.
   (E)   A master plumber's license or journeyman plumber's license shall
authorize such licensee to engage in the calling or trade of plumber as an
artisan to place, replace, install, construct, or reconstruct pipes, fittings,
fixtures, or other materials connected with the business of plumbing, intended
for the conveying of water, water borne waste, fuels, or gases. A journeyman
must work under the supervision of a master plumber as required by §
116.05.
(Ord. 2156, passed - -2025)
§ 116.05 PLUMBING CONTRACTOR; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every plumbing contractor shall be or shall employ the services of at
least one licensed master plumber who shall have satisfactorily passed
examination of the Plumbing Board of the city. No individual for hire shall
work at the installation, repair or alteration of general plumbing within the
city unless he or she is employed by a licensed plumbing contractor and under
the supervision of a master plumber and is licensed as a journeyman plumber;
provided, that apprentice plumbers may be employed to assist a master plumber
or journeyman plumber.
   (B)   Beginning January 1, 2026, a licensed plumbing contractor shall
supervise no more than two apprentice plumbers at one time. More than two
apprentice plumbers may work for the same plumbing contractor business at the
same time as long as the ratio of licensed plumbing contractors never falls
below one licensed plumbing contractor for every two apprentices. In the event
that a plumbing contractor business falls below the required ratio the business
shall be deemed to have violated this section, notwithstanding that the
business shall be allowed a grace period of 60 days to cure the violation
before any enforcement action shall be taken by the city.
   (C)   A licensed plumbing contractor must be on site during all city
inspections.
   (D)   It is hereby declared unlawful for any plumbing contractor or other
person to hire anyone not having a plumbing license in force to do plumbing in
the city, or to permit anyone in his or her employment not having a plumber's
license issued by the city to do plumbing work of any kind within the city or
its zoning jurisdiction.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to display or expose the sign
"plumbing" or "plumber" or a sign containing the words of similar import and
meaning unless the person be duly licensed and registered by the city in
accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2156, passed - -2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 116.06 MASTER PLUMBER; LICENSE; APPLICATION; QUALIFICATIONS; PROOF.
   (A)   Applicants for a master plumber's license must have had, in the first
instance, at least three years' actual experience as a licensed journeyman
plumber, and shall present documentary proof thereof in the form of letters or
affidavits from employers, or former employers or such other qualified persons
attesting to such fact.
   (B)   If the Board shall determine that the holder complied with all
requirements of this chapter pertaining to work which may be done by a master
plumber, the Board shall authorize the issuance of a master plumber's license
to such holder; otherwise, it shall deny the application. A master plumber's
license shall expire on April 30 of each year, and shall require renewal as
provided in this section.
   (C)   In the event that a plumbing contractor business loses their master
plumber, the business shall be deemed to have violated this chapter,
notwithstanding that the business shall be allowed a grace period of 60 days to
cure the violation before any enforcement action shall be taken by the city.
(Ord. 2156, passed - -2025)
§ 116.07 GAS FITTERS.
   Licensed plumbers may install gas piping if they submit to and pass the
International Code Council gas fitter's examination in addition to other
plumbing licensing requirements.
(Ord. 2156, passed - -2025)
§ 116.08 WATER FITTER'S LICENSE, BOND, CERTIFICATE OF GENERAL LIABILITY
INSURANCE, BUSINESS LICENSE AND LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   Applicants for a water fitter's license shall file an application and
have three years' actual experience working under the supervision of a licensed
water fitter or master plumber doing the work described in §
116.03. Applicants shall demonstrate competence through examination by the
Board. Upon payment of fees and showing proof of insurance or bond, a license
shall be issued.
   (B)   A water fitter's license shall authorize the holder thereof to install
water softeners, backflow devices, sprinkler stub-outs, water purification
systems and appliances. A water fitter shall confine water line work to within
a reasonable distance (± ten feet) of the unit and shall not make or change
permanent drain lines; nor shall a water fitter tie directly to the drains;
provided, such license shall not authorize the holder to change any piping that
is not directly connected to the fixture device or appliance being installed.
   (C)   A bond of a surety company in the penal sum of $5,000 conditioned that
the licensee will indemnify and keep harmless the city in case of any accident
or damage arising from negligence or unskillfulness in doing or protecting his
or her work or from any unfinished or inadequate work done in pursuance of the
license.
   (D)   A certificate of general liability insurance of $2,000,000 (add bodily
injury and property damage) must be provided with the application.
   (E)   Every water fitter contractor shall be registered as a contractor with
the State of Nebraska Department of Labor.
   (F)   The license fee for a water fitter shall be $20 due and payable on or
before May 1 of each year. If a license is not renewed within 30 days of
expiration, it will be treated as a new application and must be approved by the
Plumbing and Examining Board.
(Ord. 2156, passed - -2025)
§ 116.09 UNDERGROUND SPRINKLER SYSTEM BUSINESS REGISTRATION AND FEE.
   An underground sprinkler system certificate shall authorize the holder
thereof to install underground sprinkler systems from the backflow preventer to
the irrigation system. A permit and inspection shall be required for all work
described above. An underground sprinkler system certificate fee shall be $10
due and payable on or before May 1 of each year. Applicants for an underground
sprinkler system certificate shall, on filing of application, be issued by the
City Clerk.
(Ord. 2156, passed - -2025)
§ 116.10 RECIPROCITY.
   The city may accept a master plumbers license, journeyman plumbers license,
or water fitter's license from another jurisdiction in lieu of the required
exam and referenced experience; provided the applicant was issued said license
from the other jurisdiction using exams similar in scope and character to the
exams required by the city, and said applicant was required to provide
references showing at least three years of plumbing experience.
(Ord. 2156, passed - -2025)
§ 116.11 LICENSE; REVOCATION.
   Any license issued by the Clerk upon recommendation of city staff may be
revoked by the Plumbing Board. The City Building Inspector may suspend such
license if, in his or her opinion, a licensee consistently fails to perform
work in accordance with or willfully violates any of the provisions of this
chapter. In such case, the City Building Inspector shall give notice in writing
of the suspension to the licensee, and such suspension shall be effective until
the Plumbing Board shall determine by a hearing whether such license shall be
restored or revoked at which time such license will immediately be restored or
revoked. A licensee whose license has been suspended shall have the right to
appear before the Plumbing Board and be heard. He or she shall be given
adequate notice of the time and place of hearing and of the charges against him
or her. Such a cause must be disposed of by the Board within 30 days of the
time of notice of suspension, unless the accused consents in writing to an
extension of time.
(Ord. 2156, passed - -2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 117: CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
Section
General Provisions
   
117.01   Purpose
   
117.02   Definitions
   
117.03   Administration; delegation of powers and authority
Cable Operators
   
117.15   Cable operator; applicability
   
117.16   Video programming; exemptions
   
117.17   Request for relief by cable operator
   
117.18   Inconsistencies with federal or state law
   
117.19   Notices
   
117.20   Indemnity
   
117.21   Insurance
   
117.22   Performance bond
   
117.23   Furnishing of reports
   
117.24   Records
   
117.25   Customer service
   
117.26   Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited
   
117.27   Construction and use of public ways
   
117.28   Technical standards
   
117.29   Emergency alert system
Franchises
   
117.40   Service area and expansion
   
117.41   Franchise
   
117.42   Franchise fees
   
117.43   Assignment of franchise
Additional Regulations
   
117.55   Educational and governmental access
   
117.56   Public service
   
117.57   Default
   
117.58   Removal of cable system
   
117.59   Federal legislation, rules and regulations; franchise subject to
amendment
   
117.60   Inter-governmental cooperation
   
117.61   Tampering and unauthorized reception of certain signals
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 117.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Establish a local policy concerning cable television;
   (B)   Establish franchise procedures and standards which encourage the
growth and development of cable systems which assure that cable systems are
responsive to the needs and interests of the city;
   (C)   Establish guidelines for the exercise of local authority with respect
to the regulation of cable systems;
   (D)   Establish an orderly process for franchise renewal which protects
cable operators against unfair denials of renewal where an operator’s past
performance and proposal for future performance meet the standards set by the
FCC and this chapter;
   (E)   Promote competition in cable communications and minimize unnecessary
regulations that would impose undue burdens on cable systems;
   (F)   Provide for access and inspection of a cable operator’s records in
order to monitor compliance with local, state, and federal laws, and any
franchise agreement;
   (G)   Enforce customer service standards;
   (H)   Provide a construction and installation policy for a cable operator’s
system;
   (I)   Provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the
city in light of the cable operator’s construction, operation, and maintenance;
   (J)   Provide for emergency override capability, so that citizens of the
city may be warned of a potential, imminent, or actual emergency situation that
exists in the area;
   (K)   Create a procedure for collecting and monitoring franchise fees; and
   (L)   Create a default and revocation procedure for cable operators.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter or in any franchise issued pursuant to this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning. It is intended that the definitions
of any of the terms which are also defined in the Cable Act be consistent with
the corresponding Cable Act definitions. In the event that it is determined
that any of the below definitions are inconsistent with the Cable Act, then the
definitions contained in the Cable Act shall control.
   AFFILIATE. Another person or entity who owns or controls, is owned or
controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with, the person or
entity.
   APPLICANT. A person or entity submitting an application or proposal to the
city for a franchise to operate a cable system under the terms and conditions
of this chapter and any state or federal regulations.
   AUXILIARY EQUIPMENT. Equipment supplied by a cable operator which enhances
or assists in the reception or provision of cable service.
   BASIC CABLE SERVICE. Any service tier which includes the retransmission of
local television broadcast signals.
   CABLE ACT. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, which is
codified as 47 U.S.C. §§ 521, et. seq., or any future federal legislation
concerning the subject matter provided for in the CABLE ACT.
   CABLE OPERATOR. Any person or entity which:
      (1)   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system; or
      (2)   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement,
the management and operation of a cable system.
   CABLE SERVICE.
      (1)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of:
         (a)   Video programming; or
         (b)   Other programming service.
      (2)   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection
or use of video programming or other programming service.
   CABLE SYSTEM. A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service which includes video programming, and which
is provided to multiple subscribers within the city; provided, however, this
shall not include:
      (1)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of
one or more television broadcast stations;
      (2)   A facility that serves subscribers without using any public way;
      (3)   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provisions of Title II of the Cable Act, except that the facility
shall be considered a CABLE SYSTEM (other than for purposes of § 621(c) of the
Cable Act) to the extent the facility is used in the transmission of video
programming directly to subscribers; unless the extent of such use is solely to
provide interactive on-demand services;
      (4)   An open video system that complies with § 653 of the Cable Act,
being 47 U.S.C. § 573; or
      (5)   Any system exempted under the Cable Act.
    CHANNEL. A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used
in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel.
   CHARGE. A one-time or non-regularly occurring cost paid by the subscriber,
and which is associated with the installation, maintenance, service, or repair
of the cable service.
   CITY. The City of Gering, Nebraska and includes any areas annexed to the
CITY after this date.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Gering.
   CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The City Administrator of the City of Gering.
   COMMUNITY. The geographic area within the municipal limits of Gering,
Nebraska, Terrytown, Nebraska and Scottsbluff, Nebraska and any portions of
Scotts Bluff County, Nebraska, which are served by a cable system serving any
portion of those municipalities or county.
   EMERGENCY. An imminent, impending, or actual natural or humanly induced
situation where the health, safety, or welfare of all, or a representative
portion, of the residents of the city is threatened. An EMERGENCY (by
illustration) may include a snowstorm, flood, tornado, severe thunderstorm,
hazardous waste infiltration, petroleum, munitions or nuclear explosion, or
aircraft crash.
   EASEMENT. Includes any public easement or other compatible use created by
dedication or by other means, to the city for public utility or other purposes
including cable television. EASEMENT shall include a private easement used for
the provision of cable service.
   ENTITY. A partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, or such other form of conducting business authorized by state law.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission or any successor governmental
entity.
   FRANCHISE. The authorization issued by the city which authorizes a non-
exclusive right to construct, operate, and maintain a cable system within the
city.
   FRANCHISE FEE. Includes any tax, fee, or assessment of any kind imposed by
the city on a cable operator or subscriber, or both, solely because of their
status as such. FRANCHISE FEE does not include:
      (1)   Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including any
such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or
their services but not including a tax, fee, or assessment which is unduly
discriminatory against cable operators or subscribers);
      (2)   Agreed upon capital costs incurred by the cable operator for PEG,
or governmental access facilities;
      (3)   Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of
a franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit,
insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or
      (4)   Any fee imposed under the copyright laws of the United States.
   GROSS REVENUE. Any revenue, as determined in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles, received by a cable operator from the operation
of a cable system within the city. GROSS REVENUE does not, however, mean:
      (1)   Any taxes, fees, or assessments collected by a cable operator from
subscribers for pass-through to a government agency (including sales taxes,
franchise fees, or FCC user fees);
      (2)   Unrecovered bad debt or bona fide credits, refunds, and deposits
paid to subscribers;
      (3)   Revenues from activities exempted under the Cable Act or by the
FCC; and
      (4)   PEG channel support recovered from subscribers.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Gering.
   OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICE. Information that a cable operator makes available
to all subscribers generally.
   PEG CHANNEL. A public, educational, or governmental channel which is carried
on a cable system.
   PERMIT. A written authorization issued to a cable operator by the city,
other than a franchise.
   PUBLIC WAY. Any public street, public place, public easement or right-of-way
dedicated to the public use.
   REPORTING QUARTER. A cable operator’s fiscal quarter as reported to the
city. If a cable operator does not report to or notify the city concerning the
dates of its fiscal quarters, then the REPORTING QUARTERS for a cable operator
shall be considered to be the periods ending on the last day of March, June,
September, and December of each calendar year.
   SCHOOL. Any K-12 school operated within the city by any public school
system.
   SERVICE TIER. A category of cable service or other services provided by a
cable operator, and for which a separate rate is charged.
   STATE. The State of Nebraska.
   SUBSCRIBER. A person lawfully receiving cable service delivered by a cable
operator.
   VIDEO PROGRAMMING. Programming provided by, or generally considered
comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station.
   VIDEO PROGRAMMING PROVIDER. A provider of video programming which is
authorized by the city or applicable law to utilize the public way to provide
video programming to residents of the city.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.03 ADMINISTRATION; DELEGATION OF POWERS AND AUTHORITY.
   Unless prohibited by federal or state law, the Council may delegate its
powers and authorities with respect to a cable operator to one or more duly
authorized representatives of the city, including the Mayor, the City
Administrator, a Cable Advisory Committee, or an outside consultant; provided,
however, the Council may never delegate its power to franchise or to revoke a
franchise to another person.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
CABLE OPERATORS
§ 117.15 CABLE OPERATOR; APPLICABILITY.
   Unless exempted entirely or in part from this chapter or any of its
provisions or granted relief by the Council from any of its provisions, then
this chapter shall be applicable to all cable operators.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.16 VIDEO PROGRAMMING; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   A provider of video programming shall not be considered as a cable
operator and subject to this chapter if the provider does not use or cross any
public way.
   (B)   An exempted person or entity remains exempted only as long as it meets
the above criteria. An exempted person or entity is, however, expected to abide
by, and comply with, any other applicable city, county, state, and federal laws
and regulations, including any applicable federal or state consumer protection
or consumer service laws and regulations.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.17 REQUEST FOR RELIEF BY CABLE OPERATOR.
   (A)   Any cable operator may file a written petition, at any time, with the
city requesting relief from one or more provisions of this chapter. The relief
requested may specifically include the delay in implementation (as to the
petitioning cable operator only) of one or more provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   In order to receive any relief from one or more of the provisions of
this chapter, a cable operator must satisfactorily demonstrate to the Council
that at least one of the following facts exist:
      (1)   The provision and/or requirement is expressly prohibited by federal
law, the FCC, or state law;
      (2)   The provision in question materially affects, and is in conflict
with an expressed right that is specifically noted in an existing franchise
agreement (but only for the term of the existing franchise);
      (3)   The imposition of the provisions and/or requirements will create an
undue economic hardship on the cable operator so as to imperil or eliminate the
cable operator’s ability to provide cable service to a majority of current
subscribers; and/or
      (4)   As an alternative to requesting relief, a cable operator may
petition for clarification as to the precise intent and effect that one or more
provisions or sections of this chapter has on the petitioning cable operator.
   (C)   If the Council grants relief to a cable operator, then the franchise
agreement shall be amended to reflect the extent of the relief.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.18 INCONSISTENCIES WITH FEDERAL OR STATE LAW.
   If any provision or section of this chapter is inconsistent with any
provision or section of a federal or state rule, regulation, or law, then the
federal or state rule, regulation, or law shall control.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.19 NOTICES.
   Each franchise shall designate the city’s and the cable operator’s contact
person to receive notices, filings, reports, records, documents, and other
correspondence. All notices shall be delivered to each party’s contact person
either by personal service with signed receipt of delivery, certified, or
registered mail, return receipt requested, or by recognized overnight delivery
service with receipt verification. All other filings, reports, records,
documents, and other correspondence may be delivered by any permissible means
including, but not limited to: personal service, overnight mail, e-mail, or
facsimile. Delivery shall be deemed to have occurred at the time of receipt.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.20 INDEMNITY.
   (A)   Each cable operator shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the
city, its officials, authorized agents and employees from any and all penalty,
damage, or loss arising out of claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or
award of damages which might be claimed now or in the future, which arise out
of, or are caused by, the construction, erection, location, products
performance, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement,
removal, or restoration of the cable system within the city by a negligent act
or omission of the cable operator, its authorized agents or employees,
contractors, or authorized representatives; provided, however, the cable
operator shall not be obligated to indemnify the city for any penalty, damage,
or loss resulting from the willful misconduct or negligence of the city or from
any use of the cable system by the city (to include the use of PEG channels).
Reasonable attorney’s fees, consultant’s fees, expert witness fees, and other
expenses of litigation are included, except as set forth in division (B)(4)
below, as those costs which may be recovered by the city.
   (B)   With respect to any request for indemnification made to a cable
operator by the city.
      (1)   The city shall give the cable operator written notice of its
obligation to indemnify the city at least ten calendar days prior to the
deadline for responding to the claim or action, and if no such deadline exists,
within 30 days of receipt of written notification of a claim or action.
      (2)   The cable operator shall then have the right to defend, settle, or
compromise any such claims at the cable operator’s expense and with the
assistance of counsel of the cable operator’s choice. The city shall provide
reasonable cooperation in connection with the defense subject to the cable
operator’s obligation to reimburse the city for actual out-of-pocket expenses
incurred by the city as the result of a request by the cable operator.
      (3)   If the cable operator fails to defend a claim within a reasonable
time, the city shall be entitled to assume the defense and the cable operator
shall be bound by the results and shall be liable to the city for the damages
incurred by the city to include the costs referred to above as recoverable by
the city.
      (4)   If a cable operator obtains counsel for the city, and/or its
officials, agents, and employees, then any one of them shall have the right to
approve counsel, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. The city,
its officials, agents, and employees shall have the right to retain counsel of
their own at their own expense.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.21 INSURANCE.
   (A)   A cable operator shall secure and maintain, for as long as it provides
cable service, insurance coverage (the “insurance”) in at least the following
limits:
 
Workers’ Compensation                        Statutory Limits
Auto liability including coverage on all owned $1,000,000 per occurrence C.S.L.
and non-owned hired autos
Combined single liability (C.S.L.)             $2,000,000 general aggregate
Commercial general liability                   $2,000,000 per occurrence
Umbrella liability                             $1,000,000 per occurrence C.S.L.
 
   (B)   The insurance shall specifically include the city as an additional
insured with respect to any liability arising out of the cable operator’s
performance.
   (C)   The insurance shall be issued by one or more companies licensed to do
business in the state.
   (D)   The insurance shall contain an endorsement obligating the insurance
company to furnish the City with reasonable written advance notice of the
cancellation of the insurance.
   (E)   Before a cable operator provides cable service, the cable operator
shall deliver the policies or certificates representing the insurance to the
city. Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the
city prior to the expiration of the then existing insurance.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.22 PERFORMANCE BOND.
   A cable operator shall comply with the following bonding requirements.
   (A)   (1)   A construction/completion bond shall be furnished prior to the
time that a cable operator commences a construction, upgrade, rebuild, or
repair/maintenance project that has a capital construction cost or outlay
exceeding $50,000 in value where the construction takes place in one or more
easements or in the public way; provided, however, the following shall not be
considered in determining whether a project exceeds $50,000:
         (a)   The cost attributable to any portion of the construction that
utilizes aerial facilities consisting of existing poles owned by the cable
operator or other utilities; or
         (b)   Construction within a new subdivision where the construction of
facilities is coordinated with the developer of the subdivision.
      (2)   The amount of the bond shall equal at least 90% of the projected
capital construction cost or outlay, but shall not exceed $250,000. The
construction/completion bond shall remain in force at all times until one year
after completion of construction as determined by the city, unless relief is
granted, or a reduction schedule is detailed in an agreement between the city
and the cable operator.
   (B)   Any construction/completion bond shall specifically guarantee that a
cable operator will timely abide by its construction, upgrade, rebuild, or
repair/maintenance schedule for the cable system and/or any time table for
technical and service improvements or additions to the cable system as may be
committed to, or agreed upon, from time to time by the city and the cable
operator.
   (C)   If the city draws on a bond as a result of a cable operator’s failure
to timely discharge its obligations, or failure to construct and activate the
cable system, or failure to complete a cable system upgrade or rebuild or
repair/maintenance project, then the cable operator shall replenish the bond
within 30 days to the level required in this section.
   (D)   The Council may authorize a cable operator to substitute a cash
deposit, letter of credit, or a guaranty of another person or entity for any of
the bonds provided for in this section; provided, however, the person or entity
providing a letter of credit or guaranty, and the form of the letter of credit
or guaranty, shall be subject to the approval of the City Council in its sole
discretion.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.23 FURNISHING OF REPORTS.
   (A)   A cable operator’s schedule of charges for regular subscriber service,
its policy regarding the processing of subscriber complaints, delinquent
subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures and any other terms and
conditions adopted as the cable operator’s policy in connection with its
subscribers shall be filed with the city upon request.
   (B)   Upon written request of the city, a cable operator shall furnish, at
no cost to the city, copies of any or all non-confidential filings with the FCC
and the United States Copyright Office within 30 days of the request.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.24 RECORDS.
   A cable operator shall keep complete and accurate records concerning the
business and operations of the cable system. In addition.
   (A)   The city by its authorized representatives shall have the right, on
reasonable advance written notice, to review all records pertaining to a cable
operator’s cable operations with respect to the city as are reasonably
necessary to determine a cable operator’s compliance with the franchise. Such
notice shall specifically reference the section(s) of the franchise or the
cable ordinance for which the review is requested. The cable operator agrees
that it will furnish the information requested electronically or make it
available for the city’s review, to the city within 30 days of the request.
   (B)   Non-revenue financial records will only be requested in the aggregate
on a summary prepared by the cable operator.
   (C)   The city acknowledges the sensitivity of a cable operator’s records
and will request this information only on as needed basis and will treat this
information as confidential and proprietary to the fullest extent allowed by
law. The cable operator shall not be required to produce any records in
violation of the Cable Act or any other applicable law. Until otherwise ordered
by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, the city agrees that, to the
extent permitted by state and federal law, it shall deny access to any of a
cable operator’s records marked confidential to any person.
   (D)   The city shall have the right to hire, at its own expense, an
independent certified public accountant, or other business or financial expert,
to review the records of a cable operator pertaining to revenue information.
   (E)   If after a review or audit of a cable operator’s records, it is
discovered that the cable operator has underpaid the city by an amount that
exceeds the greater of $2,500, or 3% of the total amount paid for any reporting
quarter, then the city may require the cable operator to reimburse the city for
the actual cost of the audit, in addition to the amount of underpayment;
provided, however, no such reimbursement shall be required if the reason for
the underpayment is due to the annexation of additional areas into the city,
for which notification of the annexation was not provided to a cable operator.
   (F)   A cable operator shall not be required to maintain any records for
franchise compliance purposes longer than four years, except for written
service complaints, which shall be kept for one year.
   (G)   A cable operator shall maintain a full and complete set of plans,
records, and strand maps showing the location of the cable system.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.25 CUSTOMER SERVICE.
   A cable operator shall comply with the following customer service
requirements.
   (A)   A cable operator shall comply with the customer service standards as
provided for in the FCC regulations, as may be amended from time to time. This
section shall be considered as notice to cable operators of the city’s election
to enforce those standards.
   (B)   A cable operator shall:
      (1)   Maintain a customer service facility within the boundaries of the
city staffed by customer service representatives that have the capacity to
accept payment, adjust bills, respond to repair, installation, reconnection,
disconnection, or other service calls; distribute or receive converter boxes,
remote control units, or other equipment related to the provision of cable or
video service;
      (2)   Provide customers with bill payment facilities through retail,
financial, or other commercial institutions located within the boundaries of
the city;
      (3)   Provide an address, toll-free telephone number, or electronic
address to accept bill payments and correspondence, and provide secure
collection boxes for the receipt of bill payments and the return of equipment;
provided, that if a cable operator provides secure collection boxes, it shall
provide a printed receipt when items are deposited; and
      (4)   Provide an address, toll-free telephone number, or electronic
address to accept bill payments and correspondence, and provide a method for
customers to return equipment to the cable operator at no cost to the customer.
   (C)   A cable operator shall maintain a toll-free telephone number and a
phone service operated such that complaints and requests for repairs or
adjustments may be received at any time.
   (D)   A cable operator shall comply with all federal and state laws and
regulations concerning special service requirements for disabled, sight or
hearing impaired or ambulatory impaired subscribers.
   (E)   A cable operator shall furnish each subscriber at the time service is
installed, written instructions that clearly set forth information concerning
the procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the cable
operator’s name, address and local or toll-free telephone number. To the extent
required by applicable law, a cable operator shall give the city 30 days’ prior
notice of any rate increases, channel lineup, or other substantive service
changes.
   (F)   A cable operator shall abide by any, and all, subscriber privacy rules
or regulations under federal or state law.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.26 PREFERENTIAL OR DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   A cable operator shall not deny cable service, deny access, or
otherwise discriminate, nor subject any person to prejudice or disadvantage on
the basis of age, race, creed, color, sex, national origin, handicap, or
religious affiliation. Cable operators shall not deny cable service, or the
extension of cable service, to any group of potential residential cable
subscribers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which
such group resides.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not, however, prohibit a cable
operator from:
      (1)   Offering bulk rate discounts or promotions; and/or
      (2)   Denying service based on location of residence, if that residence
is outside the parameters for line extension, or standard installations, as
provided for in this chapter or the cable operator’s franchise.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.27 CONSTRUCTION AND USE OF PUBLIC WAYS.
   (A)   All facilities of a cable operator shall be located, installed, and
maintained so as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with usual and
customary use, traffic and travel upon public ways and easements, and according
to any public way or easement use standards established by the city.
   (B)   A cable operator shall construct, operate, maintain, and repair its
cable system in compliance with all current technical codes adopted by the
city, the state, and the FCC, as are customary to the cable television
industry. To the extent that these are inconsistent with other provisions of a
franchise, or state or local law, then the more stringent shall govern in order
to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
   (C)   A cable operator shall obtain all required permits from the city
before commencing any work requiring a permit, including the opening or
disturbance of any public way.
   (D)   All facilities of a cable operator shall be installed and located as
to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of
property owners and at all times shall be kept and maintained in a safe,
adequate and substantial condition, and in good order and repair. The cable
operator shall, at all times, employ ordinary care and use commonly accepted
methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to
cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public, to include barricades,
flags, lights, or other devices as are reasonably required for public safety.
   (E)   A cable operator shall use existing poles, conduits, and other
facilities whenever possible, and shall not construct or install any new,
different, or additional poles, conduits, or other facilities on public ways
without obtaining all permits required by the city. Any poles or other fixtures
placed in any public way by the cable operator shall be placed in such a manner
as not to interfere with the usual travel on such public way.
   (F)   The cable operator shall, at its own expense, restore any damage or
disturbance caused to the public way as a result of its operation,
construction, or maintenance of the cable system to a condition reasonably
comparable to the condition of the public way immediately prior to such damage
or disturbance.
   (G)   If a cable operator’s system creates a hazardous or unsafe condition
or an unreasonable interference with property, then the cable operator shall at
its own expense voluntarily, or upon request of the city, remove or move, as
appropriate, that part of the system that creates the hazardous condition.
   (H)   A cable operator shall not place equipment where it will interfere
with the rights of property owners or with other public utility services or any
other service facility that benefits the city or its residents’ health, safety,
or welfare.
   (I)   A cable operator shall, at its expense, protect public ways and
easements, and support or temporarily disconnect or relocate in the same public
way, any property of the cable operator when necessitated by reason of: traffic
conditions, public safety, a street closing, street construction or
resurfacing, change or establishment of a street grade, installations of other
city utility services, or any improvement, construction or repair related to
health, safety, or welfare. Except in case of emergency, the city shall provide
at least ten days written notice to the cable operator of the need for a
relocation or temporary disconnection. In addition, the city shall have the
right to remove any of the cable operator’s facilities in the event of
emergency, and no charge shall be made by the cable operator to the city for
restoration and repair, unless such acts amount to gross negligence by the
city.
   (J)   If the city elects to alter or change the grade of any public ways,
the cable operator upon reasonable notice from the city, shall relocate any
portions of its cable system impacted by the city’s public way alterations, at
the cable operator’s expense.
   (K)   A cable operator shall, at the request of any person holding a lawful
permit issued by the city, protect, support, raise, lower, temporarily
disconnect, relocate in, or remove from the street as necessary any property of
the cable operator; provided, that the expense of doing so is paid by the
person making the request and the cable operator is given reasonable advance
written notice to prepare for such changes. The cable operator may require such
payment in advance. For purposes of this division (K), REASONABLE ADVANCE
WRITTEN NOTICE shall be no less than ten business days in the event of a
temporary relocation and no less than 120 days for a permanent relocation.
   (L)   A cable operator shall have the authority to trim trees in the public
way at its own expense as may be necessary to protect its wires and facilities.
   (M)   In those areas of the city where transmission or distribution of both
telephone and power companies are underground or are later placed underground,
a cable operator’s feeder and subscriber drops shall also be placed
underground. To the extent reasonably possible, a cable operator shall
coordinate the joint use of facilities with the telephone and power companies.
Subscriber drops shall be buried within a reasonable time period, subject to
weather conditions.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.28 TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
   A cable operator shall comply with any rules and regulations of the FCC
concerning technical operation, signal quality, consumer electronics equipment
compatibility, and performance monitoring.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.29 EMERGENCY ALERT SYSTEM.
   A cable operator shall comply with all applicable federal statutes, rules,
and regulations with respect to emergency alert systems.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
FRANCHISES
§ 117.40 SERVICE AREA AND EXPANSION.
   Cable service shall be provided as follows:
   (A)   A cable operator shall make cable service distributed over its cable
system available, at a charge which does not exceed the cable operator’s normal
rate for standard installations, to every residence within any area within the
city where there is a minimum density of at least 30 residences per lineal
strand mile of cable as measured from the cable operator’s closest trunk line
or distribution cable that is actively delivering cable service as of the date
of such request for service; provided, however:
      (1)   Such installation shall be financially and technically feasible;
      (2)   The cable operator shall have legal access to the subscriber’s
location; and
      (3)   The subscriber shall be within 125 feet of the cable operator’s
existing distribution system.
   (B)    Notwithstanding the above, a cable operator shall have the right, but
not the obligation, to extend the cable system into any other area of the city
and to make cable service available to residential subscribers or to
businesses, upon such terms and conditions as determined by the cable operator.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.41 FRANCHISE.
   (A)   No person or entity, other than the city, shall be permitted to
construct, operate or maintain a cable system where any part of the cable
system’s facilities to occupy or cross public ways without first having entered
into a franchise.
   (B)   With respect to all franchises.
      (1)   The city may award one or more non-exclusive franchises; provided,
however, anytime a franchise is issued, the city otherwise grants a permit to a
video programming provider, which contains terms that are more favorable to a
particular cable operator or video programming provider, or the city
constructs, operates, or maintains its own cable system within the city limits,
then the city shall, within 30 days of a written request from another cable
operator or video programming provider, modify that cable operator’s franchise
or video programming provider authorization to ensure that the obligations
applicable to any one cable operator or video programming provider are no more
burdensome than those imposed on one or more competing cable operators or video
programming providers or the city’s own cable system. If the city fails to make
modifications consistent with this requirement, the requesting cable operator’s
franchise or video programming provider’s authorization shall be deemed so
modified 30 days after the initial written request.
      (2)   An applicant shall be selected as part of a public proceeding and
hearing which affords due process to both the city and the cable operator. If
the applicant is selected as a cable operator, then the applicant will enter
into a franchise agreement with the city.
      (3)   Unless prohibited by law, the city reserves the right to construct,
operate, or maintain its own cable system within the city limits; provided, the
city shall regulate all cable operators, video programming providers, and its
own cable system in a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory manner.
      (4)   If the Council awards a franchise to an applicant, or approves a
proposal for renewal of a franchise, then a franchise agreement shall be
signed. A newly franchised cable operator may not lay any cable until the
franchise agreement is executed by the cable operator and the city. At a
minimum, a franchise agreement shall contain provisions for the following:
         (a)   The term or duration of the franchise;
         (b)   An agreement to comply with this chapter;
         (c)   Any applicable construction, upgrade or rebuild schedule; and
         (d)   Any applicable build-out and density standard.
      (5)   Upon entering into a franchise, a cable operator may construct,
install, maintain, operate, repair, replace, remove, or restore a cable system
within the city. In so doing:
         (a)   The cable operator may utilize the public ways and those
easements dedicated to the public use; and
         (b)   The cable operator shall be responsible for obtaining its own
easements for private property and pole attachment agreements with other
utilities.
      (6)   The term of a franchise may be for a period not to exceed ten years
from the date that a franchise, or a franchise renewal, is approved by the
Council. Proceedings for the renewal of a franchise shall be governed by the
applicable provisions of the Cable Act.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.42 FRANCHISE FEES.
   (A)   Each cable operator shall pay to the city a franchise fee equal to 5%
of the gross revenues of the cable operator. The city reserves the right at any
time, upon 90 days’ notice to all cable operators, to amend this section so as
to increase the franchise fee to the maximum rate allowable under federal law,
in the event that the maximum rate is increased. It is intended that the
franchise fees will promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of
the city. Accordingly, the franchise fee shall be deposited into the general
revenues of the city, unless otherwise specified.
   (B)   The franchise fees may be passed through to subscribers as a line item
on subscriber bills or otherwise, consistent with federal law.
   (C)   Within 45 days after the end of each reporting quarter, a cable
operator shall file with the city a detailed financial and revenue report
showing the gross revenues received by the cable operator for operations within
the city during the proceeding reporting quarter. The report shall include
gross revenue from all sources upon which a franchise fee is payable. Gross
revenue may be reported in the aggregate by general service type or source.
   (D)   In the event that payment is not made within 60 days after the end of
a reporting quarter, then the cable operator may be declared in default of the
franchise, and the city may take action against the cable operator as
authorized in this chapter.
   (E)   The acceptance of any payment shall not be construed as a release of,
or an accord or satisfaction of, any claim that the city might have for further
or additional sums payable under the terms of this chapter, or for any other
performance or obligation of a cable operator.
   (F)   Payments of compensation made by a cable operator to the city pursuant
to this chapter shall be considered in addition to any and all taxes of general
applicability owed to the city by the cable operator that are not included as
franchise fee under federal law.
   (G)   A franchise fee shall not be payable on any gross revenue source(s)
which are excluded by federal law.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.43 ASSIGNMENT OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   A cable operator’s franchise may not be assigned in whole or in part
without the city’s prior written approval. For purposes of this section,
ASSIGNED or ASSIGNMENT shall mean the transfer, sale, or any other form of
assignment of a cable system, to include any transaction or action which
effectively or actually changes ownership from one person or entity to another
to include the transfer of 50% or more of the ownership interest of an entity
or the parent of an entity. Any attempted assignment without prior written
approval shall constitute a default in the franchise. A proposed assignment
shall be subject to the following.
      (1)   At least 120 days before a proposed assignment is scheduled to
become effective, the cable operator shall make a written request to the
Council for the city’s approval of the proposed assignment.
      (2)   The city will not unreasonably withhold its consent to an
assignment. However, in making its determination, the Council shall consider
the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the proposed assignee.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall restrict the city from considering
criteria established under state or federal law, rule, or regulation.
      (4)   Before an assignment is approved by the city, the proposed assignee
shall sign a statement indicating that it has read, understands, and intends to
abide by any existing franchise agreement.
      (5)   The city may include certain amendment(s) to the franchise or this
chapter as a condition to the assignment; provided, however, any such amendment
(s) shall either:
         (a)   Be by mutual agreement between the city and the proposed
assignee; or
         (b)   Shall not have a material adverse effect on the rights and
obligations of the cable operator under the franchise.
      (6)   In the event of any approved assignment, the assignee shall assume
all obligations and liabilities of the former cable operator.
      (7)   The city’s consent to an assignment shall not relieve the former
cable operator of its liability under the franchise agreement until the
assignment actually takes place unless specifically relieved by federal or
state law or by the Council at the time an assignment is approved. In the event
of an assignment, the former cable operator shall remain liable for any
franchise fees incurred as of the time that the assignment is effective for the
period governed by the applicable statute of limitations.
      (8)   If the cable operator has provided the city with all information as
required by this section or the FCC in a timely manner, and the city has not
taken action on the cable operator’s request for transfer within 120 days after
receiving such request, consent by the city shall be deemed given.
   (B)   Consent shall not be required for an assignment to a wholly-owned
subsidiary entity of a cable operator or the current parent entity of a cable
operator, whether the ownership is direct or indirect, such as through other
wholly-owned intermediate subsidiaries. In addition, consent shall not be
required for the granting of a security interest in the cable operator’s system
including its franchise. However, if the holder of the security interest
repossesses, forecloses, or takes other action concerning its collateral, it
shall dispose of the cable system within a reasonable period of time and the
disposition by the holder of the security interest shall be considered an
assignment subject to the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS
§ 117.55 EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS.
   (A)   To the extent permitted by law, and in order to fulfill a public,
educational and governmental access policy that will facilitate the long range
needs of the city, each cable operator shall provide at its own expense one PEG
Channel under the control of the city.
   (B)   The following shall apply to the PEG Channel.
      (1)   The city is solely responsible for the content it provides over the
PEG Channel. The cable operator shall not exercise any editorial control over
any programming of the PEG Channel and shall also not be subject to any civil
or criminal liability for any programs carried on the PEG Channel.
      (2)   The PEG Channel may be placed on any tier of service available to
all subscribers, including the digital tier. The city shall provide programming
on the PEG Channel to occupy 70% of the hours between 11:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
for any 12 consecutive week period. In the event that the above the programming
levels are not maintained or if the city does not adequately use the channel,
the cable operator reserves the right to have the channel returned to the cable
operator for the cable operator’s use. If at any later time, which must be at
least one year from the return of the PEG Channel to the cable operator, the
city desires to utilize the PEG Channel, it may notify the cable operator of
its desire to do so, and the PEG Channel shall be made available to the city
within 30 days of the request. The above programming requirements shall apply
with respect to continuance of the PEG Channel by the city.
      (3)   If the city is utilizing the PEG Channel and is also using any of
the following locations for signal input, signal input locations shall be
provided at City Hall. Only those signal input locations actually being used
shall be required.
      (4)   Cable operators may interconnect their cable systems for the
purpose of sharing PEG access programming; provided that the cable operators
are able to reach agreement for the interconnection. Nothing in this division
(B)(4) should be construed as requiring a cable operator to add additional PEG
Channels.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.56 PUBLIC SERVICE.
   A cable operator shall furnish, upon request, and subject to applicable law,
one outlet for public buildings as identified in a cable operator’s franchise.
With respect to this service:
   (A)   The cable service provided pursuant to this section shall not be used
for commercial purposes and shall not generally be available for public
viewing. The city shall take reasonable precautions to prevent any use of the
cable system that results in the inappropriate use or any loss or damage to the
cable system; and
   (B)   The city shall hold the cable operator harmless from any and all
liability or claims arising out of the provision and use of cable service to
city buildings.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.57 DEFAULT.
   (A)   When a cable operator violates a provision of this chapter, or acts so
as to compromise the legal, financial, or technical integrity and/or stability
of the cable system or the cable operator itself, in either case, to a degree
that the interests of the subscribers are negatively affected, then a cable
operator shall be considered in default of this chapter.
   (B)   Examples of a default shall include, but are not limited to:
bankruptcy (except for a reorganization as long as the cable operator is in
compliance with an approved plan or other court order), insolvency, failure to
pay taxes, or franchise fees, failure to receive written city approval for an
assignment, or failure to substantially abide by the terms and conditions of
the franchise agreement or this chapter, to include the failure to operate its
cable system; provided:
      (1)   It is not the city’s intention to subject a cable operator to
penalties, fines, forfeitures, or revocation of a franchise for violations
where the violation was a good faith error that resulted in no or minimal
negative impact on the subscribers within the city, or where strict performance
would result in practical difficulties and hardship to a cable operator which
outweighs the benefit to be derived by the city and/or subscribers; and
      (2)   Events in the nature of force majeure or conditions which cannot be
corrected because they are matters reasonably beyond the ability of the
affected cable operator to anticipate and control shall not be considered a
default. This provision includes, but is not limited to, severe or unusual
weather conditions, fire, flood, or other acts of God, strikes, work delays
caused by failure of utility providers to service, maintain or monitor their
utility poles to which a cable operator’s cable system is attached, as well as
unavailability of materials and/or qualified labor to perform the work
necessary; provided, however, such noncompliance shall only be excused for as
long as the cable operator is reasonably pursuing compliance.
   (C)   In the event that a default occurs, the city shall provide written
notice of the default to the affected cable operator. The notice of default
shall specify the violation(s).
   (D)   The cable operator shall have 30 days from the receipt of the written
notice to bring itself into compliance so that it is no longer in default of
its franchise or this chapter, as the case may be; provided, however, if by the
nature of default, the default cannot be cured within this 30-day period, the
cable operator shall initiate reasonable steps to remedy the default and notify
the city of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be
completed.
   (E)   (1)   If the cable operator fails to cure its default within the time
period provided for above, the matter shall be set for public hearing before
the Council to be held within 75 days after the notice of default was mailed to
the cable operator.
      (2)   Written notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be
sent to the cable operator at least 20 days prior to the date of the hearing.
   (F)   (1)   At the hearing, the cable operator shall have an opportunity to
state its position on the matter, present evidence and question witnesses.
      (2)   If the cable operator fails to attend the hearing where a
continuance of the hearing has not been granted by the Council, then the cable
operator may be declared in default of the franchise agreement.
   (G)   If the default has not been resolved by the time of or as a result of
the hearing, the Council may, after the public hearing, direct the cable
operator to take corrective action within a specified period of time, or may
declare the cable operator in default of the franchise agreement, and revoke or
terminate the franchise. The Council’s action shall be delivered to the cable
operator in writing within 15 days of the Council’s action.
   (H)   If the Council directs corrective action to be taken and the cable
operator does not rectify the default within the time specified, then the
Council may without further notice declare the cable operator to be in default
and revoke or terminate the franchise.
   (I)   If the cable operator fails to comply with any determination by the
Council, which determination is not stayed or overturned by order of an
appropriate court, then the city shall have any and all remedies available to
it by law; provided, the cable operator may continue to operate the cable
system until all legal appeals procedures have been exhausted.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.58 REMOVAL OF CABLE SYSTEM.
   (A)   In the event of termination or forfeiture of the a franchise agreement
or abandonment of a cable operator’s cable system, the city may require the
cable operator to remove all or any portion of its cable system from all public
ways; provided, however, that the cable operator will not be required to remove
those portions of its cable system required to provide telecommunications
services or other non-cable service to the extent that the cable operator
lawfully provides telecommunications services or other non-cable service over
the cable system.
   (B)   If a cable operator has failed to commence removal of its cable
system, or such part as designated by the city, within 120 days after written
demand for removal is given, or if the cable operator has failed to complete
such removal within twelve months after written demand for removal is given,
the city may apply funds secured by the franchise agreement toward removal.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.59 FEDERAL LEGISLATION, RULES AND REGULATIONS; FRANCHISE SUBJECT TO
AMENDMENT.
   (A)   In addition to any requirements contained within this chapter, all
cable operators shall be expected to comply with all applicable provisions of
the Cable Act and all other federal laws directed at controlling or regulating
cable operators, and any rules and regulations issued pursuant to those laws.
   (B)   Any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to
amendment by mutual agreement of the parties to incorporate any applicable
federal legislation, rules, or regulations which become effective after the
date of the franchise.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.60 INTER-GOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION.
   (A)   In the event that a cable system serves areas outside the jurisdiction
of the city (to include the community), then the various jurisdictions or
governmental subdivisions shall have the right to enter into one or more
agreements concerning the matters covered by this chapter. By way of example,
it is contemplated that the members of the community may enter into one or more
agreements to assist them in regulating administering franchises.
   (B)   These agreements may include, but shall not be limited to, the
following general areas:
      (1)   Allocation of the total franchise fee collected from the cable
system between the various governmental subdivisions;
      (2)   The review and evaluation of:
         (a)   Proposals to provide cable television service; or
         (b)   Requests for renewal of existing franchises.
      (3)   Evaluations of a cable operator’s performance; and
      (4)   PEG Channel use.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
§ 117.61 TAMPERING AND UNAUTHORIZED RECEPTION OF CERTAIN SIGNALS.
   (A)   No person shall intercept or receive, or assist in intercepting or
receiving, any communications service offered over a cable system, unless
specifically authorized to do so by a cable operator, or as may otherwise be
specifically authorized by law.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, the TERM ASSIST IN INTERCEPTING OR
RECEIVING shall include the manufacture or distribution of equipment intended
by the manufacturer or distributor for the unauthorized reception of cable
service.
   (C)   Without securing permission from a cable operator, or making payment
to a cable operator, then no person shall be authorized to make any connection
with any part of a cable system for the purpose of receiving or intercepting or
assisting others to receive or intercept any cable service provided lawfully by
a cable operator.
   (D)   No person shall be authorized to willfully tamper with, remove, or
damage any facilities used for the distribution of cable service.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any violation of §
117.61 shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a
fine of up to $100. Each day that the violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
(Ord. 2085, passed - -2019)
CHAPTER 118: CONTRACTOR’S LICENSE
Section
   
118.01   License required
   
118.02   Persons exempt from license requirement
   
118.03   Application, content, fees
   
118.04   Certificates or policies of insurance and bonding
   
118.05   Revocation of license
   
118.06   Unlawful use of license
   
118.07   Records retention
 
   
118.99   Penalty
§ 118.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person or corporation shall engage in the practice of general contractor
or roofing contractor in the city without first having obtained a license to
engage in any such practice and without giving the proof of surety as
hereinafter provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 2126, passed - -2023) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.02 PERSONS EXEMPT FROM LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   Any bona fide owner of a residential structure, including all accessory
structures, shall be exempt from the contractor’s licensing requirements and
may be granted a building permit to improve the structure including all
accessory structures; provided, that all work may be inspected for approval by
the City Building Inspector.
(Ord. 2126, passed - -2023) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.03 APPLICATION, CONTENT, FEES.
   (A)   Any person or persons desiring to engage in the practice of general
contractor or roofing contractor shall first make application to the city for
the license(s) to engage in such practice. Such application for a contractor’s
license shall be upon a form created by the city for such purpose and contain
at minimum the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The business location of the applicant;
      (3)   The telephone number of the place of business; and
      (4)   Applicant’s proof of bonding and proof of policy of insurance as
described in §
118.04; and
      (5)   If a partnership, shall include the names, correct mailing
addresses, and telephone numbers of all partners together with such other
information as may be required.
   (B)   Upon the filing of such application, the City Building Inspector or
his or her designee shall make such investigation as to the sufficiency of
proof of bonding and proof of insurance pursuant to this Chapter, and after
which shall approve or disapprove the application. If approved, the City
Building Inspector shall authorize the issuance of a license to the individual
(s). Such application shall be accompanied by a registration fee of $100 for a
new applicant or $25 for a renewal application. Registration shall run
concurrently with licenses, expiring on the last day of December during the
year following the date of issuance and shall not be assignable.
(Ord. 2126, passed - -2023)
§ 118.04 CERTIFICATES OR POLICIES OF INSURANCE AND BONDING.
   Every person or company applying for a contractor’s license shall present to
the city to be filed a certificate or policy of insurance in the amount of
$1,000,000, minimum, public liability insurance for each license held. Further,
the issuing insurance company agrees to provide 30-day written notice in the
event of expiration or of proposed cancellation of the insurance policy. Surety
shall be conditioned that the principal, and all employees, will comply with
all the ordinances of the city relating to model codes and to hold the city
harmless on account of any damages arising from faulty performance or neglect
of duty by the holder of such license. Every person or company applying for a
contractor’s license shall present to the city a bond with two or more
sureties, or a bond of a surety company to be approved by the City Building
Inspector or his or her designee in the penal sum of $2,000 conditioned that
the person or company applying for a contractor’s license will indemnify and
keep harmless the city in case of any accident or damage arising from
negligence or unskillfulness in doing or protecting his or her work or from any
unfinished or inadequate work done in pursuance of a contractor’s license. Any
bond required herein shall be a one-year renewable bond with starting and
ending dates, signed by an officer of the surety company, and accompanied by
power of attorney form, if applicable.
(Ord. 2126, passed - -2023)
§ 118.05 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the City Building Inspector upon proof that the licensee(s) has failed,
neglected, or refused to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or
with other ordinances of the city relating to or regulating the particular type
of work for which such license was granted; provided, that no such license
shall be revoked without the giving of a written notice of the intention to
revoke such license and without giving such licensee a full opportunity to
present evidence to the City Building Inspector as to any complaint made
against him or her. Upon the revocation of any license granted under the
provisions of this chapter, no refund shall be made of any part of the license
fee previously paid by the licensee.
(Ord. 2126, passed - -2023)
§ 118.06 UNLAWFUL USE OF LICENSE.
   No license issued hereunder shall be assignable or transferable, and it
shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit his, her, or its license to be
used or allow permits to be taken out in the name of such licensee by any other
person, firm, or corporation. Any licensed contractor that hires a sub-
contractor(s) shall provide the City Building Inspector a copy of the sub-
contractor(s) certificate or policy of insurance.
(Ord. 2126, passed - -2023) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.07 RECORDS RETENTION.
   The City Engineering Department shall keep a complete record of all licenses
issued and certificates or policies of insurance registered under the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2126, passed - -2023)
§ 118.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person or corporation violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to the penalty
described in §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall cease and desist all work in violation of this chapter and be subject to
enjoinment of the violation, along with attorney fees and costs necessary to
enforce the same
(Ord. 2126, passed - -2023)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see Neb. RS 18-1914, 18-1918, 29-835, 48-434, 48-442, 48-2114,
60-6,299, 71-4608, 71-4631, and 71-4632
CHAPTER 119: MECHANICAL CONTRACTORS
Section
   
119.01   Mechanical; requirements
   
119.02   Mechanical contractor; bond, certificate of liability insurance,
business license fee and business license
   
119.03   License; terms and conditions and fees
   
119.04   Plumbing and Examining Board and oversite of licenses
   
119.05   Gas fitters
   
119.06   Mechanical contractor; requirements
   
119.07   Master mechanical; license; application; qualifications; proof
   
119.08   Reciprocity
   
119.09   License; revocation
§ 119.01 MECHANICAL; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any individual to do any mechanical, sheet
metal or HVAC work within the corporate limits of the city, or the area outside
the city within which the city has exercised its zoning jurisdiction unless
such individual:
      (1)   Holds a master mechanical contractor license issued by the city and
does the actual installation or repair work; or
      (2)   Works under the supervision of an individual who holds a master
mechanical contractor license meeting the requirements of §
119.06 of this code.
      (3)   Holds an apprentice mechanical contractor license issued by the
city and does the actual installation or repair work under the direct
supervision of an individual who holds a master mechanical contractor or
journeyman's mechanical contractor license.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any individual, partnership, corporation or
other firm engaged in the business of mechanical, sheet metal or HVAC or in the
doing of mechanical, sheet metal or HVAC for hire to cause any mechanical,
sheet metal or HVAC work to be done, within the corporate limits of the city or
area outside the city within which the city has exercised its zoning
jurisdiction without a mechanical contractor business license.
   (C)   A permit and inspection shall be required for all work described in
this chapter.
(Ord. 2157, passed - -2025)
§ 119.02 MECHANICAL CONTRACTOR; BOND, CERTIFICATE OF LIABILITY INSURANCE,
BUSINESS LICENSE FEE AND BUSINESS LICENSE.
   (A)   A mechanical contractor business license shall be granted every
business making application to the Clerk and filing with such application.
      (1)   A bond of a surety company in the penal sum of $5,000 conditioned
that the licensee will indemnify and keep harmless the city in case of any
accident or damage arising from negligence or unskillfulness in doing or
protecting his or her work or from any unfinished or inadequate work done in
pursuance of the license, and that the licensee will restore all work that they
or he or she might do.
      (2)   A certificate of general liability insurance of $2,000,000 (add
bodily injury and property damage) must be provided with the application.
      (3)   The annual fee for mechanical contractor's first and initial
business license granted shall be $50 and for each renewal of the license the
annual fee shall be $10, and such fees shall be due and payable to the Clerk on
or before May 1 of each calendar year; the license to be for one year or any
fraction thereof expiring on April 30. If a license is not renewed within 30
days of expiration, it will be treated as a new application.
   (B)   Every mechanical contractor shall be registered as a contractor with
the State of Nebraska Department of Labor.
(Ord. 2157, passed - -2025)
§ 119.03 LICENSE; TERMS AND CONDITIONS AND FEES.
   (A)   Applicants for a master mechanical license must have had at least
three years actual experience as a licensed mechanical journeyman working under
the supervision of a master mechanical contractor and shall present documentary
proof thereof in the form of letters or affidavits from employers, or former
employers or such other qualified persons attesting to such fact, or be a
graduate of a recognized trade school conducting regular courses in the
mechanics of the mechanical, sheet metal, gas fitter, or HVAC trade.
   (B)   Applicants for a journeyman mechanical contractor license must have
had at least three years actual experience as a mechanical apprentice and shall
present documentary proof thereof in the form of letters or affidavits from
employers or former employers or such other qualified persons attesting to such
fact, or shall have completed at least two years instruction in a recognized
trade school conducting regular courses in the mechanics of the mechanical,
sheet metal, gas fitter, or HVAC trade.
   (C)   Applicants for an apprentice mechanical certificate shall, on filing
of application, be issued a certificate by the City Clerk.
   (D)   Applicants for a gas fitter's license shall have three years actual
experience in gas fitting under the supervision of a licensed plumber or
licensed gas fitter, shall have a comprehensive knowledge of the application
and use of natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas, and manufactured gases, shall
be familiar with the approved standard fixtures and appliances for consuming
these gases, shall be familiar with the venting of the equipment and shall be
familiar with and thoroughly understand the recommended methods of installation
as approved by local, state, and national codes.
   (E)   All work involving water fitting shall be completed by a licensed
professional as described in §
116.08.
   (F)   License fees.
      (1)   The license fee for master mechanical shall be $25 per year.
      (2)   License fee for limited licenses:
         (a)   The license fee for journeyman mechanical shall be $20.
         (b)   The license fee for gas fitters shall be $20 per year.
      (3)   There shall be no certificate fee for apprentice mechanical.
      (4)   License fees are due and payable on or before May 1 of each year.
If a license is not renewed within 30 days of expiration, it will be treated as
a new application and must be approved by the Plumbing and Examining Board.
   (G)   Any mechanical contractor business duly licensed in the city as of
January 1, 2025, may apply to the city for one exemption from the testing
requirements of §
119.04 herein and pursuant to §
119.06. Such exemption application will be provided by the City Clerk and must
be submitted to the city by October 1, 2025. An approved exemption must be
specific to one mechanical contractor employee or mechanical contractor owner
of the mechanical contractor business. Any mechanical contractor business not
duly licensed in the city as of January 1, 2025, must comply with all sections
of this code.
(Ord. 2157, passed - -2025)
§ 119.04 PLUMBING AND EXAMINING BOARD AND OVERSIGHT OF LICENSES.
   (A)   The Plumbing Board as described in §
116.04 of this code shall be responsible for the issuance and oversight of
mechanical contractor licenses.
   (B)   The Plumbing Board shall have power and it shall be its duty, to adopt
rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the laws of the state or the
ordinances of the city, for the installation, alteration and inspection of
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning equipment placed in or in connection
with any and every building or structure in the city. The Board shall have
power to compel the owner or contractor to first submit the plans and
specifications for mechanical, sheet metal or HVAC work that is to be done in
any building or structure or adjoining premises to the City Building Inspector
for approval before it shall be installed in such building or premises. When an
owner or contractor submits a request for a variance, the Plumbing Board shall
charge a reasonable fee, payable to the General Fund, not to exceed $25.
   (C)   The Plumbing Board shall propound such examinations to each applicant
as to ascertain his or her knowledge of mechanical, pipe fitting, ventilation,
sheet metal work for heating, and related subjects. The Examining Board shall
examine or cause to be examined or utilize a nationally recognized test as the
examination. If satisfied of the competency of such applicant, the Board shall
thereupon issue a master mechanical, journeyman mechanical, or gas fitter's
license as the case may be, authorizing such applicant to engage in the calling
or trade for which he or she has made application.
   (D)   Application shall be made in writing on forms furnished by the City
Clerk's office and shall state the name of the applicant, the location of his
or her place of business or employment and such other information as may be
required.
   (E)   A master mechanical contractor license or journeyman mechanical
contractor license shall authorize such licensee to engage in the calling or
trade of mechanical, sheet metal, or HVAC as an artisan to place, replace,
install, construct equipment or other materials connected with the business of
the mechanical, sheet metal and HVAC trade. A journeyman mechanical contractor
must work under the supervision of a master mechanical contractor as required
by §
119.03(B).
(Ord. 2157, passed - -2025)
§ 119.05 GAS FITTERS.
   (A)   A gas fitter's license shall authorize the holder thereof to engage in
the work of installing piping for the transmission of natural or LP gas and gas
consuming appliances and shall authorize the holder to install venting for such
gas consuming appliances including heating systems. Before a license shall be
issued, the applicant must submit to and pass the International Code Council
gas pipe fitter's examination.
   (B)   Master mechanical contractors may install gas piping if they submit to
and pass the International Code Council gas pipe fitter's examination in
addition to other master mechanical licensing requirements.
(Ord. 2157, passed - -2025)
§ 119.06 MECHANICAL CONTRACTOR; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every mechanical contractor shall be or shall employ the services of
at least one licensed master mechanical contractor who shall have
satisfactorily passed examination of the Plumbing Board of the city. No
individual for hire shall work at the installation, repair or alteration of
general mechanical work within the city unless he or she is employed by a
licensed mechanical contractor and under the supervision of a master mechanical
contractor and is licensed as a journeyman mechanical contractor; provided,
that mechanical apprentices may be employed to assist a master mechanical
contractor or journeyman mechanical contractor.
   (B)   Beginning January 1, 2026, a licensed mechanical contractor shall
supervise no more than two apprentice mechanical contractors at one time. More
than two apprentice mechanical contractors may work for the same mechanical
contractor business at the same time as long as the ratio of licensed
mechanical contractor(s) never falls below one licensed mechanical contractor
for every two apprentices. In the event that a mechanical contractor business
falls below the required ratio the business shall be deemed to have violated
this section, notwithstanding that the business shall be allowed a grace period
of 60 days to cure the violation before any enforcement action shall be taken
by the city.
   (C)   A licensed mechanical contractor must be on site during all city
inspections.
      (1)   Before a mechanical apprentice shall do any work, he or she shall
obtain a permit free of charge from the City Clerk, who shall record the name
and date of issuance of the apprentice permit.
      (2)   It is hereby declared unlawful for any mechanical contractor or
other person to hire anyone not having a mechanical license in force to do
mechanical, sheet metal, gas fitting and HVAC work in the city, or to permit
anyone in his or her employment not having a mechanical license issued by the
city to do mechanical work of any kind within the city or its zoning
jurisdiction.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to display or expose the sign
"HVAC" or "heating and cooling" or a sign containing the words of similar
import and meaning unless the person be duly licensed and registered by the
city in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2157, passed - -2025)
§ 119.07 MASTER MECHANICAL; LICENSE; APPLICATION; QUALIFICATIONS; PROOF.
   (A)   Applicants for a master mechanical license must have had, in the first
instance, at least three years' actual experience as a licensed mechanical
journeyman contractor, and shall present documentary proof thereof in the form
of letters or affidavits from employers, or former employers or such other
qualified persons attesting to such fact.
   (B)   If the Board shall determine that the holder complied with all
requirements of this chapter pertaining to work which may be done by a master
mechanical contractor, the Board shall authorize the issuance of a master
mechanical contractor license to such holder; otherwise, it shall deny the
application. A master mechanical contractor license shall expire on April 30 of
each year, and shall require renewal as provided in this section.
   (C)   In the event that a mechanical contractor business loses their master
mechanical contractor, the business shall be deemed to have violated this code,
notwithstanding that the business shall be allowed a grace period of 90 days to
cure the violation before any enforcement action shall be taken by the city.
(Ord. 2157, passed - -2025)
§ 119.08 RECIPROCITY.
   The city may accept a master mechanical contractor license, journeyman
mechanical license or gas fitter's license from another jurisdiction in lieu of
the required exam and referenced experience; provided the applicant was issued
said license from the other jurisdiction using exams similar in scope and
character to the exams required by the city, and said applicant was required to
provide references showing at least three years of mechanical, sheet metal, and
HVAC experience.
(Ord. 2157, passed - -2025)
§ 119.09 LICENSE; REVOCATION.
   Upon recommendation of city staff, any license issued by the Clerk may be
revoked by the Plumbing Board. The City Building Inspector may suspend such
license if, in his or her opinion, a licensee consistently fails to perform
work in accordance with or willfully violates any of the provisions of this
chapter. In such case, the Building Inspector shall give notice in writing of
the suspension to the licensee, and such suspension shall be effective until
the Plumbing Board shall determine by a hearing whether such license shall be
restored or revoked at which time such license will immediately be restored or
revoked. A licensee whose license has been suspended, shall have the right to
appear before the Plumbing Board and be heard. He or she shall be given
adequate notice of the time and place of hearing and of the charges against him
or her. Such a cause must be disposed of by the Board within 30 days of the
time of notice of suspension, unless the accused consents in writing to an
extension of time.
(Ord. 2157, passed - -2025)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER, JUSTICE, AND ADMINISTRATION
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS, INCLUDING MINORS
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST HEALTH AND SAFETY
      
134.   OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS AND DECENCY
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER, JUSTICE, AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Aiding commission of offense
   
130.02   Offenses; concealing knowledge of
   
130.03   Stop and identify; when authorized, detention authorized
   
130.04   Protection of dogs used in law enforcement
   
130.05   Appearance before county court
Offenses Against Public Order and Justice
   
130.20   Concealed weapons
   
130.21   Disorderly house
   
130.22   Riots
   
130.23   Assembly; unlawful
   
130.24   Disorderly conduct
   
130.25   Disturbing the peace
   
130.26   Drunkenness
   
130.27   Liquor; consumption on public property
   
130.28   Impersonating a police officer or city employee; penalty
   
130.29   Loitering
   
130.30   Prisoners; furnishing weapons to
   
130.31   Fire hose; crossing
   
130.32   Resisting arrest without the use of a deadly or dangerous weapon
   
130.33   Refusing to aid police officer
   
130.34   Ultimate fighting
 
   
130.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 AIDING COMMISSION OF OFFENSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, in any way or manner, to aid, abet,
counsel, advise, or encourage any other person in the commission of any of the
acts mentioned in this chapter or in any manner encourage the commission of
such offense hereby defined.
(Prior Code, § 130.01) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 OFFENSES; CONCEALING KNOWLEDGE OF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal knowledge of the commission
of any offense or to conceal knowledge of any unlawful act as defined in this
code.
(Prior Code, § 130.02) Penalty, see §
130.99 
§ 130.03 STOP AND IDENTIFY; WHEN AUTHORIZED, DETENTION AUTHORIZED.
   A peace officer may stop a person in a public place and be required to
identify himself or herself when a peace officer reasonably suspects the person
of committing, has committed, or who is about to commit a crime, and may
require him or her to provide his or her name and address. That person may be
detained only to ascertain his or her identity and the suspicious circumstances
surrounding his or her presence. Such person so detained shall identify himself
but may not be compelled to answer any other inquiry of any peace officer. Such
person detained may not be detained any longer than is reasonably necessary to
confirm the detainee’s name and address, and in no event any longer than 60
minutes. The detention may not extend beyond the place of the immediate
vicinity of the place where such detention first occurred unless such person is
arrested.
(Prior Code, § 130.03) (Ord. 1804, passed 9-12-2005) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 PROTECTION OF DOGS USED IN LAW ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, POLICE DOG shall mean any dog used
by the Police Department or by any personnel of the Department in the
performance of any of the functions or duties of the Department or its
personnel.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Willfully and maliciously harass, taunt, torment, tease, or
frighten any police dog;
      (2)   Interfere with or meddle with any police dog while being used in
the performance of its duties; or
      (3)   Willfully and maliciously torture, mutilate, injure, disable,
poison, or kill any police dog.
   (C)   A violation of any provision of this section is a Class I violation.
(Prior Code, § 130.04) (Ord. 1821, passed 2-27-2006) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.05 APPEARANCE BEFORE COUNTY COURT.
   (A)   Whenever any person is arrested for violation of any provision of the
ordinances of the city, the arresting officer shall issue a summons to or
otherwise notify in writing the arrested person to appear before the county
court at an hour and day specified in the summons or notice to answer a
complaint for violations of any provisions of the ordinances of the city.
   (B)   If the arrested person shall promise in writing to appear at the time
specified, the arresting officer shall release him or her. Should the arrested
person refuse to give his or her written promise to appear at the time given in
the summons or notice, the arresting officer shall immediately take him or her
before the county court or, if the county court shall not then be sitting,
shall be committed to the county jail.
   (C)   (1)   When any person who is charged with violation of any provision
of the ordinances of the city has appeared before the County Judge and the
matter is continued until another time, the County Judge, in his or her
discretion, shall release such person either:
         (a)   Upon his or her personal written promise to appear for hearing
at a time and date specified therein; or
         (b)   Upon the posting of bond to secure his or her appearance at a
time and date specified therein.
      (2)   Upon failure of the defendant to give either his or her written
promise to appear or a bond for his or her appearance, the county court may
commit him or her to jail until the matter can be heard without unreasonable
delay.
   (D)   If such person fails to appear at the time and date specified, the
County Judge shall forthwith issue a warrant for his or her arrest.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to appear in county court
as directed in the summons or notice, regardless of the disposition of the
charge upon which they were originally arrested, and any person who shall so
violate this section by failing to appear in county court as directed in the
summons and notice shall, upon a conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not
exceeding $100 or be imprisoned in the county jail for not to exceed seven days
and shall pay the costs of prosecution.
   (F)   The provisions of division (B)(1) above shall not apply to any person
arrested who at the time of his or her arrest:
      (1)   Is not a resident of the state;
      (2)   Resists lawful arrest; or
      (3)   Who the arresting office shall have good cause to believe has
committed:
         (a)   Any felony;
         (b)   An offense causing or contributing to an accident resulting in
death of any person; or
         (c)   Any offense of:
            1.   Reckless driving;
            2.   Wilful reckless driving;
            3.   Driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
narcotic drugs; or
            4.   Driving during any period of suspension or revocation of his
or her motor vehicle operator’s license, or after any period of suspension and
before such license shall have been renewed.
   (G)   For those arrests where the provisions of division (B) above shall not
apply to the person arrested, the arresting officer shall take any such person
forthwith before the county court, or if the county court shall not then be
sitting, shall commit such person to jail until the matter can be heard without
unreasonable delay, or until such person shall post bond to secure his or her
appearance at a time and place specified in an amount approved by the county
court.
(Prior Code, § 130.90) (Ord. 1316, passed 12-10-1984) Penalty, see §
130.99
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER AND JUSTICE
§ 130.20 CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (A)   Carrying concealed handgun; locations; restrictions; posting of
prohibition; violation; penalty; affirmative defense; applicability. Except as
otherwise provided in this section, a person, other than a minor or a
prohibited person, may carry a concealed handgun anywhere in the city, with or
without a permit under the Concealed Handgun Permit Act.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (I), a person shall not carry a
concealed handgun into or onto any place or premises where the person, persons,
entity, or entities in control of the place or premises or employer in control
of the place or premises has prohibited the carrying of concealed handguns into
or onto the place or premises.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (I), a person shall not carry a
concealed handgun into or onto any: Police, Sheriff, or Nebraska State Patrol
station or office; detention facility, prison, or jail; courtroom or building
which contains a courtroom; polling place during a bona fide election; meeting
of the governing body of a county, public school district, municipality, or
other political subdivision; meeting of the legislature or a committee of the
legislature; financial institution; professional or semiprofessional athletic
event; building, grounds, vehicle, or sponsored activity or athletic event of
any public, private, denominational, or parochial elementary, vocational, or
secondary school, a private post- secondary career school as defined in Neb.
Rev. Stat. § 85-1603, a community college, or a public or private college,
junior college, or university; place of worship; hospital, emergency room, or
trauma center; political rally or fundraiser; establishment having a license
issued under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act that derives over one-half of its
total income from the sale of alcoholic liquor; place where the possession or
carrying of a firearm is prohibited by state or federal law; or any other place
or premises where handguns are prohibited by state law.
   (D)   (1)   A financial institution may authorize its security personnel to
carry concealed handguns in the financial institution while on duty so long as
each member of the security personnel, as authorized, is not otherwise
prohibited by state law from possessing or carrying a concealed handgun and is
in compliance with Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 28-1202.02 to 28-1202.04.
      (2)   A place of worship may authorize its security personnel to carry
concealed handguns on its property if:
         (a)   Each member of the security personnel, as authorized, is not
otherwise prohibited by state law from possessing or carrying a concealed
handgun and is in compliance with Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 28-1202.02 to 28-1202.04;
         (b)   Written notice is given to the congregation; and
         (c)   For leased property, the carrying of concealed handguns on the
property does not violate the terms of any real property lease agreement
between the place of worship and the lessor.
   (E)   If a person, persons, entity, or entities in control of the place or
premises or an employer in control of the place or premises prohibits the
carrying of concealed handguns into or onto the place or premises and such
place or premises are open to the public, a person does not violate this
section unless the person, persons, entity, or entities in control of the place
or premises or employer in control of the place or premises has posted
conspicuous notice that carrying a concealed handgun is prohibited in or on the
place or premises or has made a request, directly or through an authorized
representative or management personnel, that the person remove the concealed
handgun from the place or premises.
   (F)   A person carrying a concealed handgun in a vehicle or on his or her
person while riding in or on a vehicle into or onto any parking area, which is
open to the public, used by any location listed in divisions (B) or (C), does
not violate this section if, prior to exiting the vehicle, the handgun is
locked inside the glove box, trunk, or other compartment of the vehicle, a
storage box securely attached to the vehicle, or, if the vehicle is a
motorcycle, other than an autocycle, a hardened compartment securely attached
to the motorcycle. This division does not apply to any parking area used by
such location when the carrying of a concealed handgun into or onto such
parking area is prohibited by federal law.
   (G)   An employer may prohibit employees or other persons from carrying
concealed handguns in vehicles owned by the employer.
   (H)   (1)   Except as provided in division (H)(2) below, it is an
affirmative defense to a violation of division (C) of this section that the
defendant was engaged in any lawful business, calling, or employment at the
time the defendant was carrying a concealed handgun and the circumstances in
which the defendant was placed at the time were such as to justify a prudent
person in carrying a concealed handgun for the defense of his or her person,
property, or family.
      (2)   The affirmative defense provided for in this division:
         (a)   Does not prevent a prosecution for a violation of Neb. Rev.
Stat. § 28-1204.04; and
         (b)   Is not available if the defendant refuses to remove the
concealed handgun from the place or premises after a person in control of the
place or premises has made a request, directly or through an authorized
representative or management personnel, that the defendant remove the concealed
handgun from the place or premises.
   (I)   Divisions (B) or (C) do not apply to a qualified law enforcement
officer or qualified retired law enforcement officer carrying a concealed
handgun pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 926B or 926C, respectively, as such sections
existed on January 1, 2023.
   (J)   Minor’s and prohibited persons carrying concealed weapons; prohibited.
A minor or a prohibited person shall not carry a weapon or weapons concealed on
or about their persons, such as a handgun, a knife, brass or iron knuckles, or
any other deadly weapon.
   (K)   Carrying concealed handgun; consumption of alcohol or controlled
substance; effect; applicability; violation. Except as provided in division (L)
(2) through (4) below, a person not otherwise prohibited by state law from
possessing or carrying a concealed handgun shall not carry a concealed handgun
while such person:
      (1)   Is consuming alcohol; or
      (2)   Has remaining in such person's blood, urine, or breath any
previously consumed alcohol or any controlled substance as defined in Neb. Rev.
Stat. § 28-401.
      (3)   A person does not violate this section if the controlled substance
in such person's blood, urine, or breath was lawfully obtained and was taken in
therapeutically prescribed amounts.
      (4)   A person does not violate this section if:
         (a)   Such person is storing or transporting a handgun in a motor
vehicle for any lawful purpose or transporting a handgun directly to or from a
motor vehicle to or from any place where such handgun may be lawfully possessed
or carried by such person; and
         (b)   Such handgun is unloaded, kept separate from ammunition, and
enclosed in a case.
         (c)   This section does not apply to a qualified law enforcement
officer or qualified retired law enforcement officer carrying a concealed
handgun pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 926B or 926C, respectively, as such sections
existed on January 1, 2023.
   (L)   Carrying concealed handgun; identification document, required,
applicability.
      (1)   This section applies to a person who is not otherwise prohibited by
state law from possessing or carrying a concealed handgun.
      (2)   This section does not apply to a qualified law enforcement officer
or qualified retired law enforcement officer carrying a concealed handgun
pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 926B or 926C, respectively, as such sections existed on
January 1, 2023.
      (3)   Except as provided in division (L)(4), any time a person is
carrying a concealed handgun, such person shall also carry such person's
identification document. The person shall display the identification document
when asked to do so by a peace officer or by emergency services personnel.
      (4)   A person is not required to comply with this section if:
         (a)   Such person is storing or transporting a handgun in a motor
vehicle for any lawful purpose or transporting a handgun directly to or from a
motor vehicle to or from any place where such handgun may be lawfully possessed
or carried by such person; and
         (b)   Such handgun is unloaded, kept separate from ammunition, and
enclosed in a case.
      (5)   For purposes of this section:
         (a)   EMERGENCY SERVICES PERSONNEL means a volunteer or paid
firefighter or rescue squad member or a person licensed to provide emergency
medical services pursuant to the Emergency Medical Services Practice Act or
authorized to provide emergency medical services pursuant to the EMS Personnel
Licensure Interstate Compact; and
         (b)   IDENTIFICATION DOCUMENT means a valid:
            1.   Driver's or operator's license;
             2.   State identification card;
            3.   Military identification card;
            4.   Alien registration card; or
            5.   Passport.
   (M)   Carrying concealed handgun; contact with peace officer or emergency
services personnel; procedures for securing handgun; applicability; violation.
      (1)   This section applies to a person who is not otherwise prohibited by
state law from possessing or carrying a concealed handgun.
      (2)   This section does not apply to a qualified law enforcement officer
or qualified retired law enforcement officer carrying a concealed handgun
pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 926B or 926C, respectively, as such sections existed on
January 1, 2023.
      (3)   Except as provided in division (M)(6) below, whenever a person who
is carrying a concealed handgun is contacted by a peace officer or by emergency
services personnel, the person shall immediately inform the peace officer or
emergency services personnel that the person is carrying a concealed handgun.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (M)(6) below, during contact with a
person carrying a concealed handgun, a peace officer or emergency services
personnel may secure the handgun or direct that it be secured during the
duration of the contact if the peace officer or emergency services personnel
determines that it is necessary for the safety of any person present, including
the peace officer or emergency services personnel. The person shall submit to
the order to secure the handgun.
      (5)   (a)   When the peace officer has determined that the person is not
a threat to the safety of any person present, including the peace officer, and
the person has not committed any other violation that would result in his or
her arrest, the peace officer shall return the handgun to the person before
releasing the person from the scene and breaking contact.
         (b)   When emergency services personnel have determined that the
person is not a threat to the safety of any person present, including emergency
services personnel, and if the person is physically and mentally capable of
possessing the handgun, the emergency services personnel shall return the
handgun to the person before releasing the person from the scene and breaking
contact. If the person is transported for treatment to another location, the
handgun shall be turned over to any peace officer. The peace officer shall
provide a receipt which includes the make, model, caliber, and serial number of
the handgun.
      (6)   A person is not required to comply with divisions (M)(3) and (M)(4)
if:
         (a)   Such person is storing or transporting a handgun in a motor
vehicle for any lawful purpose or transporting a handgun directly to or from a
motor vehicle to or from any place where such handgun may be lawfully possessed
or carried by such person; and
         (b)   Such handgun is unloaded, kept separate from ammunition, and
enclosed in a case.
      (7)   For purposes of this section:
         (a)   CONTACT WITH A PEACE OFFICER means any time a peace officer
personally stops, detains, questions, or addresses a person for an official
purpose or in the course of his or her official duties, and contact with
emergency services personnel means any time emergency services personnel
provide treatment to a person in the course of their official duties; and
         (b)   EMERGENCY SERVICES PERSONNEL has the same meaning as in Neb.
Rev. Stat. § 28-1202.03.
(Prior Code, § 130.33) (Ord. 1906, passed 1-11-2010; Ord. 2141, passed - -2024)
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.21 DISORDERLY HOUSE.
   (A)   Definition.
      (1)   Any room, house, building, structure, place, or premises wherein or
upon any unlawful or illegal acts are committed in violation of local state or
federal law, or which are kept in such a manner as to disturb, annoy or
scandalize the public generally, or persons within a particular neighborhood,
is hereby declared to be a DISORDERLY HOUSE.
      (2)   Any room, house, building, structure, place, or premises which are
kept, maintained, used, erected, established, or run for any of the following
purposes is hereby declared to be a DISORDERLY HOUSE; provided, however, that
this shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive, limiting, or
restrictive:
         (a)   Prostitution, pandering, or public indecency as those terms are
defined in the statutes of the state;
         (b)   Unlawful manufacture, cultivation, growth, production,
processing, sale, distribution, storage, use, or possession for any unlawful
manufacture, or use of any controlled substance as that term is defined in the
statutes of the state;
         (c)   Gambling as that term is defined in the statutes of the state,
or the keeping of gambling devices as that term is defined in the statutes of
the state;
         (d)   Acts of disturbing the peace or disorderly conduct as those
terms are defined elsewhere in this municipal code; and
         (e)   The reception, retention, or disposition of stolen moveable
property of another;
   (B)   Prohibited; nuisance.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, renter, proprietor, or
any other person or persons to keep, run, or maintain a disorderly house, or to
knowingly collect or permit to be collected therein persons who are engaging in
any unlawful act or to knowingly make, cause, or permit, or suffer to be made
therein any loud or improper noise to the annoyance or disturbance of any
person or neighborhood. A disorderly house is declared to be a public nuisance.
      (2)   A violation of this section is a Class I violation.
   (C)   Inmate; visiting; prohibited.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to become or remain an inmate
of any disorderly house, or to frequent or visit with knowledge of, and
participation in, the illegal activities occurring therein.
      (2)   A violation of this section is a Class I violation.
   (D)   Abatement procedure.
      (1)   The procedures in this section are applicable in the event of
repeated incidents of the type described in this division (D). For purposes of
this section, REPEATED INCIDENTS means two or more of such incidents within the
immediately preceding 12-month period, which incidents are documented in
writing by a law enforcement agency. Such incidents need not have resulted in a
criminal conviction. The procedures in this section are also applicable to the
situations described in division (D)(2) below.
      (2)   The Police Chief may give notice to the owner or occupants of the
disorderly house to cease the conduct. The notice shall be in writing, shall be
served personally or by certified mail, and shall contain the following:
         (a)   The location of the disorderly house;
         (b)   A description of the conduct which constitutes the room, house,
building, structure, place, or premises a disorderly house;
         (c)   An order to cease the conduct; and
         (d)   A statement that if the conduct continues the city may take such
legal action as may be necessary to restrain or suppress the conduct,
specifically including the seeking of an injunction in the District Court.
      (3)   Within five days after receipt of such notice, the owner or
occupant may make a written request for a hearing before the City Council. At
such hearing the City Council shall determine whether the room, house,
building, structure, place or premises is a disorderly house. If the City
Council determines that the room, house, building, structure, place, or
premises is a disorderly house, the City Council may authorize the appropriate
city officers to commence the appropriate action in court to suppress the
conduct if the conduct does not cease.
(Prior Code, § 130.34) (Ord. 1906, passed 1-11-2010; Ord. 1910, passed 4-12-
2010) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.22 RIOTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to or refuse immediately to
disperse upon an order to do so by a police officer, when three or more persons
are assembled for the purpose of disturbing the peace or for the purpose of
committing any unlawful act.
(Prior Code, § 130.35) Penalty, see §
130.99 
§ 130.23 ASSEMBLY; UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for three or more persons to assemble together for the
purpose of disturbing the peace or for the purpose of committing an unlawful
act and not to disperse upon the command of an officer so to do.
(Prior Code, § 130.36) Penalty, see §
130.99 
§ 130.24 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons within the city to:
      (1)   Indulge or engage in any riotous, tumultuous, or disorderly
conduct;
      (2)   Take part in any disorderly assembly;
      (3)   Be an inmate of a disorderly house or attend or visit any such
house;
      (4)   Fight by agreement or otherwise to quarrel;
      (5)   Engage in lewd, indecent, or lascivious behavior; or
      (6)   Do or engage in any other disorderly act or conduct tending to
disturb the peace and quiet or the city.
   (B)   Disorderly conduct shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Threatening, abusive or insulting conduct or behavior, if uttered
or, as the case may be, engaged in with intent to provoke a breach of the
peace, or whereby a breach of the peace may be occasioned, on the part of other
persons present;
      (2)   Language or other conduct or behavior which annoys and is uttered
or, as the case may be, engaged in with intent to provoke a breach of the peace
on the part of other persons present;
      (3)   Language, conduct, or behavior shall be deemed to be threatening,
abusive, insulting, or annoying if it would be so regarded by a person of
ordinary sensibilities in the community;
      (4)   Loitering or other conduct which obstructs or interferes with the
passage of persons upon a public street, avenue, road, alley, bridge, sidewalk,
highway, or any public way or place used for the passage of persons, if the
obstruction or interference continues or commences after the police have
ordered the person or persons so doing to cease and desist or to move on; and
      (5)   Loitering about any school or public place at which children
congregate, with an apparent intent to molest any child under the age of 18
years. LOITER shall mean to linger, delay, be dilatory, stand, sit, saunter,
lag behind, move slowly about, loaf, or spend time idly.
   (C)   Violation of any provision of this section is a Class I violation; see
§
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 130.37) (Ord. 1901, passed 9-28-2009) Penalty, see §
130.99 
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 16-228
§ 130.25 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons within the city, to disturb
the peace and quiet of any other person, family or neighbor, on any public
assembly or assemblies of persons for religious worship or for any other
purpose by any loud or unusual noise, boisterous laughing, talking, hollering,
quarreling, swearing, obscene or indecent language, or by any other manner for
device whatsoever.  Violation of any provision of this section is a Class I
violation; see §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 130.38) (Ord. 1901, passed 9-28-2009) Penalty, see §
130.99 
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-1322
§ 130.26 DRUNKENNESS.
   If any person shall be found in a state of intoxication in any public place
within the corporate limits, he or she shall be deemed guilty of an offense,
and any peace officer shall, without a warrant, take such person into custody
and detain him or her until a complaint can be filed before a magistrate and a
warrant be issued for his or her arrest.
(Prior Code, § 130.39) Penalty, see §
130.99 
§ 130.27 LIQUOR; CONSUMPTION ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Liquor consumption on state or governmental subdivision property.
Except when the State Liquor Control Commission has issued a license as
provided in Neb. RS 53-186(2) or Neb. RS 60- 6,211.08, it is unlawful for any
person to consume alcoholic liquor upon property owned or controlled by the
state or any governmental subdivision thereof unless authorized by the
governing bodies having jurisdiction over such property.
(Neb. RS 53-186)
   (B)   Liquor consumption on certain premises. It is unlawful for any person
owning, operating, managing, or conducting any bottle club, dance hall,
restaurant, café, or club or any place open to the general public to permit or
allow any person to consume alcoholic liquor upon the premises, except as
permitted by a license issued for such premises pursuant to the Nebraska Liquor
Control Act. It is unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquor in any
dance hall, restaurant, café, or club or any place open to the general public
except as permitted by a license issued for such premises pursuant to the Act.
This division (B) does not apply to a retail licensee while lawfully engaged in
the catering of alcoholic beverages or to limousines or buses operated under
Neb. RS 60-6,211.08.
(Neb. RS 53-186.01)
   (C)   Place open to general public; hours; restrictions. It shall be
unlawful for any person owning, operating, managing, or conducting any dance
hall, restaurant, café, club, or place of public resort to permit or allow any
person to consume alcoholic liquor upon the premises, except as permitted by a
license previously issued to such premises pursuant to the State Liquor Control
Act, being Neb. RS 53-101 et seq.
   (D)   Alcoholic liquor; employer; principal; liability. The act or omission
of any employee or agent who shall violate any of the provisions of this
section shall be punishable in the same manner as if such employer or principal
had personally so acted or omitted to act.
   (E)   Violations; classification. A violation of any provision of this
section, or of any provision of a permit granted pursuant to this section, is a
Class II violation.
(Prior Code, § 130.40) (Ord. 1663, passed 6-26-2000; Ord. 1911, passed 4-26-
2010) Penalty, see §
130.99 
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,211.08
§ 130.28 IMPERSONATING A POLICE OFFICER OR CITY EMPLOYEE; PENALTY.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of impersonating a police officer if he
or she falsely pretends to be a police officer and performs any act in that
pretended capacity.
   (B)   A person commits the offense of impersonating a city employee if he or
she falsely pretends to be a city employee other than a police officer and
performs any act in that pretended capacity.
   (C)   There is no defense to the prosecution under this section if the
office the actor pretended to hold did not, in fact, exist.
   (D)   A violation of this section is a Class I violation.
(Prior Code, § 130.41) (Ord. 1911, passed 4-26-2010) Penalty, see §
130.99 
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-610
§ 130.29 LOITERING.
   (A)   A person commits a violation if he or she loiters or prowls in a
place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under
circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the
vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon
appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify himself or herself, or
manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object. Unless flight
by the person or other circumstances makes it impractical, a police officer
shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person
an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by
requesting the person to identify himself or herself and to explain his or her
presence or conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this
section if the police officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if
it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and, if
it had been believed by the police officer at the time, would have dispelled
the alarm. Any police officer may arrest any person suspected of being a
loiterer or prowler without a warrant if it reasonably appears that the delay
in arresting the suspect caused by obtaining a warrant would result in the
suspect’s escape.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, after first being warned by a
police officer, or where a “no loitering” sign or signs have been posted, to
loiter, stand, sit, or lie in or upon any public or quasi-public sidewalk,
street, curb, crosswalk, walkway area, mall, or that portion of private
property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or obstruct unreasonably the
free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon. It shall be unlawful for any
person to block, obstruct, or prevent free access to the entrance to any
building open to the public.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PLACE has the following
definition unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning: an area generally visible to public view, including streets,
sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles
(whether moving or not), and buildings open to the general public, including
those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and
entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
(Prior Code, § 130.42) Penalty, see §
130.99 
§ 130.30 PRISONERS; FURNISHING WEAPONS TO.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish or attempt to furnish or take
into jail or to deliver or attempt to deliver to any prisoner therein confined,
or in the custody of any officer, any weapon, tool, intoxicating liquor, drug,
or other article without the consent of the officer in charge.
(Prior Code, § 130.43) Penalty, see §
130.99 
§ 130.31 FIRE HOSE; CROSSING.
   No vehicle shall be driven over unprotected hose of the Fire Department when
laid down on any highway or private road or driveway, in use or to be used at
any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department official
in command.
(Prior Code, § 130.44) Penalty, see §
130.99 
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,184
§ 130.32 RESISTING ARREST WITHOUT THE USE OF A DEADLY OR DANGEROUS WEAPON.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the use of a deadly or
dangerous weapon, while intentionally preventing or attempting to prevent a
peace officer, acting under color of his or her official authority, from
effecting an arrest of the actor or another, to:
      (1)   Use or threaten to use physical force or violence against the peace
officer or another;
      (2)   Use any other means which creates a substantial risk of causing
physical injury to the peace officer or another; or
      (3)   Employ means requiring substantial force to overcome resistance to
effecting the arrest.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section if the
peace officer involved was out of uniform and did not identify himself or
herself as a peace officer by showing his or her credentials to the person
whose arrest is attempted.
Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-904
§ 130.33 REFUSING TO AID POLICE OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, upon a request by a person known to him
or her to be a peace officer, unreasonably to refuse or fail to aid the peace
officer in:
   (A)   Apprehending any person charged with or convicted of any offense
against any of the laws of the state or city; or
   (B)   Securing the offender when apprehended; or
   (C)   Conveying the offender to the jail of the county or the city.
Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-903
§ 130.34 ULTIMATE FIGHTING.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      BODILY INJURY. Any impairment of physical condition, including physical
pain.
      EXTREME FIGHTING. See ULTIMATE FIGHTING.
      FULL-CONTACT FIGHTING. See ULTIMATE FIGHTING.
       “GROUND ‘N’ POUND” CHALLENGE. See ULTIMATE FIGHTING.
      MIXED MARTIAL ARTS. See ULTIMATE FIGHTING.
      “NO-HOLDS BARRED” FIGHTING. See ULTIMATE FIGHTING.
      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or causes:
         (a)   Serious permanent disfigurement;
         (b)   Unconsciousness;
         (c)   Extreme pain; or
         (d)   Permanent or protracted loss or impairment of the function of a
bodily member or organ.
      “TOUGH MAN” CONTEST. See ULTIMATE FIGHTING.
      ULTIMATE FIGHTING. A live match in which:
         (a)   Participants compete for a cash purse in any amount or a non-
cash purse with more than nominal value;
         (b)   Participants are not licensed as professional contestants in any
state;
         (c)   Audiences are charged an admission fee; and
         (d)   Match rules permit contestants to use a combination of boxing,
kicking, wrestling, hitting, punching, or other combative contact techniques,
and match rules do not:
            1.   Incorporate a formalized system of combative techniques
against which a contestant’s performance is judged to determine the prevailing
contestant;
            2.   Divide a match into two or more equal and specified time
periods for a match total of no more than 50 minutes; or
            3.   Prohibit contestants from:
               a.   Using anything that is not part of the human body, except
for boxing gloves, to intentionally inflict serious bodily injury upon an
opponent through direct contact or the expulsion of a projectile;
               b.   Striking a person who demonstrates an inability to protect
himself of herself from the advances of an opponent; or
               c.   Direct, intentional, and forceful strikes to the eyes,
groin area, Adam’s apple area of the neck, and temple area of the head.
(Prior Code, § 130.47)
   (B)   Prohibited. No person shall publicize, promote, conduct, or engage in
an ultimate fighting match within the corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 130.48)
(Ord. 1841, passed 10-23-2006) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   A person who violates §
130.34 shall be punished as provided in §
10.99.
      (2)   Any person found in violation of any provisions of §
130.34 shall be fined no less than $1,000 nor more than $2,500 for each
violation. Every day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 130.49) (Ord. 1841, passed 10-23-2006)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS, INCLUDING MINORS
Section
Offenses Against Persons
   
131.01   Assault or battery
   
131.02   Window peeping
   
131.03   Laser devices; pointing
Offenses Involving Minors
   
131.15   Beer; procuring for, selling to minors
   
131.16   Curfew; minors
   
131.17   Playing ball on streets
OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
§ 131.01 ASSAULT OR BATTERY.
   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person within the city to assault or
threaten another in a menacing manner or strike or injure another. It is
unlawful for any person or persons within the city to intentionally provoke or
attempt to provoke an assault upon himself or another by the uttering or
grossly vile or insulting epithets applied to the assailed party or one so
attempting to commit an assault, or to curse or swear at a person or use
grossly vile names, or slander or abuse the character of another person, spit
or expectorate at another person, throw or otherwise cause an object of any
size to be directed at another, with the intent of provoking an assault by such
person. Violation of this section is a Class I violation; see §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 130.10) (Ord. 1901, passed 9-28-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99 
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-310
§ 131.02 WINDOW PEEPING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon the private premises of
another within the city and look or peep into any window, door or other opening
in any building located thereon, which is occupied by any person as a place of
abode or to go upon the private premises of another for the purpose of looking
or peeping into any window, door, or other opening in any building thereon,
which is occupied by any person as a place of abode.
(Prior Code, § 130.11) (Ord. 339, passed 4-7-1952) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 131.03 LASER DEVICES; POINTING.
   (A)   Definition. As used in this section, the term LASER DEVICE shall mean
any of several devices that convert incident electromagnetic radiation of mixed
frequencies to one or more discrete frequencies of highly amplified and
coherent visible radiation; as well as any other such device operating on the
principle of light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation.
   (B)   Prohibited uses. It shall be unlawful for any person to point or
otherwise direct the beam from a laser device into the eye(s) or onto the body
of another person. It shall be unlawful for any person to point or otherwise
direct the beam from a laser device into the eye(s) of or onto the body of any
animal. It shall be unlawful for any person to point or otherwise direct the
beam from a laser device toward any occupied vehicle.
   (C)   Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of a laser
device by any licensed and qualified physician, veterinarian, or medical or
health care provider for diagnostic or treatment purposes. Nothing in this
section shall prohibit the use of a laser device by any student regularly
enrolled in any educational institution; provided, such use is in a controlled
laboratory or classroom setting, with the permission and under the direct
supervision of a licensed teacher or instructor. Nothing herein shall prohibit
the use of a laser device by any peace officer.
(Prior Code, § 130.12) (Ord. 1633, passed 3-1-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99 
OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS
§ 131.15 BEER; PROCURING FOR, SELLING TO MINORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to procure, sell, or give away any beer
to any person under the age of 21 years or for any person under the age of 21
years to purchase, attempt to purchase, or otherwise procure, consume, or have
in his or her possession any beer.
(Prior Code, § 130.60) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 131.16 CURFEW; MINORS.
   (A)   It is hereby made unlawful for any person under 16 years of age to be
or remain, or for any parent, guardian, or other person to suffer or permit a
person under 16 years of age, who is under their legal custody, to be or remain
in or upon any of the streets, alleys, vacant lots, or property of another or
public places in the city at night after the hour of 10:00 p.m., unless such
person is accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other person having the legal
custody of such minor person, or is going to or from some meeting or assemblage
of lawful character, or is in the performance of an errand or duty, directed by
a parent, guardian, or other person having the legal custody of such minor
person, or whose employment makes it necessary to be upon the streets, alleys,
or public places during the night time after such hour, or unless otherwise
exempted under division (B) below; provided, these exceptions shall not apply
when such minor person shall play or loiter unnecessarily in or upon such
street, alley, vacant lot, property of another, or public place, whether alone
or accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other person or persons whomsoever. No
minor shall play or loiter in any street, alley, or public place in the city at
any time to the inconvenience of the ordinary traffic over and upon such
streets, alleys, or public places.
   (B)   It is an exemption to a violation under this section that the person
engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.
   (C)   Violation of this section shall be a Class II violation; see §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 130.61) (Ord. 885, passed 4-28-1975; Ord. 1901, passed 9-28-
2009) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 131.17 PLAYING BALL ON STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to play catch, bat a ball, or kick or
throw a football, or to engage in any exercise or sport, upon the city streets
and sidewalks. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit or prevent the
City Council from ordering from time to time certain streets and public places
blocked off for the purpose of providing a safe area to engage in such exercise
and sport.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Additional authority, see Neb. RS 17-555 and 17-557
   Authority to regulate excavation and obstruction of streets, see Neb. RS 17-
142
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
132.01   Admission fees; avoiding payment
   
132.02   Theft
   
132.03   Criminal mischief
   
132.04   Swindling
   
132.05   Criminal trespass
   
132.06   Shoplifting
   
132.07   Littering
   
132.08   Destruction of park property
   
132.09   Public utility property; injuring prohibited
§ 132.01 ADMISSION FEES; AVOIDING PAYMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person fraudulently to enter, without
payment of the proper admission fee, any theater, ballroom, lecture, concert,
or other place where admission fees are charged.
   (B)   Nothing in this section contained shall be deemed to prohibit or
restrict the free admission of police officers engaged in the performance of
police duties to any place of public entertainment or amusement.
(Prior Code, § 130.20) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 132.02 THEFT.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, the definitions found in Neb. RS 28-509
shall be used.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, when the value of the thing
involved is under $500, to:
      (1)   Take or exercise control over movable property of another with the
intent to deprive him or her thereof;
      (2)   Transfer immovable property of another or any interest therein with
the intent to benefit himself or herself or another not entitled thereto;
      (3)   Fail to return leased or rented movable property to the lessor
after the expiration of a written lease or written rental agreement if such
lessee has been mailed notice by certified mail that such lease or rental
agreement has expired and he or she has failed within ten days after such
notice to return such property;
      (4)   Obtain the property of another by deception, as defined in Neb. RS
28-512;
      (5)   (a)   Obtain the property of another by threatening to:
            1.   Inflict bodily injury on anyone or commit any other criminal
offense; or
            2.   Accuse anyone of a criminal offense; or
            3.   Expose any secret tending to subject any person to hatred,
contempt, or ridicule, or to impair his or her credit or business repute; or
            4.   Take or withhold action as an official, or cause an official
to take or withhold action; or
            5.   Bring about or continue a strike, boycott, or other collective
unofficial action, if the property is not demanded or received for the benefit
of the group in whose interest the actor purports to act; or
            6.   Testify or provide information or withhold testimony or
information with respect to another’s legal claim or defense.
         (b)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution based on divisions
(B)(5)(a)2. through (B)(5)(a)4. that the property obtained by threat of
accusation, exposure, lawsuit, or other invocation of official action was
honestly claimed as restitution or indemnification for harm done in the
circumstances to which such accusation, exposure, lawsuit, or other official
action relates, or as compensation for property or lawful services.
      (6)   Come into control of property of another that he or she knows to
have been lost, mislaid, or delivered under a mistake as to the nature or
amount of the property or the identity of the recipient if, with intent to
deprive the owner thereof, he or she fails to take reasonable measures to
restore the property to a person entitled to have it;
      (7)   Obtain services, which he or she knows are available only for
compensation, by deception or threat or by false token or other means to avoid
payment for the service;
      (8)   Have control over the disposition of services of others to which he
or she is not entitled and divert such services to his or her own benefit or to
the benefit of another not entitled thereto; or
      (9)   Receive, retain, or dispose of stolen movable property of another
knowing that it has been stolen, or believing that it has been stolen, unless
the property is received, retained, or disposed with intention to restore it to
the owner.
(Prior Code, § 130.21) (Ord. 1668, passed 7-24-2000) Penalty, see §
10.99 
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-511 through 28-515 and 28-517
§ 132.03 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city purposely, willfully,
maliciously, or recklessly to destroy or injure or aid in destroying or
injuring, in any manner, any real or personal property of any description,
belonging to another person, or in charge of another as agent or factor, with a
value less than $500. A violation of any provision of this section is a Class I
violation.
(Prior Code, § 130.22) (Ord. 1906, passed 1-11-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99 
Statutory reference:
   Criminal mischief, see Neb. RS 28-519
§ 132.04 SWINDLING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, who by color, or aid of any trick or
sleight of hand performance, or by fraud or by fraudulent scheme, cards, dice,
or device, to win for himself or herself or for another any money or property
or a representative of either.
(Prior Code, § 130.23) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 132.05 CRIMINAL TRESPASS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, knowing that he or she is not
licensed or privileged to do so, to:
      (1)   Enter or secretly remain in any building or occupied structure, or
any separately secured or occupied portion thereof; or
      (2)   Enter or remain in any place as to which notice against trespass is
given by:
         (a)   Actual communication to the actor;
         (b)   Posting in a manner prescribed by law or reasonably likely to
come to the attention of intruders; or
         (c)   Fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to exclude
intruders.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under division (A)(1)
above that the building or occupied structure was abandoned, and to a
prosecution under either division (A)(1) or (A)(2) above that the premises were
at the time open to members of the public and the actor complied with all
lawful conditions imposed on access to or remaining in the premises, or that
the actor reasonably believed that the owner of the premises or other person
empowered to license access thereto would have licensed him or her to enter or
remain.
   (C)   A violation of any provision of this section is a Class I violation.
(Prior Code, § 130.24) (Ord. 1630, passed 1-11-1999; Ord. 1911, passed 4-26-
2010) Penalty, see §
10.99 
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 28-520, 28-521
§ 132.06 SHOPLIFTING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of theft by
shoplifting within the city limits.
   (B)   A person commits the crime of theft by shoplifting when he or she,
with the intent of appropriating merchandise to his or her own use without
paying for it, or to deprive the owner of possession of the property or its
retail value, in whole or in part, does any of the following:
      (1)   Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any
store or retail establishment;
      (2)   Alters the price tag or other price markings on goods or
merchandise of any store or retail establishments;
      (3)   Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or retail
establishment from one container to another;
      (4)   Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of merchandise
with a label or price tag for another item of merchandise; or
      (5)   Causes the cash register or other sales recording device to reflect
less than the retail price of the merchandise.
   (C)   (1)   In any prosecution for theft by shoplifting, photographs of the
shoplifted property may be accepted as prima facie evidence as to the identity
of the property. Any photographs shall be accompanied by a written statement
containing the following:
         (a)   A description of the property;
         (b)   The name of the owner or owners of the property;
         (c)   The time, date, and location where the shoplifting occurred;
         (d)   The time and date the photograph was taken;
         (e)   The name of the photographer; and
         (f)   Verification by the arresting officer.
      (2)   The purpose of this provision is to allow the owner or owners of
shoplifted property, the use of such property during pending criminal
prosecutions. Prior to allowing the use of the shoplifted property pending
prosecution, legal counsel for the alleged shoplifter shall have a reasonable
opportunity to inspect and appraise the property and may file a motion for
retention of the property. The motion shall be granted if there is any
reasonable basis for believing that the photographs and accompanying affidavit
may be misleading.
(Prior Code, § 130.25) (Ord. 1304, passed 6-11-1984) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 132.07 LITTERING.
   (A)   Any person who deposits, throws, discards, or otherwise disposes of
any litter on any public or private property or in any waters commits the
offense of littering unless:
      (1)   The property is an area designated by law for the disposal of that
type of material and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to
so use the property; or
      (2)   The litter is placed in a receptacle or container installed on the
property for that purpose.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LITTER. Includes all waste material susceptible of being dropped,
deposited, discarded, or otherwise disposed of by any person upon any property
in the state, but does not include wastes of primary processes of farming or
manufacturing.
      WASTE MATERIAL. Any material appearing in a place or in a context not
associated with that material’s function or origin.
   (C)   Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any
motor vehicle or watercraft in violation of this section, the operator of the
motor vehicle or watercraft commits the offense of littering.
(Neb. RS 28-523)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.08 DESTRUCTION OF PARK PROPERTY.
   Any person who shall cut down, injure, or destroy any tree, plant, or shrub,
or who shall injure or destroy and building, equipment, or paraphernalia
belonging to the city, and installed in its parks, or who shall commit any
waste of any kind therein, shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of
an offense.
(Prior Code, § 130.27) (Ord. 1728, passed 6-23-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.09 PUBLIC UTILITY PROPERTY; INJURING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, company, or
association of persons to interfere with, cut, injure, remove, break, destroy,
or deface, any pole, wire, fixture, instrument, or other property of any
telegraph, telephone, cable television, satellite service, cellular
communication service, electric or gas company, or association used in the
operation of any telegraph, telephone, cable television, satellite service,
cellular communication service, electric line, or gas business within the city.
   (B)   A violation of any provision of this section is a Class II violation.
(Prior Code, § 130.28) (Ord. 1911, passed 4-26-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
Offenses Against Public Health and Safety
   
133.01   Window sills; loose objects upon
   
133.02   Public ways; obstructing
   
133.03   Animals; cruelty to
   
133.04   Fences; barbed wire; electric
   
133.05   Expectorating or spitting; prohibited
   
133.06   Noise; amplified
Weapons Offenses
   
133.20   Firearms prohibited; exceptions
   
133.21   Hunting on city property prohibited
   
133.22   Air guns; toy weapons
   
133.23   Switchblade knives; possession prohibited; defined
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
§ 133.01 WINDOW SILLS; LOOSE OBJECTS UPON.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or keep on any window sill,
porch, or other projection above the first story of any building abutting on
any sidewalk any article which might do injury by falling upon any person on
the sidewalk in front of such building, unless the article be securely fastened
or protected by screens.
(Prior Code, § 130.50) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 133.02 PUBLIC WAYS; OBSTRUCTING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, without
first having complied with §
113.10, to obstruct or hamper the function of any public street, alley,
sidewalk, or parking area in the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any lot or the owner of any
vacant lot within the city to permit the obstruction of the public sidewalk.
   (C)   No person shall place or maintain or, having placed or maintained,
shall suffer to remain on any part of any public street, including the sidewalk
and the area between the lot line and the curb line, any alley, or city right-
of-way, any automobile, automobile chassis, or body, trailer, wagon, machinery,
stand, shed, or other obstructions without first having complied with §
113.10. This section shall not apply to properly licensed automotive vehicles
temporarily parked on public streets.
(Prior Code, § 130.51) (Ord. 464, passed 8-4-1964; Ord. 1764, passed 6-28-2004;
Ord. 2124, passed - -2023) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 133.03 ANIMALS; CRUELTY TO.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to torture or beat cruelly, starve, or
otherwise ill-treat any animal in his or her care or charge, whether belonging
to himself or herself or any other person.
(Prior Code, § 130.52) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 133.04 FENCES; BARBED WIRE; ELECTRIC.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, or cause to be erected, and
maintain any barbed wire or electric fence within the corporate limits, where
the fence abuts a public sidewalk, street, or alley.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Restrictions on barbed wire fences, see Neb. RS 39-307
§ 133.05 EXPECTORATING OR SPITTING; PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Spit or expectorate in any cellarway, window, door grating, or
entrance to any basement, excavation, or area in or under or leading from any
sidewalk space, or on the floor, wall, or stairway in any hall of any public
building in the city; or
      (2)   Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly spit or expectorate upon
any person within the city.
   (B)   Any violation of this ordinance is a Class I violation.
(Prior Code, § 130.54) (Ord. 1906, passed 1-11-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 133.06 NOISE; AMPLIFIED.
   It shall be unlawful to play, operate, or use any device known as a sound
truck, loud speaker, or sound amplifier, radio, or phonograph, with loud
speaker or sound amplifier or any instrument of any kind or character which
emits loud and raucous noises and is attached to and upon any vehicle unless
such person in charge of such vehicle shall have first applied to and received
permission from the Chief of Police to operate any such vehicle so equipped.
(Prior Code, § 130.55) Penalty, see §
10.99
WEAPONS OFFENSES
§ 133.20 FIREARMS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person shall fire or discharge any gun, pistol, fowling piece, or other
firearm within the corporate limits of the city, except that this section shall
not apply to an officer of the law in the discharge of his or her duties, to a
military rite for any branch of armed service, to a person having obtained
written permission from the Chief of Police, to a person utilizing a firing or
gunner range which has been established or approved by the City Council, to any
discharge on private or public property for self-defense or defense of others,
nor to officially sanctioned public celebrations if the persons so discharging
firearms have written permission from the Chief of Police or City
Administrator.
(Ord. 2027, passed 7- -2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.21 HUNTING ON CITY PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   No person shall hunt, take, trap, or otherwise harvest any animal, nor shall
any person discharge any firearm, discharge any dangerous missiles including
arrows, air guns, slingshot, or any other weapons upon lands owned or leased by
the city regardless of whether such lands are located within or without the
corporate limits of the city, except that this section shall not apply to an
officer of the law in the discharge of his or her duties, to a person having
obtained written permission from the chief of police, nor to any discharge on
private or public property for self-defense or defense of others.
(Ord. 2027, passed 7- -2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.22 AIR GUNS; TOY WEAPONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any toy pistol, toy
gun, air gun, bow and arrow, crossbow, slingshot loaded with rock or leaden or
other device capable of projecting a missile able to inflict harm to persons or
animals or to injure property, within the limits of the city, except under
special conditions approved by the City Council for practicing the use of any
such devices or giving exhibitions or holding competitions for their use,
except that this section shall not apply to an officer of the law in the
discharge of his or her duties, to a military rite for any branch of armed
service, to a person having obtained written permission from the Chief of
Police, to a person utilizing a firing or gunner range which has been
established or approved by the City Council, to any discharge on private or
public property for self-defense or defense of others, nor to officially
sanctioned public celebrations if the persons so discharging have written
permission from the Chief of Police or City Administrator.
   (B)   The City Council, may, through a special events permit, allow
organized activities listed herein within the city limits. In allowing a
special events permit, the City Council may consider, among other concerns,
insurance, and safety to the general public.
(Ord. 1468, passed 1-27-1992; Ord. 1705, passed 4-8-2002; Ord. 1711, passed 6-
10-2002; Ord. 2027, passed 7- -2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.23 SWITCHBLADE KNIVES; POSSESSION PROHIBITED; DEFINED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on or about his or her
person, or otherwise to have in his or her possession or control, any
switchblade knife. A SWITCHBLADE KNIFE shall mean and include any knife having
a spring or other device that will open the blade and lock it in an open
position.
   (B)   A violation of any provision of this section is a Class I violation.
(Prior Code, § 130.83) (Ord. 1911, passed 4-26-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS AND DECENCY
Section
   
134.01   Indecent exposure
   
134.02   Obscene conduct
   
134.03   Obscene literature; distribution of
   
134.04   Prostitution
   
134.05   Sexual predator residency restrictions
§ 134.01 INDECENT EXPOSURE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in a state of nudity or in any
indecent or lewd dress or condition in any public place or in any such place to
make any indecent exposure of his or her person or private parts thereof or the
private parts of another or to conduct himself or herself in a lewd or
lascivious manner.
(Prior Code, § 130.70) (Ord. 1854, passed 9-10-2007) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 134.02 OBSCENE CONDUCT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or stool in any place open to
the public view, or to be guilty of any lewd, lascivious, or obscene conduct or
to sing any lewd or obscene song, ballad, or other words in any public place or
any other place where other persons are present or indecently to exhibit any
animal.
(Prior Code, § 130.71) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 134.03 OBSCENE LITERATURE; DISTRIBUTION OF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit, pass, give, or deliver to
another any obscene, lewd, or indecent book, pamphlet, picture, card, print,
paper, writing, mold, case, or figure or to have same in his or her possession.
(Prior Code, § 130.72) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 134.04 PROSTITUTION.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (C) below, any person who performs,
offers, or agrees to perform any act of sexual contact or sexual penetration,
as those terms are defined in Neb. RS 28-318, with any person not his or her
spouse, in exchange for money or other thing of value, commits the offense of
prostitution.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that
such person was a trafficking victim as defined in Neb. RS 28-830.
   (C)   If the law enforcement officer determines, after a reasonable
detention for investigative purposes, that a person suspected of or charged
with a violation of division (A) above is:
      (1)   A person engaging in those acts as a direct result of being a
trafficking victim as defined in Neb. RS 28-830, such person shall be immune
from prosecution for a prostitution offense; or
      (2)   (a)   A person under 18 years of age, such person shall be immune
from prosecution for a prostitution offense under this section and shall be
subject to temporary custody under Neb. RS 43-248 and further disposition under
the State Juvenile Code, being Neb. RS 43-2,129 et seq.
         (b)   A law enforcement officer who takes a person under 18 years of
age into custody under this section shall immediately report an allegation of a
violation of Neb. RS 28-831 to the Department of Health and Human Services
which shall commence an investigation within 24 hours under the Child
Protection and Family Safety Act, being Neb. RS 28-710 et seq.
(Neb. RS 28-801) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 134.05 SEXUAL PREDATOR RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Findings and intent.
      (1)   The State Legislature has found that certain sex offenders present
a high risk to commit repeat offenses and has enabled municipalities to
restrict such person’s place of residency as provided in the Sexual Predator
Residency Restriction Act, being Neb. RS 29-4001 et seq.
      (2)   Sex offenders who prey on children and who are high risks to repeat
such acts present an extreme threat to public safety. The cost of sex offender
victimization to these children and to society at large, while incalculable, is
exorbitant.
      (3)   It is the intent of this section to serve the city’s compelling
interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the city by creating certain areas around locations where children
regularly congregate in concentrated numbers where certain sexual predators
cannot reside.
(Prior Code, § 130.75)
   (B)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
      CHILD CARE FACILITY. A facility licensed pursuant to the Child Care
Licensing Act, being Neb. RS 71-1908 et seq.
      RESIDE. To sleep, live, or dwell at a place, which may include more than
one location, and may be mobile or transitory.
      RESIDENCE. A place where an individual sleeps, lives, or dwells, which
may include more than one location, and may be mobile or transitory.
      SCHOOL. A public, private, denominational, or parochial school which
meets the requirements for state accreditation or approval.
      SEX OFFENDER. An individual who has been convicted of a crime listed in
Neb. RS 29-4003 and who is required to register as a sex offender pursuant to
the Sex Offender Registration Act, being Neb. RS 29-4001 et seq.
      SEXUAL PREDATOR. An individual who is required to register under the Sex
Offender Registration Act, who has been classified as Level 3 because of a high
risk of recidivism as determined by the State Patrol under Neb. RS 29-4013, and
who has victimized a person 18 years of age or younger.
(Prior Code, § 130.76)
   (C)   Violation; exception.
      (1)   Prohibited location of residence. It is unlawful for any sexual
predator to reside within 500 feet from a school or child care facility.
      (2)   Measure of distance. For purposes of determining the minimum
distance separation, the distance shall be measured by following a straight
line from the outer property line of the residence to the nearest outer
boundary line of the school or child care facility.
      (3)   Violation. A person who violates this section shall be punished as
provided generally in the code.
      (4)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to a sexual predator who:
         (a)   Resides within a prison or correctional or treatment facility
operated by the state or a political subdivision;
         (b)   Established a residence before July 1, 2006, and has not moved
from that residence; or
         (c)   Established a residence after July 1, 2006, and the school or
child care facility triggering the restriction was established after the
initial date of the sexual predator’s residence at that location.
(Prior Code, § 130.77)
(Ord. 1828, passed 7-10-2006) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   The Sexual Predator Residency Restriction Act, Neb. RS 29-4015 et seq.
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   MOBILE HOMES
      
152.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
153.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      
154.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
      
155.   ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Standard Codes Adopted
   
150.001   Standard codes; adopted; exceptions
   
150.002   Housing Code adopted by reference; amendments
   
150.003   Uniform Plumbing Code adopted by reference; amendments
   
150.004   Uniform Mechanical Code adopted by reference; amendments
   
150.005   National Fire Code adopted by reference; amendments
Permits
   
150.020   Permit required
   
150.021   Application for permit
   
150.022   Approval of plat and plans
   
150.023   Permit fees
   
150.024   Plumbing permit
   
150.025   Additional permits required
   
150.026   Electrical permit
   
150.027   Violation of building regulations
   
150.028   Revocation of permits
Inspections
   
150.040   Inspection required
   
150.041   Record card
   
150.042   Approvals required
   
150.043   Certificate of occupancy
   
150.044   Called inspections
   
150.045   Reinspection
   
150.046   Inspection of building operations
   
150.047   Plumbing inspections
   
150.048   Electrical inspections
General Specifications and Regulations
   
150.060   Finished grade
   
150.061   Water supply service line
   
150.062   Sanitary plumbing; vacating premises
   
150.063   Excavation; backfilling
   
150.064   Meter pits
   
150.065   Water meters
   
150.066   Sewer pipes
   
150.067   Vent pipes; soil stacks
   
150.068   Roof drains; sewer traps
   
150.069   Sewer connections
   
150.070   Gas lines
   
150.071   Lawn sprinkling systems
   
150.072   Electrical work
   
150.073   Wiring; enclosure material
Prebuilt Homes
   
150.085   Definition
   
150.086   Placement requirements
   
150.087   Inspection requirements
Wind Energy Conversion Systems
   
150.100   Definitions
   
150.101   Tower construction
   
150.102   Guy wires
   
150.103   Wind rotor
   
150.104   Electrical components
   
150.105   Noise
   
150.106   Electromagnetic interference
   
150.107   Aviation regulations apply
   
150.108   Building permit application; general requirements
   
150.109   Building permit application; electrical components
   
150.110   Warning sign; labeling
   
150.111   Power connection; notice
   
150.112   Liability insurance
   
150.113   Maintenance
Unsafe Buildings and Structures
   
150.125   Unsafe buildings prohibited; declared nuisance
   
150.126   Buildings and structures declared unsafe
   
150.127   Wind energy conversion systems included
   
150.128   Inspections
   
150.129   Determination; order
   
150.130   Order to repair or vacate
   
150.131   Emergency order
   
150.132   Notice; posting; affidavit
   
150.133   Compliance; hardship
   
150.134   Standards for repair, rehabilitation, vacation, demolition
   
150.135   Noncompliance with order; report to City Council
   
150.136   Building permits; stay
   
150.137   Violation; nuisance; hearing
   
150.138   Notice; form
   
150.139   Notice; service; posting
   
150.140   Time of notice
   
150.141   Notice; affidavit
   
150.142   Hearing; order; extension
   
150.143   Placarding structure
   
150.144   Use of unsafe structure prohibited
   
150.145   Demolition; removal of debris
   
150.146   Sale or disposition of debris
   
150.147   Repair or demolition; report; certificate
   
150.148   Expenses
   
150.149   Assessment
   
150.150   Emergency order; subsequent procedure
   
150.151   Deceased persons; notice
   
150.152   Rights, remedies; cumulative
   
150.153   Nonliability of city officers and employees
Abandoned and Foreclosed Properties
   
150.165   Purpose and intent
   
150.166   Definitions
   
150.167   Applicability
   
150.168   Registration of real property mortgagee holding mortgages in default
   
150.169   Maintenance requirements
   
150.170   Security requirements
   
150.171   Opposing, obstructing enforcement officer
   
150.172   Immunity of enforcement officer
   
150.173   Additional authority
   
150.174   Supplemental provisions
Administration and Enforcement
   
150.185   Variances
   
150.186   Building Inspector
   
150.187   Electrical Inspector
   
150.188   Entry; notices
   
150.189   Liability not assumed by city
 
   
150.999   Penalty
STANDARD CODES ADOPTED
§ 150.001 STANDARD CODES; ADOPTED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The following standard building codes are adopted for the purposes of
establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal,
demolition, equipment, use, occupancy, location, and maintenance of buildings
and structures, including permits and penalties.
      (1)   International Building Code.
         (a)   Adoption. The International Building Code, 2018 Edition,
including Appendix F, published by the International Code Council is hereby
adopted by reference. Reference to “International Building Code” throughout the
municipal code shall mean this code.
         (b)   International Building Code; portions excluded. IBC sections
101.4.1, 101.4.2, 101.4.3, 101.4.4, 101.4.5, 101.4.6, 101.4.7, 105.1.1,
105.1.2, 105.2. 107, 109, 110, 1112, 113, 115, 116, 3103, and Chapters 13, 27,
28, 29, and 30 of the International Building Code are excluded and not adopted
by this municipal code.
      (2)   International Residential Code.
         (a)   Adoption. The International Residential Code One- and Two-Family
Dwellings, 2018 Edition, published by the International Code Council is hereby
adopted by reference. Reference to the International Residential Code
throughout the municipal code shall mean this code.
         (b)   International Residential Code, portions excluded. IRC sections
105.2, 107, 112, 113, 309.5, 313, Chapter 2904 “Fire Sprinkler System,” and
Chapters 11 through 42, which are the energy, plumbing, mechanical, and
electrical sections of the 2018 International Residential Code are excluded
from the Building Code and are not considered as adopted by this municipal
code.
      (3)   The International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition, adopted
by the Nebraska legislature as the “Nebraska Energy Code.”
   (B)   The International Building Code, International Residential Code One-
and Two-Family Dwellings, and the International Energy Conservation Code, 2009
Edition, are described collectively as “the Building Code.” Except for those
portions specifically excluded or modified by this or other sections of the
municipal code, the Building Code is adopted in this section by reference and
shall be controlling with respect to the construction of all buildings and
structures within the corporate limits of the city and within the area with
respect to which the city has exercised its zoning jurisdiction under Chapter
150. One copy of each Code shall be on file in the City Clerk’s office.
(Prior Code, § 150.001) (Ord. 1432, passed 8-20-1990; Ord. 1750, passed 1-12-
2004; Ord. 1925, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. 2086, passed 2-10-2020)
§ 150.002 HOUSING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The following standard building codes are adopted for the purpose of
establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal,
demolition, equipment, use, occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings
and structures, including permits and penalties: IRC throughout the city code
shall mean this code.
   (B)   Except for those portions specifically excluded or modified by this or
other sections of the code, the IBC and IRC (referred to as “the Building
Code”) are adopted by reference and shall be controlling with respect to the
construction of all buildings and structures within the corporate limits of the
city and within the area with respect to which the city has exercised its
zoning jurisdiction. One copy of each code shall be on file in the City Clerk’s
office.
   (C)   Amendments to the Housing Code, as enacted by the City Council, are
hereby adopted by reference. Copies of amendments to the Housing Code shall be
on file in the City Clerk’s office.
(Prior Code, § 150.002) (Ord. 1432, passed 8-20-1990; Ord. 1750, passed 1-12-
2004)
§ 150.003 UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted, for the purpose of establishing rules and
regulations for the installation and repair of plumbing material and fixtures,
appliances, and apparatus, drainage or sewer disposal systems, water softeners,
dispensers and storage equipment and refrigerating equipment, hereafter
referred to as “plumbing”, that certain plumbing code known as the Uniform
Plumbing Code published and recommended by the International Association of
Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, being the most current edition thereof
(hereinafter usually referred to as the “Plumbing Code”). One copy of such code
is on file in the office of the City Clerk, and such code is hereby adopted and
incorporated in this section by reference as fully as if set out at length
herein (except such portions thereof as hereinafter are excluded, or are
adopted with modifications).
   (B)   Amendments to the Plumbing Code, as enacted by the City Council, are
hereby adopted by reference. Copies of amendments to the Plumbing Code shall be
on file in the City Clerk’s office.
(Prior Code, § 150.003) (Ord. 1554, passed 11-13-1995; Ord. 1750, passed 1-12-
2004)
§ 150.004 UNIFORM MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and
regulations for the complete installations, maintenance and repair of heating,
ventilating, cooling, and refrigeration systems herein referred to as
“mechanical plumbing;” that certain mechanical plumbing code known as the
Uniform Mechanical Code, published and recommended by the International
Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, being the most current
edition thereof (hereinafter referred to as the “Mechanical Code”). One copy of
such code is on file in the office of the City Clerk, and such code is hereby
adopted and incorporated in this section by reference as fully as if set out at
length herein (except such portions thereof as hereinafter are excluded, or are
adopted with modifications).
   (B)   Amendments to the Mechanical Code, as enacted by the City Council, are
hereby adopted by reference. Copies of amendments to the Mechanical Code shall
be on file in the City Clerk’s office.
(Prior Code, § 150.004) (Ord. 1554, passed 11-13-1995)
§ 150.005 NATIONAL FIRE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; AMENDMENTS.
   There are hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, the
International Fire Code (IFC), 2018 Edition. The Clerk shall forthwith purchase
for the city one copy of the code. The City Clerk shall keep the copy in his or
her office for such and examination by the public at all reasonable times. Such
use and examination of the same shall be made in his or her office.
(Prior Code, § 150.007) (Ord. 1379, passed 3-14-1988; Ord. 1750, passed 1-12-
2004; Ord. 2153, passed - -2025)
PERMITS
§ 150.020 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Any person desiring to commence or proceed to erect, construct, repair,
enlarge, demolish, or relocate any building or dwelling, or cause the same to
be done, shall file with the City Clerk an application for a building permit.
The application shall be in writing on a form to be furnished by the City Clerk
for that purpose. Every such application shall set forth the legal description
of the land upon which the construction or relocation is to take place, the
nature of the use or occupancy, the principal dimensions, the estimated cost,
the names of the owner, architect, and contractor, and such other information
as may be requested thereon. The application, plans, and specifications so
filed with the City Clerk shall be checked and examined by the City Council,
and if they are found to be in conformity with the requirements of this chapter
and all other ordinances applicable thereto, the City Council shall authorize
the City Clerk to issue the applicant a permit upon payment of a permit fee set
by the Council by resolution. Whenever there is a discrepancy between permit
application procedures contained herein and those contained in any building
code adopted by reference, the provisions contained herein shall govern.
Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.021 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Application for a building permit for building construction or alteration,
fence erection, sign erection, building demolition, and gas, electrical, and
plumbing installations or alterations shall be filed with the Building
Inspector, in writing, upon forms prepared by the city for that purpose. Each
application shall be accompanied by a plat in duplicate showing the actual
dimensions of the lot to build upon, the size, shape, and location of the
building to be erected, and such other information as may be necessary to
provide for the enforcement of this chapter, along with permit and inspection
fees as required by this chapter. In addition thereto, in those cases involving
institutional, multi-family, commercial, or industrial projects, such
application shall be accompanied by proof that the building plans have been
approved for compliance with the fire codes by the State Fire Marshall’s
office.
(Prior Code, § 150.031)
§ 150.022 APPROVAL OF PLAT AND PLANS.
   Such application, with the plat, plans and specifications attached, shall be
referred to the Building Inspector who shall examine the same to determine
whether the proposed construction or alteration will comply strictly with this
chapter and all other provisions of this code relative thereto. On approval,
one set of plans shall be returned to the City Clerk with written notification
that a permit has been granted and the other set of plans shall be retained by
the Building Inspector for use and inspection of building operations. No permit
shall be issued until after the approval of the plat, plans and specifications.
The building permit shall be on a form prescribed by the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 150.032)
§ 150.023 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Fees for building permits, plumbing permits, electrical permits, sewer
tap, building moving permits, building demolition permits, temporary
certificates of occupancy, and final certificates of occupancy and for
inspections shall be paid to the Building Inspector and remitted to the City
Clerk according to the schedule adopted by the City Council. The determination
of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this section shall be made
by the Building Inspector. Where work, for which a permit is required by this
code, is started or continued prior to obtaining such permit, the fees
specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such doubled fees shall not
relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this code and
the execution of the work or from any other penalties prescribed.
   (B)   In case of abandonment or discontinuance, the cost of work performed
under a permit may be estimated, an adjustment of the fee made and the portion
of the fee for uncompleted work returned to the permit holder; provided, no
refund of a prescribed minimum fee shall be made until all penalties incurred
or imposed by due authority have been collected. After such a refund has been
made, no work shall be resumed until a new application has been made and a new
permit has been issued.
(Prior Code, § 150.033) (Ord. 1379, passed 3-14-1988; Ord. 1555, passed 11-27-
1995; Ord. 1564, passed 4-8-1996)
§ 150.024 PLUMBING PERMIT.
   (A)   Required; application. Application for a permit to install, change, or
alter any plumbing, gas, steam fittings, oil fittings, and sheet metal for
heating appliances, or apparatus or sewage disposal systems shall be made in
writing upon forms furnished by the Building Inspector. The application shall
describe the location of the proposed work, with a drawing or diagram thereon
or attached thereto. The Building Inspector shall examine every such
application and plans, drawings, or diagrams for compliance with the provisions
of this section before issuance of a permit.
   (B)   Posting permit. The permit shall be posted by the person obtaining it
in a conspicuous place on the building or premises wherein the work is being
done until completion of the work.
(Prior Code, § 150.034)
§ 150.025 ADDITIONAL PERMITS REQUIRED.
   In addition to procuring a building permit, any person constructing,
reconstructing or altering any building or structure in the city or within the
zoning jurisdiction of the city, as determined by the official zoning map of
the city, shall obtain permits from the Building Inspector or from the
appropriate authorities of the city, for the construction, reconstruction or
alteration of all facilities that are a part of such building or structure for
utility services such as water service, electric service, plumbing and drainage
systems, and natural gas service; and the construction, reconstruction, or
alteration of such facilities for such utilities, shall be made in strict
compliance with all other provisions of this code pertaining thereto; and the
construction, reconstruction, or alteration of such facilities for utility
services shall be subject to all of the inspections provided in this code
pertaining thereto; and the person shall pay all permit and inspection fees
designated thereby and in the manner herein prescribed.
(Prior Code, § 150.035)
§ 150.026 ELECTRICAL PERMIT.
   (A)   Permit for wiring required. No alteration or change shall be made in
the wiring or appliances in any building, nor any wires or appliances be
installed in any building for use in connection with electric lights, motors,
or heating devices, without first securing from the Electrical Inspector a
permit therefor, nor shall any change be made in any wiring or appliances after
inspection without notifying the Electrical Inspector, and securing a permit
therefor, except minor repair work such as repairing flush and snap switches,
replacing fuses, changing lamp sockets and receptacles, taping bare joints, and
repairing drop cords. Applications for such permit, describing such work, shall
be made by the person installing the same, and the permit, when issued, shall
be to such applicant. This section shall not apply to maintenance and repairs
on the premises of a person regularly employing journeyman electricians for
that purpose. No deviation shall be made in the details for wiring or
appliances as shown by application without permission from the Electrical
Inspector in writing.
   (B)   Posting. The electrical construction permit shall be posted by the
person installing the work in a conspicuous place on the building or premises
where the work is being performed, and shall be maintained by such person in
such place until the work has been completed and final approval thereof by the
Electrical Inspector has been obtained.
   (C)   Expiration; renewal. A construction permit issued under provisions of
this section shall become null and void if the work is not commenced within six
months from the date of issuance of the permit or shall be abandoned for a
period of 120 days. Renewal of an expired permit for identical work shall be
obtained before work is recommenced, and the renewal fee therefor shall be the
minimum amount required for a new permit.
   (D)   Revocation. The Electrical Inspector may, in writing, revoke a permit
which has been issued under the provisions of this section whenever the permit
has been issued in reliance upon a misrepresentation of work proposed or
incorrect information supplied by the applicant, or in violation of the
provisions of this section.
   (E)   Work; conformance. All work done by the holder of such a permit shall
conform to the plans and specifications therefor which are included in the
approved application unless the Electrical Inspector shall in writing consent
to a deviation from such plans or specifications.
(Prior Code, § 150.036)
§ 150.027 VIOLATION OF BUILDING REGULATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any contractor or any other person engaged in the
actual work of constructing or altering a building or other structure within
the city or within the zoning jurisdiction, as determined by the official
zoning map of the city; to proceed with the work thereof until he or she knows
positively that the owner has obtained a building permit as herein before
provided. In the event that it is determined that work has started on any
construction or alteration of any building or other structure as covered by
this chapter, the Building Inspector shall immediately give notice to the owner
of the property directing them to cease and desist from any further work so
started, before issuance of the permit, until such a permit is obtained.
(Prior Code, § 150.037) Penalty, see §
150.999 
§ 150.028 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   A permit for the construction, reconstruction, or alteration of any building
or structure may be revoked by the Building Inspector at any time prior to the
completion of the building or structure for which the same was issued, when it
shall satisfactorily appear that in the construction work there is a departure
from the plans, specifications, or conditions as required under the terms of
the permit; that the permit was procured by false representations or was issued
by mistake; or that any provisions of this chapter, or any other provisions of
this code, are being violated. Notice of the revocation of the permit shall be
given to the person conducting such building operations, either by handing the
same to the person in charge of the operations or mailing it to the person by
United States mail at the address given in the application for the permit. Upon
the revocation of such permit, all building operations shall immediately cease
and shall not be renewed until the defects and departures from the plans and
specifications or conditions required under the terms of the permit, have been
corrected to the reasonable satisfaction of the Building Inspector. Upon the
failure, refusal, or neglect of any owner, his or her agent, contractor, or
duly authorized representative to correct such defects in construction, and
departures from the plans, specifications, and conditions under which the
permit was originally issued, or upon the failure, refusal, or neglect of such
persons to abide by the cease and desist order issued by the Building
Inspector, they shall be considered violators of the provisions of this chapter
and subject to the penalties provided for herein.
(Prior Code, § 150.038) Penalty, see §
150.999
INSPECTIONS
§ 150.040 INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   All construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to
inspection by the Building Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 150.060)
§ 150.041 RECORD CARD.
   Work requiring a building permit shall not be commenced until the permit
holder or his or her agent shall have posted an inspection record card in a
conspicuous place on the front of premises and in such position as to allow the
Building Inspector conveniently to make the required entries thereon, regarding
inspection of the work. This card shall be maintained in such position by the
permit holder until the completion of the job.
(Prior Code, § 150.061)
§ 150.042 APPROVALS REQUIRED.
   No work shall be done on the building or structure beyond the point
indicated on each successive inspection without obtaining the written approval
of the Building Inspector. Such written approval shall be given only after an
inspection shall have been made of each successive step in the construction, as
indicated by each of the inspections required in §
150.044. A survey of the lot may be required by the Building Inspector to
verify compliance of the structure with approved plans, which survey shall
include the staking of all property corners by the surveyor.
(Prior Code, § 150.062) Penalty, see §
150.999 
§ 150.043 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   In any situation in which a determination shall be required as to whether
construction or alteration of a building or structure will comply, or has
complied with the Zoning Ordinances, the application for a temporary or final
certificate of occupancy shall be filed with the Building inspector, supporting
data as provided him or her, and the application and such data reviewed,
certificate and inspection fees determined and paid, and the application
approved and the certificate signed or, as the case may be, the application be
denied, by the Building Inspector, all in accordance with applicable ordinances
of the city.
(Prior Code, § 150.063)
§ 150.044 CALLED INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   No reinforcing steel or structural framework of any part of any
building or structure shall be covered or concealed in any manner whatsoever
without the approval of the Building Inspector first being obtained.
   (B)   The Building Inspector, upon notification of the permit holder or his
or her agent, shall make the following inspections and shall either approve
that portion of the construction as completed or shall notify the permit holder
or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with the law:
      (1)   Footing inspection. To be made after trenches excavated and forms
erected and when all materials for the foundation are delivered on the job;
      (2)   Foundation inspection. After sill plates are set and waterproofing
is applied; before backfilling or setting floor joists;
      (3)   Frame inspection. To be made after the roof, all framing, fire
blocking, and bracing are in place and all pipes, electrical rough-in, chimneys
and vents are complete;
      (4)   Final inspection and any final inspection required by the State
Fire Marshal on institutional, multi-family, commercial and industrial projects
for compliance with national fire codes. To be made after building is completed
and ready for occupancy; and
      (5)   Other inspections. In addition to the called inspections specified
above, the Building Inspector may make or require any other inspections of any
construction work to ascertain compliance with provisions of this code and
other laws which are enforced by the Building Inspector, including but not
limited to, temporary power pole, meter loop, electrical rough-in, sewer tap
(outside sewer), water tap (outside water), sewer under floor (inside), rough-
in plumbing, inside and outside gas installations and connections, fences,
signs, and temporary and final certificates of occupancy.
(Prior Code, § 150.064)
§ 150.045 REINSPECTION.
   For purposes of determining compliance with this chapter, the Building
Inspector may cause any structure to be reinspected at any time, and in such
event, the Building Inspector may collect a fee for the particular reinspection
required, based upon the original permit fees provided for in §
150.023.
(Prior Code, § 150.065)
§ 150.046 INSPECTION OF BUILDING OPERATIONS.
   The Building Inspector shall inspect, from time to time, any building for
which such building permit was issued as the building or reconstruction
operations progress, to determine if the same are being carried on in
accordance with the plat, plans and specifications submitted at the time of the
application for such building permit.
(Prior Code, § 150.066)
§ 150.047 PLUMBING INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Notice to Building Inspector. When work is ready for inspection, the
Building Inspector shall be notified in writing or by phone and it shall be the
duty of any plumbing contractor, limited contractor, or person in charge to see
that all plumbing work is left open until inspected and approved. The Building
Inspector shall complete inspection of work by the close of the working day of
the Department following the day in which the Department has been notified that
such work is ready for inspection.
   (B)   Tests required. It shall be the duty of the plumbing contractor,
limited contractor, or person in charge to test, in the manner hereinafter
provided and in the presence of the Building Inspector, all soil, waste, vent,
water, stream, gas and oil pipes, all sheet metal work for heating, and the
fittings and connections therewith.
   (C)   Tests; specifications. All plumbing, gas fittings, stream fittings,
oil fittings, sheet metal work for heating and house drainage work shall be
tested and meet a test as follows:
      (1)   For water system, shall hold city water pressure for a period of 20
minutes without leaking;
      (2)   For house drainage systems within and under all buildings or
structures, shall hold a cold water pressure of not less than four pounds per
square inch for a period of 20 minutes without leaking, or an air pressure of
ten pounds on an approved type gauge for 20 minutes;
      (3)   For natural gas fitting, the system shall hold an air pressure of
20 pounds on an approved type gauge for a period of 20 minutes;
      (4)   For liquefied petroleum (LP) gas fittings and all other
manufactured gases for domestic and commercial uses, in strict accordance with
the applicable manual for approved installation;
      (5)   For steam fittings, the system shall hold cold water under city
water main pressure without leaking for a period of 20 minutes;
      (6)   For oil fittings for liquid petroleum products, the system shall
hold an air pressure of 20 pounds on an approved type gauge for a period of 20
minutes;
      (7)   For gas piping and venting, the system shall comply with the
standards of installation;
      (8)   For heating, ventilating, and cooling installations, the system
shall comply with the standards of installation; and
      (9)   Water for conducting tests will be “jumped” at the meter loop by a
suitable hose connection or union coupled connection from the house service
line to the house distribution system. After tests have been completed, the
plumbing contractor, limited contractor or his or her worker in charge shall
turn the water off at the curb box and disconnect the “jumper” connection in
the presence of the Building Inspector. An approved type air gauge shall not
exceed 50 pounds capacity and shall be graduated in not to exceed two pound
increments. All gauges may be subjected to inspection and tests by the Building
Inspector where there is any doubt as to the accuracy of such gauge. A fire
test of gas fittings is prohibited under any circumstances.
   (D)   Final inspection. When work is completed and all fixtures set, the
Building Inspector must be notified that the plumbing work is ready for final
inspection.
(Prior Code, § 150.067)
§ 150.048 ELECTRICAL INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Required. The Electrical Inspector shall make the following
inspections of electrical equipment installations:
      (1)   An “electrical rough-in” inspection when all conduit, boxes, wires
troughs, raceways, cabinets, and panel boards to be installed are in place,
before the view thereof has been obscured and before installing fixtures or
devices;
      (2)   A “meter loop” inspection when all conduit, service entrance
equipment, meter sockets, main service disconnects, and distribution panels are
in place and all wiring from the point of service attachment to the point of
distribution is in place, before current is permanently connected or restored;
      (3)   A “final electrical” inspection when all electrical equipment to be
installed, including all outlets, receptacles, lights, switches, fixtures,
appliances, motors, controls, devices, and apparatus are in place, completed,
and operating; and
      (4)   Such other inspections or tests of apparatus as the Electrical
Inspector shall deem necessary to determine compliance with provisions of this
section.
   (B)   Notice; leaving work open. During and upon completion of the
installation of electrical equipment, it shall be the duty of the contractor,
electrician or installer to notify the Electrical Inspector when the work is
ready for inspection. It shall be the responsibility of the contractor or
person in charge of electrical installation to see that no work is obscured
from view and is left open until inspected and approved.
   (C)   Time; notice to applicant. The Electrical Inspector shall complete
inspection of work by the close of the working day of the Department following
the day on which the Department has been notified that the work is ready for
inspection. When, upon inspection of the work, the Electrical Inspector finds
the electrical installation to be fully in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter, and not to constitute a hazard to life and property, he or she
shall attach to the installation a tag approving the installation, and shall
authorize connection of the installation to the electrical service and turning
on of the power. If the Electrical Inspector finds the electrical installation
not to be fully in compliance with provisions of this chapter, or that it
constitutes a hazard to life or property, he or she shall so notify the person
who made the installation and, if such person shall so request, shall furnish
to such person a statement in writing of the reasons for such finding. No power
shall be turned on until an approval tag has been attached and authorization
for a connection has been given by the Electrical Inspector; provided, if the
Electrical Inspector shall fail to complete an inspection within the time
herein limited, work may proceed or, as the case may be, a connection may be
made or power may be turned on at the risk of the person doing the work and his
or her employer, if any.
   (D)   Inspection fees. The per outlet or unit price fees for electrical
inspections will be set annually by the Building Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 150.068) (Ord. 1564, passed 4-8-1996; Ord. 1819, passed 1-23-
2006)
GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS AND REGULATIONS
§ 150.060 FINISHED GRADE.
   The finished grade from the curb line to any wall facing the street shall be
not less than one-quarter inch.
(Prior Code, § 150.080)
§ 150.061 WATER SUPPLY SERVICE LINE.
   (A)   Depth; protection from freezing. All surface pipe from the curb box to
the building shall be laid not less than four and one-half feet below the
surface of the ground. In all cases, service lines must be so protected as to
prevent rupture from freezing.
   (B)   Distance from sewer. All water service lines shall be installed so as
to be at least five feet away from sewer lines unless this distance is
impractical, in which case the plumber shall obtain from the Plumbing
Inspector, a written waiver of the requirement.
   (C)   Material; within building. Service pipes shall consist of the
following:
      (1)   From the meter or valve within the building to the curb stop shall
not be less than three-quarter inch outside diameter copper-type K pipe, cast
iron pipe, 150 psi DR18 C-900 polyvinyl chloride pipe or not less than one-inch
outside diameter 200 psi SDR9 polyethylene pipe; and
      (2)   From the meter or valve within the building shall be brass pipe,
copper pipe, galvanized iron pipe, galvanized steel pipe, or PEX polyethylene
pipe, which must meet ASTM Standard F876/877.
(Prior Code, § 150.081) (Ord. 1678, passed 12-11-2000)
§ 150.062 SANITARY PLUMBING; VACATING PREMISES.
   Whenever, upon inspection, any building or premises, or part thereof, is
found unfit for human habitation by reason of defective plumbing, water piping,
gas fittings, or drainage system, the Building Inspector may order the vacation
of such building, premises, or part thereof, and a written or printed order
shall be conspicuously posted on the building or premises, and where
practicable, a copy shall be served on the owner, agent or occupant of such
premises, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect, or refuse
to vacate such premises when so ordered.
(Prior Code, § 150.082) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.063 EXCAVATION; BACKFILLING.
   No concrete, rubble, building material waste, garbage, or trash shall be
used for backfilling of excavations for water, sewer, or gas lines. The
material used shall be thoroughly tamped and packed into place so that no
settling will take place. The holder of the building permit and the holder of
the excavation permit, if an excavation permit is required, shall maintain the
surface over the refilled excavation in a smooth condition for a period of six
months from the completion of backfilling. No water, sewer, or gas lines shall
cross another such line unless the trench for the lower line has been
excavated, backfilled, and tamped back to the satisfaction of the Building
Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 150.083) Penalty, see §
150.999 
§ 150.064 METER PITS.
   All meter pits shall be constructed at a point near the property line and
shall be of the design approved by the Building Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 150.084)
§ 150.065 WATER METERS.
   Water meters shall be installed in a basement, utility room, or meter pit.
All water meters shall be installed in a horizontal position not less than nine
inches above the floor, and in a location that is, and will remain, easily
accessible to the water meter reader and for meter repair.
(Prior Code, § 150.085)
§ 150.066 SEWER PIPES.
   (A)   Materials. All sewer pipes under a building shall be cast iron,
Schedule 40, Type I polyvinyl chloride meeting standard specification ASTM D-
2665. Polyvinyl chloride sewer pipe may also be used in the right of way of any
public or private street, alley or way meeting specification ASTM D-2665.
   (B)   Diameter. All sewer pipe, except common laterals and branch sewer
pipe, from the sewer main to the stub from the building shall be at least four
inches in diameter. Common laterals shall be not less than six inches in
diameter and branch sewer pipe shall be not less than three inches in diameter.
   (C)   Location; grade. Sewer pipes shall be run as directly as possible and
shall have a fall of at least one-eighth inch to the foot. Where sewer pipe
runs under a sidewalk, it shall be at least two feet below the sidewalk. Sewer
and drains of greater depth than ten feet may run up to the grade within three
feet of the property line, and, where the property line is some distance above
the grade of the street, one-eighth bends may be used. It shall not be
necessary to lay sewer pipes deeper than two feet from the surface; provided,
that a fall of one-eighth inch to the foot can be obtained.
(Prior Code, § 150.086)
§ 150.067 VENT PIPES; SOIL STACKS.
   All waste pipes, soil stacks, and vent pipes shall be soil stacks and vent
pipes shall be Schedule 40, Type I polyvinyl chloride meeting ASTM D-2665.
(Prior Code, § 150.087)
§ 150.068 ROOF DRAINS; SEWER TRAPS.
   (A)   No rain water leaders, roof drains, or mud interceptor (traps) shall
be connected to a sanitary sewer; provided, if a storm sewer is not available
to which a satisfactory connection of a mud interceptor (trap) could be made, a
special permit to connect a mud interceptor (trap) to a sanitary sewer may be
issued by the Building Inspector if he or she finds that the waste to be
drained through the mud interceptor (trap) will not interfere with, or cause
problems with, the operation of the city sewer system. A permit to connect a
mud interceptor (trap) to a sanitary sewer, if issued, may contain reasonable
restrictions concerning use of the mud interceptor (trap).
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place in any mud interceptor
(trap) connected to a sanitary sewer of the city, and material other than mud
and water resulting from the washing of vehicles.
   (C)   The sewer main shall not be trapped except upon written permission of
the Building Inspector. Such permission may be granted in the event a proper
junction wye (Y) on the sewer main is not available. If the sewer main contains
the proper junction wye (Y), the private sewer line shall be connected to such
wye (Y).
(Prior Code, § 150.088) Penalty, see §
150.999 
§ 150.069 SEWER CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Required. The plumbing and drainage system of each new building and of
new work installed in an existing building or premises, shall except as
hereinafter provided, have an independent connection with a public sewer if
such a sewer exists in the street or alley upon which the property abuts.
   (B)   Common lateral. When approved by the Building Inspector, more than one
house or building situated on the same premises may be connected to the same
lateral, providing each connection is to a wye (Y). In the event of a
subsequent subdivision of the premises into two or more tracts, whether by
recorded plat, a deed, or a contract to sell, the permit shall expire on the
date of such plat, deed, or contract and the permit shall so state, and all
connections in excess of one to the lateral shall be removed and connections of
the houses or other buildings to separate laterals shall be installed by the
owners upon receiving a permit therefor from the Building Inspector, within 30
days after the date of plat, deed, or contract.
   (C)   Permit. The application for a permit to connect more than one house or
other building situated on the same premises to the same lateral shall be in
writing and shall include the drawing of the connections existing and proposed
and such other information as the Building Inspector shall require. The
application shall be accompanied by a written agreement with the city and
recordable and otherwise in such form as the Building Inspector shall prescribe
and signed and acknowledged by the owners of record and contract purchases, if
any, of the premises on which the connections are to be made, wherein such
owners covenant on behalf also, of all successors in interest to the premises
or any part thereof, that upon a subdivision of the property, all connections
will be removed and reconnected as provided in division (B) above and the
amount of the fee chargeable by the Register of Deeds for recording such
agreement shall accompany the application and the Building Inspector shall
cause such agreement to be recorded with the Register of Deeds forthwith after
issuance of the permit.
(Prior Code, § 150.089)
§ 150.070 GAS LINES.
   (A)   Main to curb; installation. All main to curb lines shall be installed
by the gas company.
   (B)   Service lines. Gas service lines shall be installed by a licensed
plumber or gas fitter. They shall be tested and inspected by the Building
Inspector.
      (1)   Location. Service lines leading from the property line to the meter
location shall be buried to a depth of not less than 24 inches and at a
distance of at least 36 inches from any existing ditch or ditches. The point at
which a service line enters a building must be above the finished grade.
Service lines shall be installed in a location permitting proper location of
the gas meter. The location of service lines and meters shall be selected by
the gas company.
      (2)   Pipes. Service line pipes shall be black malleable iron pipe not
less than one and one-fourth inch in diameter and wrapped with wrapping that,
as determined by the Building Inspector, will afford proper protection. Where
laid on the surface of the ground, or beneath the surface of the ground over
which is to be poured concrete or similar material, the surface line pipe shall
be enclosed in tile or steel pipe ducts.
      (3)   Exposed lines. Gas lines installed above ground outside a building,
or that are exposed to unusually damp conditions shall be coated or wrapped
with a protective coating approved by the Building Inspector.
      (4)   House piping; material. All house gas piping shall be black
malleable iron, except that nonferrous metal pipe may be used to connect a
built-in appliance with a stopcock on the service line if authorized in writing
by the Building Inspector and A.G.A. rated and approved pipe may be used to
connect a gas appliance. Stainless steel flexible gas piping known as “tyte-
flex” may be used for inside installations only. Rubber hose connections shall
not be used except for intermittently used appliances such as bunsen-type
laboratory burners.
      (5)   Fittings; stopcocks. No bushings or cast iron fittings, except cast
iron body stopcocks may be used. No cement of any kind shall be used to repair
faulty fittings. Provisions shall not be made for rubber hose connections,
except for intermittently used appliances such as bunsen-type laboratory
burners. Unions shall not be used in any lines, except to connect appliances,
for which purpose the union shall be placed between the valve above the floor
and the appliance. Right and left couplings shall be used in connecting lines.
All gas appliance shall have a stopcock on the connection one inch above the
floor and not more than five feet from the appliance. Pipe joint cement may be
used on male threads only.
      (6)   Concealed; inside flues prohibited. No gas pipes shall be concealed
or shall run up or through any flue.
      (7)   Turning on and off. Gas service shall not be turned on or off at
the meter except by an employee of the gas company.
(Prior Code, § 150.090) (Ord. 1477, passed 7-13-1992) Penalty, see §
150.999 
§ 150.071 LAWN SPRINKLING SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Permit required. Any person who shall construct or install any lawn
sprinkling system which is to be connected to the city potable water system
shall first obtain a permit for such connection at city hall for all such
installations that are to be served or supplied from the public potable water
system of the city. This requirement is applicable whether or not the location
of the connection is within or without the city limits, the only determinative
factor being whether or not a connection is to be made to the public potable
water system of the city.
   (B)   Connection. The connection of the city potable water supply system
with the lawn sprinkler system shall be in accordance with the requirements of
the Uniform Plumbing Code and any applicable state statutes or other ordinances
from the supply site up to the point of the pressure vacuum breaker. The water
supply site of the installation shall have an approved type pressure vacuum
breaker installed at the proper location of such system. Installation of the
system by an owner or occupant of the premises involved shall not relieve such
person from compliance with this section.
   (C)   Permit Fees.
      (1)   The permit fee required by this section shall be $15 for each
connection, payable at the time the permit is obtained. Any person who shall
construct or install such lawn sprinkler system without first obtaining a
permit shall pay a permit fee which is three times the amount of the fee stated
above to compensate the city for its additional costs in detecting and
remedying such connection made without a permit. Payment of a fee, either
before or after connection, shall not relieve the subject premises from
complying with all of the provisions of the law applicable to the construction,
installation, and connection of any lawn sprinkling system connected to the
potable water supply system of the city.
      (2)   The fee required by this section shall apply on a per permit per
system and shall be paid to the City Clerk on an application for permit form
provided by the city.
   (D)   Exemptions. Any lawn sprinkling system which is not connected or to be
connected to the city public potable water supply system is exempt from the
requirements of this section.
(Prior Code, § 150.091)
§ 150.072 ELECTRICAL WORK.
   (A)   License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the
installation, repair, or alteration of electrical equipment within the area of
the city zoning jurisdiction without having secured from the State Board of
Electrical Examiners a license of the class or type which by the laws of the
state is required to be held by the person engaged in such work. A true copy of
the license shall be filed in the office of the Electrical Inspector before any
work for which the license is required shall commence; provided, a license
issued in respect of a calendar year will meet the requirements of this section
until the next following January 31. This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   An apprentice electrician working under the direct supervision of a
licensed master electrician or licensed journeyman electrician;
      (2)   Employees of public power districts, public power and irrigation
districts, electric membership or cooperative associations, public utility
corporations, railroads, petroleum companies, petrochemical companies, pipeline
companies, telephone or telegraph systems, or employees of affiliated companies
performing manufacturing installation, and repair work for such employer, while
acting within the scope of their employment;
      (3)   The installation, maintenance, repair, or alteration of vertical
transportation or passenger conveyors, elevators, or appurtenances thereto;
      (4)   The engaging of any electrical appliance where approved electrical
outlets are already installed;
      (5)   An employee, working for a single employer as part of such
employer’s full-time staff and not holding himself or herself out to the public
for hire, while acting within the scope of his or her employment; or
      (6)   An owner of property performing work on such property or farm
property which he or she owns, excluding commercial, industrial, or public use
buildings.
   (B)   Supervision. If an electrical contractor employs men or women to make
an electrical installation, all work shall be done under the direct supervision
of a licensed master electrician or a licensed journeyman electrician.
   (C)   Contractor; bond. No parson shall engage in the business of
installation, repair, or alteration of electrical equipment for which a
construction permit is required in this chapter until such person shall have
filed with the City Clerk a bond with two or more sureties, or a bond of surety
company to be approved by the City Clerk, the penal sum of $2,000 conditioned
that the principal will indemnify and keep harmless the city in case of
accident or damage arising from the negligence of unskillfulness in doing or
protecting such work, or from an unfinished or inadequate work, that the
principal will restore the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, and pavements
over all work done, and fill all excavations made by the principal so as to
leave all streets, sidewalks, and pavements in as good condition as when the
work began, and will maintain the same to the satisfaction of the City Engineer
for a period of six months thereafter, and that he or she will pay all fines
that may be imposed upon him or her for the violation of any rules or
regulations adopted by the Council or the Electrical Inspector and in force
during his or her license. The obligee of the bond shall be the city and action
may be maintained thereon by any injured by the breach of any of these
conditions.
(Prior Code, § 150.092) Penalty, see §
150.999 
§ 150.073 WIRING; ENCLOSURE MATERIAL.
   All electrical wiring installed in buildings constructed for use or used, in
whole or in part, as non-residential buildings or in buildings and structures
within or constructed within the fire zone area of the city, shall be enclosed
in rigid conduit, metal tubing, mold, flexible conduit, A/C cable, M/C cable
and non-metallic flexible conduit. Armored cable (BX) shall not be used in new
or remodeling installations.
(Prior Code, § 150.093) (Ord. 1795, passed 4-25-2005)
PREBUILT HOMES
§ 150.085 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PREBUILT HOME. A single family residence constructed on a site other than
the location where it is to be permanently placed and which is designed for
transportation to the location of its permanent placement by wheels and which
is designed to have a running gear and hitches or tongues removed upon
placement in its permanent position. A PREBUILT HOME, as distinguished from a
mobile home, is designed for all running gear and hitches used in
transportation to be removed without any structural alterations; is built with
two by four studs and is so designed that once it is placed upon a permanent
foundation, it is not readily movable.
(Prior Code, § 150.110)
§ 150.086 PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   For any or all of the purposes designated in Neb. RS 19-901, the City
Council may divide the city into districts of such number, shape, and area as
may be deemed best suited to carry out the purposes of Neb. RS 19-901 to 19-914
and may regulate and restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, or use of buildings, structures, or land within the
districts. All such regulations shall be uniform for each class or kind of
buildings throughout each district, but the regulations applicable to one
district may differ from those applicable to other districts. If a regulation
affects the Niobrara scenic river corridor as defined in Neb. RS 72-2006 and is
not incorporated within the boundaries of the city, the Niobrara Council shall
act on the regulation as provided in Neb. RS 72-2010.
   (B)   (1)   The City Council shall not adopt or enforce any zoning ordinance
or regulation which prohibits the use of land for a proposed residential
structure for the sole reason that the proposed structure is a manufactured
home if such manufactured home bears an appropriate seal which indicates that
it was constructed in accordance with the standards of the Uniform Standard
Code for Manufactured Homes and Recreational Vehicles, being Neb. RS 71-
4604.01; the State Uniform Standards for Modular Housing Units Act, being Neb.
RS 71-1555 et seq.; or the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development. The City Council may require that a manufactured home be located
and installed according to the same standards for foundation system, permanent
utility connections, setback, and minimum square footage which would apply to a
site-built, single-family dwelling on the same lot. The City Council may also
require that manufactured homes meet the following standards:
         (a)   The home shall have no less than 900 square feet of floor area;
         (b)   The home shall have no less than an 18-foot exterior width;
         (c)   The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of two
and one-half inches for each 12 inches of horizontal run;
         (d)   The exterior material shall be of a color, material, and scale
comparable with those existing in residential site-built, single-family
construction;
         (e)   The home shall have a nonreflective roof material which is or
simulates asphalt or wood shingles, tile, or rock; and
         (f)   The home shall have wheels, axles, transporting lights, and
removable towing apparatus removed.
      (2)   The City Council may not require additional standards unless such
standards are uniformly applied to all single-family dwellings in the zoning
district.
      (3)    Nothing in this section shall be deemed to supersede any valid
restrictive covenants of record.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, manufactured home shall mean a factory-
built structure which is to be used as a place for human habitation, which is
not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it
to be moved other than to a permanent site, which does not have permanently
attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles, and which bears a label
certifying that it was built in compliance with National Manufactured Home
Construction and Safety Standards, 24 C.F.R. §§ 3280 et seq., promulgated by
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, or a modular
housing unit as defined in Neb. RS 71-1557 bearing a seal in accordance with
the State Uniform Standards for Modular Housing Units Act, being Neb. RS 71-
1555 et seq.
   (D)   Subdivision regulations and building, plumbing, electrical, housing,
fire, or health codes or similar regulations and the adoption thereof shall not
be subject to Neb. RS 19-901 to 19-915.
(Prior Code, § 150.111)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Neb. RS 19-902
§ 150.087 INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   It is intended by this section to waive building, plumbing, and electrical
inspection requirements insofar as the prebuilt home has the pertinent building
construction, electrical, or plumbing installed and enclosed in such a manner
that, to require an inspection thereof would necessitate damaging the rebuilt
home in order to view the object of an inspection. It is not the intent of this
section to waive any building, electrical, or plumbing inspection which can be
performed without damaging any part of the prebuilt home to perform the
inspection, or which could have been performed had construction at the location
of the permanent situs of the prebuilt home not proceeded past the point where
such an inspection could have been performed without damaging the prebuilt home
had an inspection been called for at an appropriate time.
(Prior Code, § 150.112)
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS
§ 150.100 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OVERSPEED CONTROL. A mechanism used to limit the speed of blade rotation to
one that is below the design limits of the WECS.
   SURVIVAL WIND SPEED. The maximum wind speed a WECS in automatic unattended
operation (whether or not producing power) can sustain without damage to
structural components or loss of ability to function normally.
   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS). A machine that converts kinetic energy
in wind into a different, usable form of energy, including a machine commonly
known as a wind turbine or windmill. Unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise, the term refers to all components of such a system, including, but
not limited to, the tower and transmission equipment. For convenience, the term
usually is abbreviated “WECS.”
   WIND ROTOR. The blades, and the hub to which they are attached, which are
used to capture wind for purposes of energy conversion. A WIND ROTOR is mounted
upon a pole or tower for use.
(Prior Code, § 150.130) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.101 TOWER CONSTRUCTION.
   Tower construction shall comply with all provisions of the Building Code
currently in effect in the city. The tower shall have either a tower-climbing
apparatus commencing not lower than 12 feet above the ground, or a locked
anticlimb device installed on the tower, or shall be completely enclosed by a
locked, protective fence not less than six feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 150.131) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.102 GUY WIRES.
   Anchor points of guy wires for the tower shall be located upon the lot or
tract of land on which the tower is situated. Such wires shall not be located
across any aboveground electrical transmission or distribution lines, and shall
not extend into any required front or side yard building setback areas. The
point of ground attachment for guy wires shall be completely enclosed by a
continuous fence six feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 150.132) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.103 WIND ROTOR.
   Each WECS shall be equipped with both manual and automatic controls which
will limit the rotational speed of the blade to a speed that is lower than the
design limits of the wind rotor.
(Prior Code, § 150.133) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.104 ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS.
   All electrical components of a WECS shall comply with the requirements of
the Electrical Code currently in effect in the city.
(Prior Code, § 150.134) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.105 NOISE.
   The noise generated by a WECS shall not exceed 65 decibels on the DBA scale,
as measured outdoors at any property line of the lot or tract of land on which
the WECS is located, or 45 decibels as measured inside any residential
structure located on or adjacent to such lot or tract of land.
(Prior Code, § 150.135) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.106 ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCE.
   A WECS shall be filtered and/or shielded so as to prevent the emission of
radio-frequency energy which would cause harmful interference with radio and/or
television broadcasting or reception. A WECS shall not be installed in any
location along the major axis of an existing microwave communications link such
that the operation of the WECS may produce a harmful level of electromagnetic
interference. If the Building Inspector shall determine that a WECS is causing
harmful interference, the operator shall immediately cease operation of the
system, and shall not resume operation until the harmful interference has been
removed, as determined by the Building Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 150.136) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.107 AVIATION REGULATIONS APPLY.
   No WECS shall be erected, maintained, or operated in violation of any
regulation of the Federal Aviation Administration.
(Prior Code, § 150.137) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.108 BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATION; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   An application for a building permit for a WECS shall:
   (A)   Be accompanied by a plot plan drawn in sufficient scale and detail to
clearly show:
      (1)   The property lines and physical dimensions of the lot or tract of
land on which the WECS will be located, and the location and dimensions of all
abutting streets and alleys;
      (2)   The location and total height of the WECS;
      (3)   The location of the aboveground utility lines on the lot or tract
of land and, whether or not on the lot or tract of land, within a radius equal
to one and one half times the total height of the WECS; and
      (4)   The location and size (including height) of buildings, structures
and trees, except electrical transmission and distribution lines, antennas,
slender or open lattice towers, and open fences.
   (B)   Be accompanied by standard drawings of the structural components of
the WECS, including the tower support structures, base, and footings: such
drawings and any necessary calculations shall be certified in writing by a
licensed professional engineer licensed to practice in the state, and shall
include a certification that the system, including any structural components or
installation details which vary from the standard design or specifications,
complies with the requirements, including the windload requirements, of the
Building Code currently in effect in the city;
   (C)   Cite specific wind-speed data, including monthly mean wind speeds for
a period of no less than six months;
   (D)   For the area in which is situated the lot or tract of land, including
WECS design data, including manufacture’s specification and installation and
operation instructions;
   (E)   Be accompanied by a statement by a professional engineer certifying
that the rotor and overspeed controls have been designed and fabricated for the
proposed use in accordance with good engineering practices, and the structural
compatibility of available towers with available rotors; and
   (F)   Be accompanied by documentation by the WECS manufacturer that the WECS
model has operated safely in atmospheric conditions for a period of not less
than three months and has provided energy equivalent to not less than 25% of
its predicted annual energy output under a 12 mph annual wind regime.
(Prior Code, § 150.138) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.109 BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATION; ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS.
   (A)   The drawing of the electrical components which accompanies the
application shall be a line drawing in sufficient detail to enable the Building
Inspector to determine that the manner of installation will comply with the
requirements of the National Electrical Code currently in effect in the city
and there shall be attached to the drawing a statement of an electrician
licensed under the laws of the state that the electrical system complies with
such Electrical Code, and conforms to good. electrical practices.
   (B)   If electrical components proposed to be installed vary from the
standard design or specifications, the application shall be accompanied, also,
by a certificate of a licensed professional engineer that the modified design
or specifications comply with such Electrical Code and conform to good
electrical engineering practices.
(Prior Code, § 150.139) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.110 WARNING SIGN; LABELING.
   (A)   Not less than one sign warning of electrical shock or high voltage
shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous location at the base of the
tower.
   (B)   The following information shall also be posted on a label or labels
affixed to the generator or alternator of the WECS:
      (1)   The maximum power output of the system and the wind speed at which
it is achieved;
      (2)   Nominal voltage(s) and maximum current; and
      (3)   The manufacturer’s name and address, and the serial number and
model number.
   (C)   All of the foregoing information, together with a statement of the
maximum survival wind speed and of emergency and normal shutdown procedures,
shall also be proved on a label or labels posted and easily read at ground
level or located at the WECS control panel.
(Prior Code, § 150.140) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.111 POWER CONNECTION; NOTICE.
   The person to whom a building permit for a WECS is granted shall, before
connecting the WECS to the grid of a power line of the city or a public power
district, notify the district in writing of its intention so to do.
(Prior Code, § 150.141) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.112 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The owner of the lot or tract of land or, if the WECS is to be erected,
maintained, or operated by some other person, such other person shall maintain
liability insurance covering loss or damage to persons and property by the WECS
in a minimum amount of $200,000, and shall maintain on file in the office of
the City Clerk a certificate of the insurer showing such coverage.
(Prior Code, § 150.142) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.113 MAINTENANCE.
   A WECS shall be regularly and properly maintained in good operating
condition.
(Prior Code, § 150.143) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
§ 150.125 UNSAFE BUILDINGS PROHIBITED; DECLARED NUISANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building or structure
within the corporate limits of the city to cause or permit such building or
structure to become or remain an unsafe building or structure within the
meaning of §
150.126. Any such building or structure is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance, and shall be repaired, rehabilitated, vacated, or demolished, as the
case may be, as provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 150.500) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988) Penalty, see §
150.999 
§ 150.126 BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES DECLARED UNSAFE.
   All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects
are hereby declared to be unsafe buildings or structures:
   (A)   All buildings or structures having one or more walls or other vertical
structural members which list, lean, or buckle to such extent that a plumb line
passing through the center of gravity of the lean, list, or buckle point falls
outside of the middle third of the base of the wall or structural member;
   (B)   All buildings or structures which, exclusive of the foundation, show
33% or more of damage or deterioration of a supporting member or members, or
50% or more of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting part of the
enclosing or outside walls or covering;
   (C)   All buildings or structures the floor or roof of which bears a load or
loads of such weight as to create a danger of collapse of the building or
structure, or any part thereof;
   (D)   All buildings or structures having a part or parts which are so
attached that they may fall and injure the occupants or members of the public,
or property;
   (E)   All buildings or structures which have been damaged by fire, wind, or
other cause so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, or the general
health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the city; and
   (F)   All buildings or structures which have become or are so dilapidated,
decayed, unsafe, or unsanitary as to be likely to cause sickness or disease, so
as to work injury to the health, safety, or general welfare of the occupants or
the people of the city.
(Prior Code, § 150.501) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988) Penalty, see §
150.999 
§ 150.127 WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS INCLUDED.
   A wind energy conversion system, and any component thereof, constitutes a
structure within the meaning of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 150.502) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.128 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Building Inspector, or his or her duly appointed deputies, may
inspect or cause to be inspected all public or quasi-public buildings, schools,
halls, churches, theaters, hotels, tenements, commercial offices,
manufacturing, or loft buildings, and all structures that are not buildings,
for the purpose of determining their structural safety.
   (B)   Whenever the Building Inspector shall receive information that any
other type of building or portion thereof in the city violates the provisions
of this chapter, the Building Inspector or his or her duly appointed deputies
may inspect or cause to be inspected such building, structure or portion
thereof.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of every owner, agent, lessee, or occupant of any
building or structure to permit such an inspection at any reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 150.503) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.129 DETERMINATION; ORDER.
   If the Building Inspector, upon inspection by him or her or his or her duly
appointed deputy, shall find a building or structure to be an unsafe building
or structure because of one or more violations of §§
150.126 and
150.127, he or she shall proceed forthwith to make such a determination in
writing and enter an order to repair, rehabilitate, vacate or, as the case may
be, demolish the building or structure. The determination shall specify the
respects in which the Building Inspector has found the building or structure to
be an unsafe building or structure within the meaning of this subchapter. A
copy of the determination shall be filed within three business days with the
City Clerk who may cause the same to be filed in the office of the Register of
Deeds for recording.
(Prior Code, § 150.504) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.130 ORDER TO REPAIR OR VACATE.
   If the order is to repair or rehabilitate the building, the order shall
specify the repairs to be made and the time (which shall be a reasonable time,
as determined by the Building Inspector) within which the repairs or
rehabilitation is to be completed. If the Building Inspector shall determine
that the building is unsafe for occupancy pending repair or rehabilitation, the
order shall include an order that the building be vacated within a time
specified in the order, and that it not be reoccupied without a written permit
from the Building Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 150.505) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.131 EMERGENCY ORDER.
   If the Building Inspector shall determine that a building or structure, or a
portion thereof, is so unsafe; or is unsafe in a respect such that a delay in
repairing, rehabilitating, vacating, or demolishing the building or structure
until after a hearing by the City Council would result in undue danger or other
hazard to persons or property, he or she may declare that there exists an
emergency requiring that his or her order to repair, rehabilitate, vacate, or
demolish the building or structure become final and effective immediately, in
which case the order shall become final and effective immediately.
(Prior Code, § 150.506) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.132 NOTICE; POSTING; AFFIDAVIT.
   (A)   Upon making a determination that a building or structure is unsafe and
entering an order to repair, rehabilitate, vacate, or, as the case may be,
demolish the building or structure, the Building Inspector shall issue and
cause to be posted a written notice as herein provided. The notice shall
summarize the determination and order which have been made, be printed or
typewritten upon cardboard or other material or equivalent durability, and be
posted in two or more conspicuous places on the exterior of the building or
structure.
   (B)   Upon completion of such posting, the Building Inspector shall sign and
cause to be filed in the office of the City Clerk an affidavit, to which shall
be attached and in which shall be incorporated by reference a copy of the
posted notice, and which shall identify the building or structure upon which
the notice was posted and the tract of land upon which the building or
structure was situated and shall specify the date of the posting and the
locations of the posting upon the building or structure, and the person by whom
the posting was done.
(Prior Code, § 150.507) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.133 COMPLIANCE; HARDSHIP.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any
order of the Building Inspector issued pursuant to this chapter; provided, if
the Building Inspector shall find that compliance with the order within the
time specified in the order would create undue hardship to the owner or
occupant of the building, and that delay would not involve undue hazard or
injury to persons or property, the Building Inspector may grant an extension of
time within such compliance with the order shall be completed; such finding,
the grounds therefor, and the order of extension shall be in writing.
(Prior Code, § 150.508) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988) Penalty, see §
150.999 
§ 150.134 STANDARDS FOR REPAIR, REHABILITATION, VACATION, DEMOLITION.
   The following standards shall be followed in substance by the Building
Inspector and the City Council in ordering repairs, rehabilitation, vacation,
or demolition.
   (A)   If the cost of repairing or rehabilitating an unsafe building so that
it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this subchapter does not
exceed 50% of the actual appraised value of the building as shown by the
records of the office of the County Assessor, it shall be ordered repaired or
rehabilitated.
   (B)   If the unsafe building is in such condition as to render it dangerous
to the health, safety, or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered
to be vacated.
   (C)   In any case where the cost of repair or rehabilitation of the unsafe
building so that it no longer will exist in violation of the terms of this
subchapter is in excess of 50% of the actual appraised value of the building as
shown by the records of the office of the County Assessor, it shall be ordered
demolished unless repaired or rehabilitated so that it no longer will exist in
violation of the terms of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 150.509) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988) Penalty, see §
150.999 
§ 150.135 NONCOMPLIANCE WITH ORDER; REPORT TO CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   Whenever any person shall fail to comply with an order of the Building
Inspector to repair, rehabilitate, vacate, or demolish an unsafe building or
structure as provided in the preceding sections of this subchapter (except §
150.131), the Building Inspector shall file with the City Clerk a report
concerning the matter, addressed to the City Council, and signed by the
Building Inspector.
   (B)   The report shall state the legal description of the lot or tract upon
which is situated the building or structure, the address and the nature and
general condition of the building or structure; the name of the owner and
mortgagee, if any, of record of the lot or tract and the building or structure;
the name of the any person or persons in possession of the lot or tract and the
building, and the nature of the interest (if known) in the lot, tract or
building owned or claimed by such person or persons; the names of any other
person or persons who have or appear or claim to have an interest, of record or
otherwise, in the lot, tract or building or structure, and the nature (if
known) of such interest or claim; a statement that the Building Inspector made
a determination that the building or structure is an unsafe building or
structure, and entered an order to repair, rehabilitate, vacate, or, as the
case may be, demolish the building or structure, filed a copy of such
determination with the Register of Deeds, and posted copies of a notice of the
determination and orders on the building or structure, all as provided by the
ordinance; the dates of such determination, order, filing, and posting; and
such other information as the Building Inspector shall include.
   (C)   There shall be attached to the report a copy of the determination,
orders, notice, and affidavit required by this subchapter; provided, compliance
by the Building Inspector with the provisions of this subchapter shall not be
considered essential to the jurisdiction of the City Council to consider, hear,
and take action upon a complaint or information that a building or structure is
unsafe and a public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 150.510) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988) Penalty, see §
150.999 
§ 150.136 BUILDING PERMITS; STAY.
   After a report shall have been filed with the City Clerk as provided in
section §
150.135, no building permit shall be issued in respect of the building which is
the subject of such report, except with the consent and approval of the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 150.511) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.137 VIOLATION; NUISANCE; HEARING.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a written report as provided in §
150.135, or, in the discretion of the City Council, without such a report, the
City Council may by resolution set a date, time, and place at which the person
or persons who own, or have, or appear or claim to have, an interest in a lot
or tract and the building or structure which is the subject of such a report,
or a building or structure which, as the City Council has been informed in some
other manner, is or appears to be an unsafe building within the meaning of this
subchapter, may appear before the City Council and show cause why the City
Council shall not determine the building or structure to be an unsafe building
or structure, and, as the case may be, a public nuisance, and order the
building or structure repaired, rehabilitated, vacated, or, as the case may be,
demolished.
   (B)   If the resolution is to be adopted as a result of information received
in some manner other than a report filed by the Building Inspector as provided
in §
150.135, it shall include an order that the Building Inspector prepare and file
with the City Clerk, within the time specified in the order, a written
statement containing the type of information required to be contained in a
report filed pursuant to §
150.135, together with a summary of the information received by the City
Council indicating that the building or structure is or appears to be an unsafe
building or structure within the meaning of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 150.512) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.138 NOTICE; FORM.
   After the City Council shall have adopted a resolution as provided in §
150.137, the City Clerk shall issue a written notice:
   (A)   Addressed to the owner(s) of record of the lot or tract and the
building or structure, or of any interest therein; the holders of any
encumbrances of record; the person(s) in possession of the lot or tract and
building or structure; and all other persons, including persons whose real
names are unknown, who have or appear or claim to have some interest in the lot
or tract and building or structure;
   (B)   Stating that such hearing has been set before the City Council, the
date, time and place of hearing, and that the persons to whom the notice is
addressed may appear before the City Council at such time and place to show
cause, if any, why the City Council shall not determine the building or
structure to be an unsafe building or structure and, as the case may be, a
public nuisance, and order the building or structure and, as the case may be, a
public nuisance, and order the building or structure repaired, rehabilitated,
vacated, or, as the case may be, demolished; and
   (C)   The notice shall state that the building or structure allegedly is an
unsafe building and, as the case may be, a public nuisance for reasons stated
in the report or statement of the Building Inspector which is on file in the
office of the City Clerk and a copy of which may be obtained from the City
Clerk, and that at the hearing, the persons addressed may show cause, if any,
why the City Council shall not determine the building or structure to be an
unsafe building or structure and, as the case may be, a public nuisance, and
order the building repaired, rehabilitated, vacated, or, as the case may be,
demolished. The form of the notice shall be approved by the City Attorney as to
legal sufficiency prior to service and publication.
(Prior Code, § 150.513) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.139 NOTICE; SERVICE; POSTING.
   Copies of the notice, signed by the City Clerk, shall be served as follows.
   (A)   A copy shall be delivered by the City Clerk, or by any person whom he
or she shall in writing authorize to deliver it, to the person or persons to
whom the notice is addressed, unless the person is a non-resident of, or after
diligent investigation and inquiry cannot be found within, the city.
   (B)   If a person to whom the notice is addressed is a non-resident of, or
after diligent investigation and inquiry cannot be found within, the city, the
City Clerk shall cause a copy of the notice to be mailed by certified or
registered mail addressed to the person at his or her last known address and
requiring a receipt signed by such person.
   (C)   If a person to whom the notice is addressed is deceased, and the City
Clerk, after diligent investigation and inquiry, is unable to ascertain and
does not know the names, residence, place of abode or whereabouts of the heirs,
devisees, personal representatives, or other persons interested in the estate
of such named person deceased, the City Clerk shall cause to be published a
notice addressed to “the heirs, devisees, legatees, personal representatives,
and all other persons interested in the estate of” such named person deceased,
“real names unknown.”
   (D)   If the City Clerk, after diligent investigation and inquiry, is unable
to ascertain the name, residence, or address of a person, not deceased, who has
or appears or claims to have some interest in the lot or tract and building or
structure, the City Clerk shall cause to be published a notice addressed to
“all persons having or claiming to have an interest in,” followed by a legal
description of the lot or tract. If publication of notice is required, the City
Clerk shall also cause a copy of the notice to be posted in a conspicuous place
on the building or structure to which the notice relates. Service and posting
of the notice shall be reviewed by the City Attorney as to legal sufficiency.
If, for any reason, the service or posting of a notice shall be determined to
have been insufficient or defective, then the hearing may be continued by the
City Council for a period sufficient to enable proper service to be had on all
persons to whom the notice is addressed or, as the case may be, to enable
proper posting to be had.
(Prior Code, § 150.514) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.140 TIME OF NOTICE.
   (A)   If a copy of a notice is by §
150.139 required to be delivered or posted, or by §
150.139(B) to be mailed, the copy shall be so delivered, posted or mailed not
less than ten days prior to the hearing.
   (B)   Publication of notice, if required by §
150.139 shall be made for two successive weeks (as defined by statute),
commencing not less than ten days before the hearing, in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city; and the City Clerk, within five days after the
first publication, shall cause a copy of the published notice to be mailed by
certified or registered mail to the last known address of any person appearing
or claiming to have an interest in the lot or tract and building or structure.
(Prior Code, § 150.515) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.141 NOTICE; AFFIDAVIT.
   Upon completion of service of notice and, if posting of notice is required,
upon completion of posting as provided in §
150.139, a copy of the notice shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk,
to which shall be attached:
   (A)   An affidavit, signed by the person who served and, as the case may be,
posted and mailed the notice, stating that the attached copy of the notice is a
true copy of the notice which was served, posted, and mailed; the names of the
person upon whom the notice was served and the date and manner of service; the
date when the notice was posted, and the names and addresses of the persons to
whom the notice was mailed; and
   (B)   If the notice was published, an affidavit by the printer of
publication.
(Prior Code, § 150.516) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.142 HEARING; ORDER; EXTENSION.
   (A)   At the time fixed for hearing, the City Council shall hear all
objections and evidence submitted by the person or persons who own, or have an
interest in, or who appear or claim to own or have an interest in the lot or
tract and the building or structure, as well as evidence and arguments
submitted by the Building Inspector and other interested persons.
   (B)   If, after consideration of such evidence and arguments, the City
Council shall find that the building or structure is an unsafe building or
structure and, as the case may be, a nuisance, it shall by ordinance so
determine, and shall in such ordinance order, in accordance with the provisions
of §
150.134, that the building or structure be repaired, rehabilitated, vacated,
or, as the case may be, demolished.
   (C)   If the order is to repair or rehabilitate the building or structure,
the order shall specify the repairs or rehabilitation work to be done and the
time, which shall be a reasonable one, within which the repairs or
rehabilitation is to be completed, and shall require that such repairs or
rehabilitation work be done by the owner or, as the case may be, by the lessee
or occupant of the building or structure. If the order is to vacate the
building, the order shall specify the time within which the building shall be
vacated. If the order is to demolish the building or structure and remove all
materials and debris from the lot or tract, it shall specify the time, which
shall be a reasonable one, within which the demolition and removal shall be
completed.
   (D)   In the discretion of the City Council, the order may also direct that
if the building or structure is not repaired, rehabilitated, or demolished and
the material and debris removed by the owner within the time specified, the
building or structure shall be repaired or demolished and the debris therefrom
removed by the city under the direction of the Building Inspector, and the cost
thereof shall be levied by the City Council as a special assessment against the
land, and the assessment shall be a lien on the real estate and be collected in
the manner provided for special assessments. Subsequently, upon written
application of a person affected by the order, the City Council may by
resolution extend the time within which the building or structure is to be
repaired, rehabilitated, vacated, or demolished by the owner if the City
Council shall make a finding that repair, rehabilitation, vacation, or
demolition of the building or structure within the time limited by the order
would cause undue hardship to such person.
(Prior Code, § 150.517) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.143 PLACARDING STRUCTURE.
   (A)   After the City Council has enacted an ordinance determining a building
or structure to be an unsafe building or structure and, as the case may be, a
nuisance, and ordered it repaired, rehabilitated, vacated, or demolished, the
City Clerk shall file a copy of the ordinance in the office of the Register of
Deeds for recording, and the Building Inspector shall cause to be placed upon
the building or structure a placard stating that the building or structure has
been determined by the City Council to be an unsafe building and, as the case
may be, a public nuisance, and has ordered the building or structure repaired,
rehabilitated, vacated, or, as the case may be, demolished, and, if the City
Council has ordered the building or structure vacated, that occupancy or use of
the building or structure is unlawful.
   (B)   The placard shall be printed or typewritten upon cardboard or other
material of equivalent durability, and be posted in two or more conspicuous
places on the exterior of the building or structure. Upon completion of such
posting, the Building Inspector shall sign and cause to be filed in the office
of the City Clerk an affidavit, to which shall be attached and in which shall
be incorporated by reference a copy of the placard, and which shall identify
the building or structure upon which the notice was posted and the tract of
land upon which the building or structure was situated, and shall specify the
date of the posting and the locations of the posting upon the building or
structure, and the person by whom the posting was done.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deface or remove such placard.
(Prior Code, § 150.518) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988) Penalty, see §
150.999 
§ 150.144 USE OF UNSAFE STRUCTURE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   If the City Council shall have declared a building to be an unsafe
building or structure and, as the case may be, a nuisance, and shall have
ordered it vacated or not used until required repairs or rehabilitation work
shall have been completed, it shall be unlawful for any person thereafter to
occupy or use, or to continue to occupy or use, the building or structure until
the building or structure shall have been repaired or rehabilitated as required
by the order and a certificate of occupancy shall have been obtained from the
Building Inspector.
   (B)   If the City Council shall have declared a building or structure to be
an unsafe building or structure and, as the case may be, a nuisance, and shall
have ordered it vacated and demolished, it shall be unlawful for any person
thereafter to occupy or use, or to continue to occupy or use, the building or
structure.
(Prior Code, § 150.519) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988) Penalty, see §
150.999 
§ 150.145 DEMOLITION; REMOVAL OF DEBRIS.
   (A)   If the City Council shall order a building or structure repaired or
demolished and the debris removed by the city as provided in §
150.143, and the owner shall fail or refuse to comply with the order in whole,
or in part, within the time specified in the order, the Building Inspector
shall in writing so report to the City Administrator and submit to the City
Administrator an estimate by the City Engineer concerning the cost of the
repair or demolition and removal, and a recommendation concerning the manner in
which the repair, demolition, and removal shall be effected.
   (B)   If it shall appear to the City Administrator that the aggregate cost
of the repair or demolition and removal of work will not exceed the sum of
$7,500, the City Administrator, shall in writing so determine and, in this
sound discretion, shall order either that the repair or demolition and the
removal work be done by employees of the city under the direction of the
Building Inspector, or that the work be done by a private contractor, subject
to inspection and approval of the work by the Building Inspector.
   (C)   If the City Administrator shall determine that the work shall be done
by employees of the city under the direction of the Building Inspector, the
Building Inspector shall proceed with the repair or demolition of the building
or structure and removal from the lot or tract of all materials and debris, and
he or she shall place the lot or tract in a safe condition.
   (D)   If the City Administrator shall determine that the work shall be done
by a private contractor, he or she shall also determine in writing whether the
taking of bids would be likely to result in the lowest cost and, depending upon
his or her decision in that respect, shall make appropriate arrangements for a
contract with a private contractor for that purpose. Such bids may be solicited
in any manner which, in the sound discretion of the City Administrator, is the
best suited for eliciting the lowest and best bid, but the bids shall be in
writing.
   (E)   No repair, demolition, or removal work shall be commenced by a private
contractor until a written contract therefor shall have been signed by the
contractor and the city, the latter, by the Mayor or, in case of his or her
absence or disability, by the President of the City Council. If it shall appear
to the City Administrator that the aggregate cost of the repair or demolition
and removal work will exceed the sum of $7,500, the City Administrator shall in
writing so determine, and shall submit to the City Council the estimate of cost
prepared by the City Engineer, together with a recommendation by the City
Administrator that the city advertise for bids for such work.
   (F)   All repair, demolition, or removal work done by a private contractor,
whether done pursuant to a bid accepted by the City Council, or otherwise,
shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Building Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 150.520) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.146 SALE OR DISPOSITION OF DEBRIS.
   (A)   Where pursuant to an order of the City Council, an unsafe building or
structure has been repaired or demolished and the materials and debris removed
or, as the case may be, is about to be repaired or demolished and removed, the
Building Inspector shall sell, or if there appears to him or her to be a
substantial doubt whether the gross proceeds of sale will exceed the expenses
of sale, shall otherwise dispose of the materials and debris. The sale shall be
at private sale or public auction, as will in the discretion of the Building
Inspector be likely to realize the largest amount of proceeds after payment of
the expenses of sale. The proceeds of sale shall be applied in payment, in the
following order, of:
      (1)   The expenses of sale;
      (2)   The expenses incurred by the city in the proceedings to have the
building or structure determined to be an unsafe building and, as the case may
be, a nuisance and, if a special assessment is to be made, the estimated
expense of levying such assessment;
      (3)   The expense of repair or demolition of the building or structure
and removal of the material and debris;
      (4)   Unpaid general taxes on the building, structure, lot, or tract; and
      (5)   Unpaid special assessments against the lot or tract.
   (B)   The balance, if any, of the proceeds shall be paid to the owner,
encumbrancer, or other person having an interest in the building or structure,
as their interest may appear. If any of such expenses shall have been paid by
the city prior to the sale, the proceeds shall be paid into the fund out of
which the expenses were paid, to the same extent that they would have been
applied in payment of the expenses had the expenses not been paid initially out
of the fund.
(Prior Code, § 150.521) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.147 REPAIR OR DEMOLITION; REPORT; CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   Where pursuant to an order of the City Council, an unsafe building or
structure has been repaired or demolished and materials and debris have been
removed, the Building Inspector shall file with the City Clerk a written report
thereof.
   (B)   The report shall identify the building or structure and the lot or
tract; state the name and address of the owner and of any other person having,
or appearing or claiming to have, an interest therein; state that the owner of
the building or structure did not complete repair or demolition thereof and
removal of the materials and debris from the lot or tract within the time
specified by the order of the City Council; state the date or dates when the
repair, demolition, and removal were completed by the city; and, in the event
that the work was performed otherwise than under a contract let by the City
Council, state the cost, in itemized form, of the work.
   (C)   If the work was performed by a private contractor, the report shall
contain a certificate of the Building Inspector that the work was performed in
accordance with the contract; and, if the contract was one which was let by the
City Council, there shall also be attached to the report a certificate of the
City Engineer that the work was performed in accordance with the contract.
(Prior Code, § 150.522) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.148 EXPENSES.
   When a report and certificate of the Building Inspector and, as the case may
be, a certificate of the City Engineer shall have been filed with the City
Clerk as provided in §
150.145, the City Council may authorize payment of the expenses so certified.
(Prior Code, § 150.523) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-88)
§ 150.149 ASSESSMENT.
   Where an unsafe building or structure has been repaired or demolished and
material and debris removed from the lot or tract pursuant to an order of the
City Council made in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, the
City Council, after notice and hearing, and either prior or subsequent to a
sale of the removed materials and debris as provided in §
150.146, may by ordinance specially assess the cost of such repair, demolition
and removal against the lot or tract. Any such assessment shall be a lien on
the lot or tract on which levied from the date of passage of the assessment
ordinance, shall become delinquent in 20 days after such date, shall draw
interest at the rate of 12% per annum from such date until the assessment shall
become delinquent, and thereafter shall draw interest at the rate of 12% per
annum. The City Clerk shall certify all such assessments to the County Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 150.524) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.150 EMERGENCY ORDER; SUBSEQUENT PROCEDURE.
   Whenever any person shall fail to comply with an order of the Building
Inspector to repair, rehabilitate, vacate, or demolish immediately an unsafe
building or structure and remove the material and debris as provided in §
150.131, the Building Inspector shall forthwith so report to the City
Administrator, and the city shall proceed with such repair or demolition and
removal as provided in §§
150.136 through
150.147, inclusive, of this subchapter, except that the City Administrator may
waive estimates of cost and bidding where the apparent cost of the work will
not exceed the sum of $7,500, and the City Council, if it shall find that there
exists and emergency may, by an ordinance adopted by three-fourths of the
members of the City Council, waive estimates of cost and advertising for bids
where the apparent cost of the work will exceed $7,500, and the expense of such
repair, demolition, and removal may be paid as provided in §
150.148 and assessed against the lot or tract as provided in §
150.149.
(Prior Code, § 150.525) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.151 DECEASED PERSONS; NOTICE.
   If any person upon whom a notice is required to be served under this
subchapter is deceased, the notice shall be issued to, and copies shall be
served upon, the duly appointed personal representative, if any, of the estate;
the surviving spouse, if any, of the deceased; and all heirs the names of whom
can be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence.
(Prior Code, § 150.526) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.152 RIGHTS, REMEDIES; CUMULATIVE.
   All remedies provided in this subchapter are in addition to the remedies
proved in other ordinances of the city, and are not in derogation of any rights
or remedies which the city has under the laws of the state.
(Prior Code, § 150.527) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
§ 150.153 NONLIABILITY OF CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   No officer, employee, or agent of the city shall be personally liable for
any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act
required or permitted in the discharge of his or her office, employment, or
agency under this subchapter. Any suit brought against any officer, employee,
or agent of the city as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his or her duties under this subchapter shall be defended by the
City Attorney at the expense of the city until final determination of the
proceedings therein.
(Prior Code, § 150.528) (Ord. 1382, passed 3-14-1988)
ABANDONED AND FORECLOSED PROPERTIES
§ 150.165 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a process to limit and reduce
the amount of deteriorating property located within the city, as to which a
public notice of default has been filed, which is in foreclosure, or where
ownership has been transferred to the lender or mortgagee by any legal method.
It is further intended to establish a registration program as a mechanism to
protect neighborhoods from the negative effects of inadequately maintained,
abandoned, or vacated properties subject to a mortgage or properties subject to
mortgages that are in default.
(Prior Code, § 150.550) (Ord. 1980, passed 6-23-2014)
§ 150.166 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Where the
context will permit and no definitions are provided herein, the definitions
provided in the applicable Building Code will apply.
   ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY. Any real property that is vacant and/or is under a
public notice of default, notice of mortgagee’s sale, pending tax assessor’s
lien sale and/or properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale
where title is retained by the mortgagee, and any properties transferred under
a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure sale, short sale, or any other legal means in
lieu of foreclosure.
   DEFAULT. The mortgagee filed a foreclosure action or public notice of
default on the mortgage. A mortgage shall be considered in DEFAULT at such time
as the mortgagee declares said mortgage to be in default either in writing, by
recording a lis pendens, or by its actions, or commences foreclosure
proceedings.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any law enforcement officer, building official, problem
resolution team, fire inspector or code enforcement officer employed by the
city.
   EVIDENCE OF VACANCY. Any condition that on its own, or combined with other
conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property
is vacant. Such conditions may include, but not be limited to, overgrown and/or
dead vegetation, broken windows or doors, electricity, water, or other
utilities turned off, statements by neighbors, passers-by, delivery agents, or
government agents, among other evidence.
   FORECLOSURE. The judicial process by which a property placed as a security
for a mortgage loan, after a judicial process, is to be sold at an auction to
satisfy a debt upon which the borrower has defaulted.
   LANDSCAPING. Includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground cover, bushes,
shrubs, hedges, or similar plantings, decorative rock, or bark or artificial
turf/sod designed specifically for residential, commercial, or industrial
installation, as applicable.
   VACANT. Any building or structure that is not regularly and lawfully
occupied or inhabited by human beings.
(Prior Code, § 150.551) (Ord. 1980, passed 6-23-2014)
§ 150.167 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter relates to all abandoned or vacant real property.
(Prior Code, § 150.552) (Ord. 1980, passed 6-23-2014)
§ 150.168 REGISTRATION OF REAL PROPERTY MORTGAGEE HOLDING MORTGAGES IN DEFAULT.
   (A)    Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within
the corporate limits of the city shall perform an inspection of the property
upon default by the mortgagor or prior to the issuance of a notice of default.
If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it shall be
deemed vacant or abandoned and the mortgagee shall, within two days of the
inspection, register the property with the city on forms developed and made
available by the city or the city’s designee, even though the real property may
not be vacant. If the mortgage on the property is in default, no later than ten
days after the date that a default is declared, the mortgagee shall register
the property with city on forms developed and made available by the city or the
city’s designee.
   (B)   If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be
inspected monthly by the mortgagee or mortgagee’s designee.
   (C)   Within ten days of the date the mortgagee declares its mortgage to be
in default, the mortgagee shall register the property with the city or the
city’s designee and, at the time of registration, shall designate in writing a
local property manager to inspect, maintain, and secure the real property
subject to the mortgage in default.
   (D)   Registration pursuant to this section shall contain at a minimum the
name of the mortgagee, the mailing address of the mortgagee and e-mail address,
and telephone number and name of the local property manager. The local property
manager shall be responsible to inspect, secure, and maintain the property. The
property manager named in the registration shall be located within 100 miles of
the city and be available to be contacted by the city, Monday through Friday
between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., holidays and lunch hours excluded. The city
shall charge a fee of $150 for any registration or amodification of
registration and may at the city’s discretion assign and delegate the
collection of such fee to an independent contractor. The structure shall be
posted by the city with an eight and one-half-inch by 11-inch sign containing
the information required for registration. The sign shall be located in or upon
the front window or door of the structure facing the street.
   (E)   This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject
of a foreclosure sale where title is transferred to the mortgagee as well as
any properties transferred to the mortgagee under a deed in lieu of
foreclosure,
   (F)   Properties subject to this section shall remain under the annual
registration requirement, inspection, security, and maintenance standards of
this subchapter as long as they are abandoned real property.
   (G)   Any person or other legal entity that has registered a property under
this subchapter must report any change of information contained in the
registration within ten days of the change.
   (H)   Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly
register or to revise the registration from title to title to reflect a change
of circumstances as required by this subchapter is a violation of the City Code
and may result in the issuance of a citation.
   (I)   Responsible parties are affirmatively required to de-register
properties once these properties are no longer subject to registration pursuant
to this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 150.553) (Ord. 1980, passed 6-23-2014)
§ 150.169 MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Properties subject to this subchapter shall be kept free of weeds,
overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any
accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required
by federal, state, or local law, discarded personal items including, but not
limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, or any other items
that give the appearance that the property is abandoned or not being properly
maintained. Weeds, overgrown brush, or dead vegetation are prohibited.
   (B)   The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings
by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color
of the exterior structure. Yards shall be landscaped and maintained pursuant to
the standards set forth in the city code.
   (C)   Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to watering and mowing
of required landscape and removal of all trimmings and weeds.
   (D)   Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly
maintain the property is a violation of the City Code and may result in the
issuance of a citation.
(Prior Code, § 150.554) (Ord. 1980, passed 6-23-2014)
§ 150.170 SECURITY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Properties subject to this subchapter shall be maintained in a secure
manner so as to not be accessible to unauthorized persons, animals, or insects.
   (B)   A SECURE MANNER shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and
locking of all windows, doors, gates, and other openings of such size that may
allow access to the interior of the property and/or structure. Broken windows
shall be secured by re-glazing or boarding.
   (C)   If a mortgage on the property is or has been in default on the
property and the property becomes vacant or abandoned real property, a local
property manager shall be designated by the mortgagee to perform the work
necessary to bring the property into compliance with this code and the local
property manager must perform weekly inspections to verify compliance with the
requirements of this subchapter, and any other applicable laws or ordinances of
the city.
   (D)   When the property becomes vacant or abandoned real property, it shall
be posted by the city with the name and 24-hour contact telephone number of the
local property manager. The posting shall be at least eight and one-half inches
by 11 inches and shall contain the following language:
      THIS PROPERTY IS MANAGED BY                                     .
      TO REGISTER PROPERTY AND OBTAIN AN APPROVED
POSTER,                                                                   .
   (E)   (1)   The posting shall be placed in or upon the front window or door
of the structure facing the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/
structure facing the street to the front of the property so that it is visible
from the street or if no such area exists, on a stake sufficient size to
support the posting in a location that is at all times visual from the street
to the front of the property but not readily accessible to vandals.
      (2)   Exterior posting shall be constructed of and printed with weather-
resistant materials.
   (F)   Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly
inspect and secure the property, and post and maintain the signage noted in
this section, is a violation of this section and shall result in the issuance
of a citation by a Code Enforcement Officer.
(Prior Code, § 150.555) (Ord. 1980, passed 6-23-2014)
§ 150.171 OPPOSING, OBSTRUCTING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   Whoever opposes, obstructs, or resists any enforcement officer, or any
person authorized by the city, in the discharge of duties as provided in this
subchapter, upon conviction may be sanctioned as provided in this code of
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 150.556) (Ord. 1980, passed 6-23-2014)
§ 150.172 IMMUNITY OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   Any enforcement officer, or any person authorized by the city to enforce
this subchapter, shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for
reasonable, good faith entry or trespass upon real property while in the
discharge of duties imposed by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 150.557) (Ord. 1980, passed 6-23-2014)
§ 150.173 ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY.
   Failure to comply with the terms of this subchapter shall constitute a
continuing public nuisance. The city shall have the authority to promptly abate
the public nuisance, in whole or in part, by action of the City Council, City
Administrator, Problem Resolution Team, jointly or severally, at the expense of
the mortgagee or other responsible party.
(Prior Code, § 150.558) (Ord. 1980, passed 6-23-2014)
§ 150.174 SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall prohibit the city from enforcing
its codes by any other means, including, but not limited to, injunction,
abatement, or as otherwise provided by code. If any phrase or portion of this
subchapter, or the particular application thereof, shall be held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court, administrative agency, or other body with
appropriate jurisdiction, then the remainder thereof shall not be affected
thereby.
(Prior Code, § 150.559) (Ord. 1980, passed 6-23-2014)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 150.185 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Application. Any person aggrieved by decision of the Chief Building
Inspector may apply to the Board of Adjustment for a variation of the
application of any provision of the Building Code to the particular case. The
application shall be in writing, shall specify the variation sought and shall
be signed by the applicant. The Board, upon such application and after a public
hearing pursuant to such notice as the Board shall specify, may vary the
application of any provision of the Building Code to the particular case when,
in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice, and would
be contrary to the spirit and purpose of the Building Code or public interest.
A decision of the Board to vary the application of any provision of the
Building Code shall specify in what manner the variation is made, the
conditions upon which it is made and the reasons therefor.
   (B)   Fee. Any person applying for a variation of the application of any
provision of the Building Code shall contemporaneously pay to the City Clerk, a
fee equal to one-half the original building permit application filing fee;
provided, the minimum fee shall be $10; provided, further, no such fee shall be
payable if the application is made by the city pursuant to a motion of the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 150.900)
§ 150.186 BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   The Building Inspector shall be the city official who shall have the duty of
enforcing all city building and housing regulations, if any. He or she shall
inspect all buildings repaired, altered, built, or moved in the city as often
as necessary to ensure compliance with all city ordinances. He or she shall
have the power and authority to order, at the direction of the City Council,
all work stopped on any construction, alteration, or relocation which violates
any provisions prescribed in any city building and housing regulations. He or
she shall, at the direction of the City Council, issue permission to continue
any construction, alteration, or relocation when the City Council is satisfied
that no provision will be violated. If the stop order is an oral one, it shall
be followed by a written stop order within one hour. This written order may be
served by any city police officer. In the event that the city has building and
housing regulations and the Mayor fails to appoint a Building Inspector, the
chief city law enforcement officer shall be the Building Inspector ex officio.
§ 150.187 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.
   (A)   Appointment. The office of Electrical Inspector for the city is hereby
created and the Mayor, by and with consent of the Council, at the commencement
of each municipal year shall appoint an Electrical Inspector. The person chosen
shall be well versed in approved methods of electrical construction for the
safety to life and property. The Electrical Inspector shall keep records with
his or her office as provided herein, which shall be the property of the city
and shall be filed and preserved by the Electrical Inspector and which shall be
delivered to his or her successor in office. The Electrical Inspector may be
removed from office for cause only after a hearing before the Mayor and
Council. It shall be unlawful for the Electrical Inspector to engage in the
business of the installation and maintenance of electric wiring, electric
devices and electrical materials, either directly or indirectly, and he or she
shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in any such business in
the city at any time, while holding the office of Electrical Inspector. Any
violation of the provisions of this section by the Electrical Inspector shall
be sufficient cause for his or her removal from office, but he or she may be
removed for other just causes. If the city should contract with another
political subdivision or entity for inspection services, then the entity shall
designate that employee or agent of the entity or political subdivision who
shall perform the electrical inspection services and the person shall be
designated and appointed by the Mayor and Council as Electrical Inspector for
the city. Term of office of the Electrical Inspector shall be for a period of
one year, or in the event that services are contracted for with another entity
or political subdivision, for the term of the contract as provided for in the
contract entered into by the city.
   (B)   Duties. The Electrical Inspector shall have general supervision over,
and is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to interpret, where necessary,
and enforce all provisions of this chapter, to the end that fires and accident
or injury to persons or property shall be prevented, and whenever, in the
judgment of the Electrical Inspector, any electric wire or insulation, or for
any other cause, the Electrical Inspector shall at once notify the owner
thereof, of such defect and order him or her to repair, rearrange or remove the
same, and upon the owner’s failure to do so within a reasonable time, the owner
shall be deemed guilty of a violation of the provisions of this chapter and
each and every day which shall elapse after the expiration of the reasonable
time until the order of the Electrical Inspector is fully complied with, shall
be considered a separate offense within the intent and meaning of this chapter.
   (C)   Right of access. The Electrical Inspector, upon proper identification
and subject to requirements of search warrants, where applicable, shall have
the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any building or premises and, in
the discharge of his or her official duties, to inspect and test any electrical
equipment or appliances therein contained. The Electrical Inspector shall have
the authority to cause the turning off of electrical power and, in case of an
emergency, to cut or disconnect any wire where electrical power is dangerous to
life or property.
   (D)   Defense. Any suit brought against the Electrical Inspector or his or
her subordinates because of an act performed by him or her, or an omission by
him or her occurring, in the enforcement of any provision of this chapter shall
be defended by the city until final termination of the proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 150.902) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.188 ENTRY; NOTICES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow the Building
Inspector entry into any building or structure where the work of construction,
alteration, repair, or relocation is taking place, for the purpose of making
official inspections at any reasonable hour.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.189 LIABILITY NOT ASSUMED BY CITY.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to relieve from or
lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating,
controlling or installing any electric wiring, electric devices, or electric
material or damages to person or property caused by any defect therein nor
shall the city be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the
inspection authorized therein, or the approval of such installation by reason
of the inspection issued as herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 150.904)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   Violations of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement by the city in
any manner provided herein or elsewhere in this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 150.560) (Ord. 1980, passed 6-23-2014)
CHAPTER 151: MOBILE HOMES
Section
   
151.01   Definitions
   
151.02   License; temporary permit
   
151.03   Fees
   
151.04   Mobile home community; application
   
151.05   Temporary permit; application
   
151.06   Renewal; application
   
151.07   Nonconforming areas
   
151.08   Violations
   
151.09   Hearings
   
151.10   Location
   
151.11   Mobile home community plan
§ 151.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME. A mobile home which does not have a flush toilet and
a bath or shower.
   INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME. A mobile home which has a flush toilet and a bath
or shower.
   INSPECTOR. The City Engineer or his or her authorized representative.
   LICENSEE. Any person licensed to operate and maintain a MOBILE HOME
COMMUNITY under the provisions of this chapter.
   LOT. A plot of ground within a mobile home community which is designed for,
and designated as, the location for one mobile home and not used for any other
purpose other than the customary accessory uses associated therewith.
   MOBILE HOME COMMUNITY. An area, tract, site, or plot of land whereupon a
minimum of 25 mobile homes as herein defined are placed, located, or maintained
or intended to be placed, located, or maintained for dwelling purposes only,
whether or not upon a lot.
   NATURAL OR ARTIFICIAL BARRIER. Any street, river, pond, canal, railroad,
levy, embankment, or screening by an appropriate fence or hedge.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a temporary permit is issued to maintain an
individual mobile home outside of a licensed MOBILE HOME COMMUNITY and in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter as hereinafter prescribed.
(Prior Code, § 151.01) (Ord. 1763, passed 6-28-2004)
§ 151.02 LICENSE; TEMPORARY PERMIT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, operate,
or permit to the established, maintained, or operated, any mobile home
community within the zoned limits of the city on land owned or controlled by
him or her, without first having secured a license therefor as provided herein.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place, or abandon any
mobile home upon any street, alley, highway, or other public place or upon any
premises or tract of land located within the zoned limits of the city (which
mobile home is situated outside of a licensed mobile home community) without
first having secured a temporary permit as provided herein.
   (C)   The following shall constitute exceptions to divisions (A) and (B)
above.
      (1)   The parking of visiting mobile homes in an accessory private garage
building or in the rear yard of any premises for a period not to exceed 30 days
within any one calendar year shall be permitted.
      (2)   Emergency or temporary stopping or parking for 24 hours upon any
public street shall be permitted; provided, however, that such stopping or
parking shall be subject to any other parking or stopping regulations or
limitations that may be imposed by any other ordinance of the city relative to
stopping and parking.
      (3)   Unoccupied mobile homes for demonstration and/or sale purposes
(only) may be located within any district where such demonstration and/or sale
purposes are permitted by the zoning ordinances of the city.
      (4)   The storage of any unoccupied or uninhabited mobile home within the
corporate limits of the city shall be permitted in the rear yard of any
premises; provided, however, that all such storage is not in conflict with any
other sections of this chapter, the zoning regulations of the city or with any
other ordinance of the city.
(Prior Code, § 151.02) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 151.03 FEES.
   The annual license fee for each mobile home community shall be $5 for each
lot contained therein; provided, however, that a mobile home community license
shall be transferable to another person or persons during the current year of
such license upon payment of a transfer fee of $5 to the city business office.
(Prior Code, § 151.03)
§ 151.04 MOBILE HOME COMMUNITY; APPLICATION.
   (A)   The initial application for a mobile home community license shall
conform to the following and shall:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Be signed by the owner of the land upon which the mobile home
community is sought to be located;
      (3)   Contain the name and the address of the applicant; and
      (4)   State the locations and the legal description of the land upon
which the mobile home community is desired to be placed.
   (B)   The following shall be filed at the city business office when the
application for license is made:
      (1)   A complete plan of the mobile home community showing it to be in
conformity with all of the requirements of this chapter;
      (2)   Plans and specifications for all buildings, improvements and other
facilities, including but not limited to electrical wiring, water services, gas
services, and sewer services, which are constructed or are to be constructed
within the mobile home community; and
      (3)   Such other information as may reasonably be requested by the City
Inspector to enable him or her to determine if the proposed mobile home
community will comply with the requirements of the city code.
   (C)   When the City Inspector has determined that the complete plan of the
mobile home community will comply with all requirements of the city code, he or
she shall notify the Planning Commission of the city. Upon such notification,
the Planning Commission shall then make a study of the plans and specifications
to determine if the plans and specifications will fit into the master plan for
future expansion of the city. When this study has been completed, the plans,
specifications, and recommendations of the Planning Commission shall be
forwarded to the Mayor and City Council for final action. The failure of the
Planning Commission to make a recommendation within 30 days from the time the
plans and specifications have been forwarded to it shall be deemed by the Mayor
and Council of the city to be a declination of the Planning Commission to make
any recommendations whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 151.04)
§ 151.05 TEMPORARY PERMIT; APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for a temporary permit shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The locations and legal description of the property or area upon
which the mobile home is to be parked temporarily;
      (3)   The dates that the mobile home will be temporarily parked;
      (4)   The license number of the mobile home; and
      (5)   A statement by the owner or occupant of the mobile home authorizing
the City Inspector or his or her representative to seal all plumbing fixtures.
In the event that such plumbing is sealed, the owner or occupant of such mobile
home shall not permit such seal to be broken except by the City Inspector or
his or her representative, which directive shall be in writing. No sewage shall
be permitted to be discharged upon the ground in any manner.
   (B)   All applications for a temporary permit as herein required shall be
approved by the City Inspector. Upon certification by the City Inspector that
the applicant for temporary permit is in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, the office of the City Clerk shall issue the temporary permit upon
payment of the fee as hereinbefore provided.
   (C)   The City Inspector shall report the approval of all temporary permits
to the Mayor and Council.
(Prior Code, § 151.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.06 RENEWAL; APPLICATION.
   Upon application in writing by the holder of a mobile home community license
for renewal of the license the City Inspector shall reinspect the mobile home
community. If the City Inspector determines that the mobile home community is
in compliance with provisions of this chapter, the City Clerk shall issue a
certificate renewing such license for the period of one year upon payment by
the licensee of the prescribed fee.
(Prior Code, § 151.06)
§ 151.07 NONCONFORMING AREAS.
   All existing mobile homes or mobile home communities, spaces, or areas which
do not meet the requirements of this chapter are nonconforming and shall not be
permitted to add spaces or to make any improvements which are inconsistent with
the provisions of this chapter. Any such nonconforming mobile home community
which is not operated as a mobile home community for a period of three months
shall not be reopened as a mobile home community until the conditions of this
chapter have been met. Any such nonconforming mobile home located on any space
or area not within a mobile home community which is not occupied as a place of
human habitation and which has been unoccupied for the period of one month
shall not again be occupied as a place of habitation until the conditions of
this chapter have been met.
(Prior Code, § 151.07)
§ 151.08 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   If, upon inspections of any mobile home community or individual mobile
home, the City Inspector finds that conditions or practices exist which are in
violation of any provisions of this chapter or the city code, the City
Inspector shall give notice in writing to the person to whom the license for
the mobile home community or mobile home was issued at the address of the
applicant listed on the application for permit, and, unless such conditions or
practices are corrected within a reasonable time, but not to exceed 60 days,
the City Inspector shall give notice in writing to the person to whom the
license was issued that license has been revoked. The notice of revocation
shall be delivered personally or sent by United States mail to the address
shown on the application for permit.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the notice of revocation, such person shall cease
operation of such mobile home community within 72 hours. Upon receipt of notice
of revocation, such person shall remove the mobile home or homes, from the
zoning limits of the city, or shall move the mobile home or homes, to a
location that is in compliance with this chapter within 72 hours.
(Prior Code, § 151.08)
§ 151.09 HEARINGS.
   Any person who receives notice from the City Inspector that his or her
license has been revoked may request, and shall receive, a hearing of the
matter before the Mayor and Council of the city upon filing an application for
such hearing before such body within 72 hours following the time at which such
notice was received or license denied and the Mayor and Council shall hold such
hearing within 21 days after the filing of such application. The filing of such
application shall suspend any order of revocation of the license until the
matter has been heard before the Mayor and Council and the Mayor and Council
have made a disposition of the matter.
(Prior Code, § 151.09)
§ 151.10 LOCATION.
   (A)   A mobile home community may be located in any district as provided by
the zoning ordinances of the city.
   (B)   Each boundary of any mobile home must be at least 200 feet from any
permanent residential building located outside the mobile home community unless
separated therefrom by a natural or artificial barrier, or unless a majority of
the property owners according to area within the 200 feet consent in writing to
the establishment of the mobile home community and such consents are filed with
the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 151.10)
§ 151.11 MOBILE HOME COMMUNITY PLAN.
   The mobile home community shall conform to the following.
   (A)   It shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to ensure
rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water.
   (B)   The site of the mobile home community shall be platted to conform with
all subdivision regulations of the city code.
   (C)   Lot spaces within the mobile home community shall be provided
consisting of a minimum width of 37 and one-half feet for each lot and with an
aggregate minimum of 4,250 square feet for each lot, which boundaries shall be
clearly defined and marked.
   (D)   All storage must be provided within enclosed areas and the areas shall
be kept neat and free from accumulation of miscellaneous junk and unsightly
materials.
   (E)   (1)   Mobile homes shall be harbored on each space so that there shall
be at least 20 feet between mobile homes; provided, however, that with respect
to mobile homes parked end to end, the end to end clearance may not be less
than 15 feet.
      (2)   No mobile home shall be located closer than 20 feet from any
building within the mobile home community or from any property line boundary of
the mobile home community except for placement of storage lockers.
   (F)   All electrical distribution systems, plumbing systems and telephone
service systems to each mobile home space, except outlets and risers, shall be
underground. Each mobile home space shall be provided with a 115-volt and a
230-volt service with a minimum 100 ampere individual service outlet.
   (G)   Whenever master television antenna systems are to be installed, the
complete plans and specifications for the system must be approved by the City
Inspector. Distribution to individual mobile home spaces shall be underground
and shall terminate adjacent to the electrical outlet.
   (H)   Only independent mobile home spaces shall be provided and no service
building shall be required; provided, that if such service building is provided
it shall comply with the regulations hereinafter prescribed for service
buildings.
   (I)   The water supply for the mobile home community shall be connected to
the municipal water system and all plumbing shall be constructed and maintained
in accordance with the city’s Plumbing Code.
   (J)   Individual water service connections shall be provided for direct use
by mobile homes and shall be so constructed that they will not be damaged by
the parking of such mobile homes or as required by the City Inspector.
   (K)   All plumbing at the mobile home community shall comply with the state
and local plumbing laws and regulations.
   (L)   Each mobile home space shall be provided with not less than a four-
inch sewer connection. The sewer connection shall be provided with suitable
fittings so that a water-tight connection can be made between the mobile home
drain and the sewer connection. Such individual mobile home connection shall be
so constructed that they can be closed when not linked to a mobile home, and
shall be trapped in such a manner as to maintain them in an odor-free
condition.
   (M)   Sewer lines shall be constructed with the approval of the City
Inspector and in accordance with the city Plumbing Code.
   (N)   The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home
community shall be in compliance with the refuse regulations of the city.
   (O)   All electrical installations shall comply with the Electrical Code of
the city. Exterior electrical outlets shall be weatherproof. No power line,
including service lines to the mobile home, shall be permitted to lie on the
surface of the ground.
   (P)   Natural and liquefied petroleum gas for cooking purposes maybe used at
individual mobile home spaces; provided, however, that the installation must be
connected by approved metallic tubing and must comply with the Fire Prevention
Code of the city.
   (Q)   Each mobile home community shall be subject to the rules and
regulations of the city and the Fire Prevention Code.
   (R)   Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the Fire Chief shall
be kept in service buildings and in all other locations named by such Fire
Chief, and shall be maintained at all times in a good operating condition.
   (S)   Standard fire hydrants shall be located within 400 feet of each mobile
home.
(Prior Code, § 151.11) (Ord. 648, passed 7-28-1969) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 152: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
   
152.01   Adopted by reference
§ 152.01 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   Ordinance 1991, establishing flood damage prevention regulations, and
providing for the administration, enforcement, and amendment thereof, is hereby
adopted by reference. Copies shall be available for public inspection at the
office of the City Clerk during regular city office hours.
(Prior Code, § 152.01) (Ord. 1991, passed 4-27-2015)
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
   
153.01   Adopted by reference
§ 153.01 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   Ordinance 1300, establishing subdivision regulations relating to the
subdivision of land, requiring and regulating the preparation and presentation
of preliminary and final plats for such purpose; establishing minimum
subdivision design standards; providing minimum improvements to be made or
guaranteed to be made by the subdivider; setting forth the procedure to be
followed by the City Council in applying these rules, regulations and
standards; and, prescribing penalties for the violation of its provisions; and,
for the repeal of all subdivision development ordinances in conflict herewith;
for the city, was passed and approved and is published in pamphlet form and
available on the office of the City Clerk for public inspection during regular
city office hours.
(Prior Code, § 153.01) (Ord. 1300, passed 4-12-1984; Ord. 2019, passed 2-8-
2016; Ord. 2021, passed 2-29-2016; Ord. 2032, passed 8-29-2016; Ord. 2040,
passed 10-24-2016; Ord. 2060, passed - -2018; Ord. 2063, passed - -2018; Ord.
2072, passed 12-10-2018; Ord. 2117, passed - -2022; Ord. 2118, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 154: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Section
   
154.01   Adopted by reference
§ 154.01 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Comprehensive Plan, as revised and adopted on March 4, 1996, is hereby
adopted by reference. Copies shall be available for public inspection at the
office of the City Clerk during regular city office hours.
(Prior Code, § 154.01) (Ord. passed 3-4-1996)
CHAPTER 155: ZONING REGULATIONS
Section
   
155.01   Adopted by reference
§ 155.01 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Title. The comprehensive zoning regulations ordinance, copies of which
are on file in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection during
regular city office hours, is adopted and incorporated as part of this code of
ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein and shall be known and may
be cited and referred to as the “zoning ordinance” of the city. All ordinances
and regulations of the city in conflict herewith are repealed.
   (B)   Jurisdiction. The provisions of the zoning ordinance shall apply to
the incorporated area of the city and to the two mile area of planning and
zoning jurisdiction as set forth by state law and the official zoning map of
the city, as may be amended from time to time; said zoning map is incorporated
herein by reference.
   (C)   Purposes and objectives of the ordinance. The zoning ordinance is
adopted to preserve, protect, and promote the public health, safety, peace,
comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare. More specifically, the
zoning ordinance is adopted in order to achieve the following objectives:
      (1)   To provide a precise plan for the physical development of the city
in such a manner as to achieve progressively the general arrangement of land
uses depicted in the Comprehensive Plan;
      (2)   To foster a harmonious, convenient, workable relationship among
local uses and a wholesome, serviceable, and attractive living environment;
      (3)   To promote the stability of existing land uses which conform with
objectives and policies of the Comprehensive Plan and to protect them from
inharmonious influences and harmful intrusions;
      (4)   To ensure that public and private lands ultimately are used for the
purposes which are most appropriate and most beneficial from the standpoint of
the municipality;
      (5)   To promote the beneficial development of those areas which exhibit
conflicting patterns of use;
      (6)   To prevent excessive population densities and overcrowding of the
land with structures;
      (7)   To promote a safe, effective traffic circulation system;
      (8)   To foster the provision of adequate off-street parking and truck
loading facilities;
      (9)   To facilitate the appropriate location of public facilities and
institutions;
      (10)   To protect and promote appropriately located agricultural,
commercial, and industrial pursuits in order to preserve and strengthen its
economic base;
      (11)   To protect and enhance real property values;
      (12)   To converse the municipality’s natural assets and to capitalize on
the opportunities offered by its terrain, soils, vegetation, and waterways; and
      (13)   To coordinate policies and regulations relating to the use of land
with such policies and regulations of incorporated municipalities of the county
in order to: facilitate transition from county to municipal jurisdiction that
land which is first developed in an unincorporated area and is subsequently
annexed to a municipality; foster the protection of farming operations in areas
of planned urban expansion; and ensure unimpeded development of such new urban
expansion that is logical, desirable, and in accordance with objectives and
policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 2088, passed 8- -2020; Ord. 2150, passed - -2024)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Nebraska Revised Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NEBRASKA REVISED STATUTES
Neb. RS Cites Code Section
Neb. RS Cites                Code Section
11-101                       33.31
13-501                       35.22
13-506                       35.22
13-518 to 13-522             35.22
13-825 et seq.               33.04,
                             33.05
13-2501 et seq.              33.04,
                             33.05
16-205                       112.15
16-228                       130.24
16-245                       91.99
                             10.99,
16-246                       30.45,
                             94.42
16-247                       30.53
16-305                       33.45
16-308                       31.08
16-310                       33.45
16-312                       30.16
16-313                       30.16
16-314                       30.16
16-316                       30.16
16-318                       31.04
16-319                       31.07
16-326                       33.45
16-327                       30.16
16-401                       30.30
16-403                       30.51
                             30.48,
16-404                       30.49,
                             30.53
                             30.48,
16-405                       30.50,
                             30.51,
                             30.52
16-501                       35.02
16-502                       33.45,
                             35.02
16-503                       30.49,
                             35.02
16-712                       35.04
16-1020 to 16-1042           32.057
17-142                       131.17
17-555                       131.07
17-557                       131.17
17-614                       10.15
18-131                       30.50,
                             30.51
18-132                       30.45
18-305 through 18-312        33.46
18-503                       50.06
18-1720                      10.99
18-1722                      10.99
18-1736                      72.25,
                             72.26
18-1737                      72.26,
                             72.27
18-1739                      72.26,
                             72.27
18-1741.01                   72.25
18-1914                      118.99
18-1918                      118.99
18-2101 through 18-2144      32.007
18-2101 et seq.              32.091
18-2102.01                   32.085
18-2147 through 18-2151      32.007
18-2154                      32.007
18-2401 et seq.              33.04
19-710                       94.43
19-901                       32.003,
                             150.086
19-901 to 19-914             32.003,
                             150.086
19-901 to 19-915             32.003,
                             150.086
19-901 et seq.               32.003
19-902                       150.086
19-903 to 19-904.01          32.003
19-907                       32.003
19-908                       32.003
19-909                       32.003
19-910                       32.003
19-912                       32.003
19-912.01                    32.003
19-926                       32.002
19-927                       32.002
19-929(3)                    32.003
19-1101                      31.06
Ch. 19, Art. 18              32.006
19-3101                      30.01
19-3701                      30.52
21-1316.01                   35.04
23-114.02                    32.003
25-1801                      50.05
25-21,275                    50.05
25-21,276                    50.05
25-21,277                    50.05
25-21,278                    50.05
28-310                       131.01
28-318                       134.04
28-401                       130.20
28-431                       93.01
28-509                       132.02
28-511 through 28-515        132.02
28-512                       132.02
28-515.02                    50.04
28-517                       132.02
28-519                       132.03
28-520                       132.05
28-521                       132.05
28-523                       132.07
28-610                       130.28
28-710 et seq.               134.04
28-801                       134.04
28-830                       134.04
28-831                       134.04
28-903                       130.33
28-904                       130.32
28-1008                      96.11
28-1009                      96.11
28-1012                      96.11
28-1013                      96.11
28-1202.02 to 1202.04        130.20
28-1202.03                   130.20
28-1204.04                   130.20
28-1322                      130.25
29-422 to 29-429             96.11
29-835                       118.99
29-4001 et seq.              134.05
29-4003                      134.05
29-4013                      134.05
29-4015 et seq.              134.05
32-101 et seq.               34.01
32-404                       34.01,
                             34.02
32-556                       34.01
32-560                       30.01
33-139.01                    32.044
33-141                       31.06
35-101                       32.044
35-102                       32.044
35-103                       32.044
35-108                       32.044
39-307                       133.04
43-248                       134.04
43-2,129 et seq.             134.04
44-4301 et seq.              33.04,
                             33.05
48-101 et seq.               32.044
48-115                       32.044
48-434                       118.99
48-442                       118.99
49-1408                      33.46
49-1425                      33.46
49-1499.03 through 49-14,103 33.46
49-1499.04                   33.46
49-14,102                    33.46
49-14,103.01                 33.46
49-14,103.02                 33.46
49-14,103.03                 33.46
49-14,103.04                 33.46
49-14,103.05                 33.46
49-14,103.06                 33.46
49-801(16)                   10.05
51-201 to 51-219             32.001
51-202                       32.001
51-204                       32.001
52-601.01 to 52-605          93.01
                             111.01,
                             111.02,
53-101 et seq.               111.04,
                             111.05,
                             130.27
53-186                       111.04,
                             130.27
53-186.01                    111.04,
                             130.27
53-186(2)                    111.04,
                             130.27
54-603                       96.07
54-907 through 54-912        96.13
54-911                       96.13
54-912                       96.13
55-133                       70.01
Ch. 60                       70.42
60-169                       93.01
60-301                       93.01
60-302                       70.02,
                             70.06
60-324                       70.06
60-352.01                    72.25
60-376                       93.01,
                             93.02
60-479 et seq.               73.39
60-498.01 to 60-498.04       71.095
60-606 through 60-676        70.01
60-607                       70.01
60-610                       70.01
60-613                       70.01
60-624                       70.01
60-631                       70.01
60-638                       70.01
60-646                       70.01
60-654                       70.01
60-656                       70.01
60-658.01                    70.01
60-661                       70.01
60-669                       70.01
60-670                       70.01
60-671                       70.01
60-672                       70.01
60-676                       70.01
60-699                       73.35
60-1901                      93.01
60-1902                      93.01
60-1903                      70.43,
                             93.01
60-1903.01                   93.01
60-1903.02                   93.01
60-1904                      93.01
60-1905                      93.01
60-1906                      93.01
60-1907                      93.01
60-1908                      93.01
60-1909                      93.01
60-1911                      70.43,
                             93.01
60-2410                      93.01
60-6,113                     72.26,
                             72.27
60-6,114                     71.052
60-6,118                     70.01,
                             72.27
60-6,142                     73.57
60-6,166                     72.01
60-6,179                     70.08
60-6,184                     130.31
60-6,196.01                  91.22
60-6,197.02 to 69-6,197.08   71.095
60-6,201                     71.095
60-6,203                     71.095
60-6,211.08                  111.04,
                             130.27
60-6,243                     70.25
60-6,265                     70.23
60-6,267                     70.23
60-6,268                     70.23
60-6,278 through 60-6,282    73.39,
                             73.57
60-6,288 to 60-6,290         71.052
60-6,294                     71.052
60-6,299                     118.99
60-6,375                     73.57
60-6,196(1)                  71.095
60-6,197(1)                  71.095
60-6,197(2)                  71.095
60-6,197(3)                  71.095
69-1329 et seq.              94.41
70-624.04                    33.46
70-1601                      50.01
70-1601 through 70-1615      50.04
70-1605                      50.03
70-1606                      50.03
70-1609                      50.03
70-1615                      50.03
71-1555 et seq.              150.086
71-1557                      150.086
71-1908 et seq.              134.05
71-4403                      96.25
71-4603                      93.01
71-4604.01                   150.086
71-4608                      118.99
71-4631                      118.99
71-4632                      118.99
72-2006                      150.086
72-2010                      150.086
77-2365.01                   35.04
77-2366                      35.04
77-27,142                    35.36
81-201                       96.11
81-501.01 to 81-531          32.047
81-506                       32.048
81-512                       32.047
81-1245 et seq.              112.16
81-15,117 et seq.            32.047
84-712 through 84-712.09     31.03
                             33.02,
                             33.04,
84-1407 to 84-1414           33.05,
                             33.11,
                             33.13
84-1408                      33.02
84-1409                      33.01,
                             33.04
84-1410                      33.06,
                             33.13
                             33.02,
                             33.04,
84-1411                      33.05,
                             33.07,
                             33.10
84-1411(7)                   33.02
84-1412                      33.11
84-1413                      33.08,
                             33.09
85-1603                      130.20
                             
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2023 Code
Prior Code         2023 Code
10.99              10.99
30.01              30.01
30.10              30.15
30.11              30.16
30.20              30.30
30.21              30.31
30.22              30.32
30.23              30.33
30.24              30.34
30.40              30.45
30.42              30.48
30.43              30.49
30.44              30.50
30.45              30.51
30.46              30.52
30.47              30.53
31.01              31.01
31.02              31.02
31.03              31.03
31.04              31.04
31.05              31.05
31.06              31.06
31.07              31.07
31.08              31.08
31.09              31.09
32.02              32.002
32.04              32.004
32.05              32.005
32.06              32.006
32.07              32.007
32.20              32.020
32.21              32.021
32.22              32.022
32.23              32.023
32.24              32.024
32.25              32.025
32.26              32.026
32.40              32.040
32.42              32.042
32.43              32.043
32.45              32.045
32.46              32.046
32.50              32.050
32.51              32.051
32.52              32.052
32.53              32.053
32.54              32.054
32.55              32.055
32.56              32.056
32.57              32.057
32.70              32.070
32.71              32.071
32.72              32.072
32.73              32.073
32.74              32.074
33.03              33.03
33.05              33.04
33.06              33.05
33.15              33.14
33.16              33.15
33.30              33.30
33.45              33.45
33.47              33.47
34.01              34.01
35.01              35.01
35.02              35.02
35.03              35.03
35.04              35.04
35.05              35.05
35.20              35.20
35.21              35.21
35.22              35.22
35.23              35.23
35.24              35.24
35.40              35.35
51.001             51.001
51.002             51.002
51.003             51.003
51.004             51.004
51.005             51.005
51.006             51.006
51.007             51.007
51.008             51.008
51.009             51.009
51.010             51.010
51.011             51.011
51.012             51.012
51.013             51.013
51.014             51.014
51.015             51.015
51.030             51.030
51.031             51.031
51.032             51.032
51.033             51.033
51.034             51.034
51.035             51.035
51.036             51.036
51.037             51.037
51.038             51.038
51.039             51.039
51.040             51.040
51.041             51.041
51.060             51.055
51.061             51.056
51.062             51.057
51.063             51.058
51.064             51.059
51.065             51.060
51.066             51.061
51.080             51.075
51.081             51.076
51.082             51.077
51.083             51.078
51.084             51.079
51.085             51.080
51.086             51.081
51.087             51.082
51.088             51.083
51.100             51.095
51.101             51.096
51.102             51.097
51.103             51.098
51.104             51.099
51.105             51.100
51.106             51.101
51.107             51.102
51.108             51.103
51.109             51.104
51.110             51.105
51.111             51.106
51.112             51.107
51.113             51.108
51.125             51.120
51.126             51.121
51.127             51.122
51.128             51.123
51.129             51.124
51.130             51.125
51.131             51.126
51.140             51.140
51.141             51.141
51.142             51.142
51.143             51.143
51.144             51.144
51.145             51.145
51.146             51.146
51.147             51.147
51.148             51.148
51.149             51.149
51.150             51.150
51.151             51.151
51.152             51.152
51.999             51.999
52.01              52.01
52.02              52.02
52.03              52.03
52.04              52.04
52.05              52.05
52.06              52.06
52.07              52.07
52.20              52.20
52.21              52.21
52.22              52.22
52.23              52.23
52.24              52.24
52.25              52.25
52.26              52.26
52.27              52.27
52.99              52.99
53.01              53.01
53.02              53.02
53.03              53.03
53.20              53.15
53.21              53.16
53.40              53.30
53.41              53.31
53.42              53.32
53.43              53.33
53.44              53.34
53.45              53.35
53.46              53.36
53.47              53.37
54.01              54.01
54.02              54.02
54.03              54.03
54.04              54.04
54.05              54.05
54.06              54.06
54.07              54.07
54.08              54.08
54.09              54.09
54.10              54.10
54.11              54.11
54.30              54.25
54.31              54.26
54.32              54.27
54.33              54.28
70.02              70.02
70.03              70.03
70.04              70.04
70.05              70.05
70.06              70.06
70.07              70.07
70.08              70.08
70.20              70.20
70.21              70.21
70.22              70.22
70.23              70.23
70.24              70.24
70.25              70.25
70.90              70.40
70.91              70.41
70.92              70.42
70.93              70.43
70.99              70.99
71.01              71.001
71.02              71.002
71.03              71.003
71.04              71.004
71.05              71.005
71.06              71.006
71.07              71.007
71.08              71.008
71.09              71.009
71.10              71.010
71.11              71.011
71.12              71.012
71.13              71.013
71.14              71.014
71.15              71.015
71.16              71.016
71.30              71.030
71.31              71.031
71.32              71.032
71.33              71.033
71.34              71.034
71.35              71.035
71.50              71.050
71.51              71.051
71.60              71.065
71.61              71.066
71.62              71.067
71.63              71.068
71.64              71.069
71.70              71.080
71.71              71.081
71.80              71.095
71.99              71.999
72.01              72.01
72.02              72.02
72.03              72.03
72.04              72.04
72.05              72.05
72.06              72.06
72.07              72.07
72.08              72.08
72.09              72.09
72.10              72.10
72.11              72.11
72.20              72.25
72.21              72.26
72.22              72.27
72.99              72.99
73.01              73.01
73.02              73.02
73.10              73.03
73.20              73.20
73.21              73.21
73.22              73.22
73.23              73.23
73.24              73.24
73.30              73.35
73.31              73.36
73.32              73.37
73.33              73.38
73.34              73.39
73.35              73.40
73.40              73.04
73.50              73.55
73.51              73.56
73.52              73.57
73.53              73.58
73.99              73.99
Ch. 74, Sched. I   Ch. 74, Sched. I
Ch. 75, Sched. I   Ch. 75, Sched. I
Ch. 75, Sched. II  Ch. 75, Sched. II
Ch. 75. Sched. III Ch. 75, Sched. III
76.01              76.01
76.02              76.02
76.03              76.03
76.04              76.04
76.05              76.05
76.99              76.99
90.20              90.25
90.21              90.26
90.22              90.27
90.23              90.28
91.01              91.01
91.02              91.02
91.03              91.03
91.04              91.04
91.05              91.05
91.99              91.99
92.01              92.01
92.02              92.02
92.03              92.03
92.04              92.04
92.05              92.05
92.06              92.06
92.20              92.20
92.21              92.21
92.22              92.22
92.23              92.23
92.30              92.35
92.31              92.36
92.32              92.37
92.33              92.38
92.34              92.39
94.01              94.01
94.02              94.02
94.03              94.03
94.10              94.15
94.11              94.16
94.12              94.17
94.13              94.18
94.14              94.19
94.15              94.20
94.16              94.21
94.17              94.22
94.18              94.23
94.19              94.24
94.20              94.25
94.21              94.26
94.30              94.40
94.31              94.41
94.32              94.45
94.34              94.44
94.35              94.45
94.36              94.46
94.37              94.47
95.01              95.01,
                   95.99
95.02              95.02
95.03              95.03
95.04              95.04
95.05              95.05
95.06              95.06
95.07              95.07
95.08              95.08
95.20              95.20
95.21              95.21
95.22              95.22
95.23              95.23
95.24              95.24
95.26              95.26
95.27              95.27
95.40              95.40
95.41              95.41
95.42              95.42
95.43              95.43
95.44              95.44
95.45              95.45
95.46              95.46
95.47              95.47
95.48              95.48
95.49              95.49
95.50              95.50
95.51              95.51
95.52              95.52
95.53              95.53
95.54              95.54
96.02              96.02
96.03              96.03
96.04              96.04,
                   96.99
96.05              96.05
96.06              96.06
96.07              96.07
96.08              96.08
96.09              96.09
96.10              96.10
96.12              96.12
96.20              96.25
96.21              96.26
96.30              96.40
96.31              96.41
96.32              96.42
96.33              96.43
96.90              96.55
96.91              96.56
96.92              96.57
96.93              96.58
96.94              96.59
97.01              97.01
97.02              97.02
97.03              97.03
97.04              97.04
97.05              97.05
97.06              97.06
97.07              97.07
97.08              97.08
97.09              97.09
97.10              97.10
98.01              98.01
98.02              98.02
98.03              98.03
98.04              98.04
98.05              98.05
98.06              98.06
98.07              98.07
98.08              98.08
98.09              98.09
98.10              98.10
98.11              98.11
98.12              98.12
98.13              98.13
98.14              98.14
98.15              98.15
98.16              98.16
98.17              98.17
98.18              98.18
110.01             110.01
110.20             110.15
110.21             110.16
110.22             110.17
110.23             110.18
110.24             110.19
110.30             110.30
110.31             110.31
110.32             110.32
110.33             110.33
110.34             110.34
110.35             110.35
111.01             111.01
111.02             111.02
111.03             111.03
111.05             111.05
111.06             111.06
112.01             112.01
112.02             112.02
112.03             112.03
112.04             112.04
113.01             113.01
113.02             113.02
113.03             113.03
113.04             113.04
113.05             113.05
113.06             113.06
113.07             113.07
113.08             113.08
113.09             113.09
115.01             115.01
115.02             115.02
115.03             115.03
115.04             115.04
115.05             115.05
115.06             115.06
130.01             130.01
130.02             130.02
130.03             130.03
130.04             130.04
130.10             131.01
130.11             131.02
130.12             131.03
130.20             132.01
130.21             132.02
130.22             132.03
130.23             132.04
130.24             132.05
130.25             132.06
130.27             132.08
130.28             132.09
130.33             130.20
130.34             130.21
130.35             130.22
130.36             130.23
130.37             130.24
130.38             130.25
130.39             130.26
130.40             130.27
130.41             130.28
130.42             130.29
130.43             130.30
130.44             130.31
130.47             130.34
130.48             130.34
130.49             130.99
130.50             133.01
130.51             133.02
130.52             133.03
130.54             133.05
130.55             133.06
130.60             131.15
130.61             131.16
130.70             134.01
130.71             134.02
130.72             134.03
130.75             134.05
130.76             134.05
130.77             134.05
130.83             133.23
130.90             130.05
150.001            150.001
150.002            150.002
150.003            150.003
150.004            150.004
150.007            150.005
150.031            150.021
150.032            150.022
150.033            150.023
150.034            150.024
150.035            150.025
150.036            150.026
150.037            150.027
150.038            150.028
150.060            150.040
150.061            150.041
150.062            150.042
150.063            150.043
150.064            150.044
150.065            150.045
150.066            150.046
150.067            150.047
150.068            150.048
150.080            150.060
150.081            150.061
150.082            150.062
150.083            150.063
150.084            150.064
150.085            150.065
150.086            150.066
150.087            150.067
150.088            150.068
150.089            150.069
150.090            150.070
150.091            150.071
150.092            150.072
150.093            150.073
150.110            150.085
150.111            150.086
150.112            150.087
150.130            150.100
150.131            150.101
150.132            150.102
150.133            150.103
150.134            150.104
150.135            150.105
150.136            150.106
150.137            150.107
150.138            150.108
150.139            150.109
150.140            150.110
150.141            150.111
150.142            150.112
150.143            150.113
150.500            150.125
150.501            150.126
150.502            150.127
150.503            150.128
150.504            150.129
150.505            150.130
150.506            150.131
150.507            150.132
150.508            150.133
150.509            150.134
150.510            150.135
150.511            150.136
150.512            150.137
150.513            150.138
150.514            150.139
150.515            150.140
150.516            150.141
150.517            150.142
150.518            150.143
150.519            150.144
150.520            150.145
150.521            150.146
150.522            150.147
150.523            150.148
150.524            150.149
150.525            150.150
150.526            150.151
150.527            150.152
150.528            150.153
150.550            150.165
150.551            150.166
150.552            150.167
150.553            150.168
150.554            150.169
150.555            150.170
150.556            150.171
150.557            150.172
150.558            150.173
150.559            150.174
150.560            150.999
150.900            150.185
150.902            150.187
150.904            150.189
151.01             151.01
151.02             151.02
151.03             151.03
151.04             151.04
151.05             151.05
151.06             151.06
151.07             151.07
151.08             151.08
151.09             151.09
151.10             151.10
151.11             151.11
152.01             152.01
153.01             153.01
154.01             154.01
                   
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Description
11-80-2  10-10-1980  72.07
12-00-1  12-11-2000  Ch. 75, Sched. I
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
865      - -         72.06,
                     72.99
1084     - -         72.99
1694     - -         33.03
2044     - -         72.01
-        9-19-1939   94.03
237      9-16-1941   51.060
270      5-1-1948    92.04
271      7-6-1948    110.34
312      1-5-1950    96.02,
                     96.58
318      2-20-1951   51.041
337      3-18-1952   54.01,
                     54.09
339      4-7-1952    131.02
                     71.001,
                     71.004,
                     71.008,
340      4-15-1952   71.031,
                     71.032,
                     71.999,
                     72.03
374      3-26-1956   71.033
455      5-5-1964    32.002
464      8-4-1964    133.02
467      8-18-1964   95.04
496      6-15-1965   71.003
554      7-19-1966   94.22
                     71.080,
558      9-6-1966    71.081,
                     Ch. 74, Sched. II
559      9-6-1966    72.04
560      9-6-1966    71.011
575      5-16-1967   32.002
585      9-19-1967   71.034
586      9-19-1967   71.050,
                     71.051
549      2- -1968    32.052
597      2-6-1968    71.030
612      7-8-1968    71.031
626      3-24-1969   54.03
647      7-14-1969   94.46
648      7-28-1969   151.11
                     30.15,
682      2-23-1970   30.33,
                     31.05
726      10-11-1971  71.080
809      11-26-1973  34.01
840      7-22-1974   71.030
847      10-14-1974  32.056
859      11-25-1974  32.006
862      12-9-1974   96.59
875      3-24-1975   Ch. 74, Sched. II
884      4-28-1975   96.26
885      4-28-1975   131.16
968      8-26-1976   Ch. 75, Sched. I
980      11-22-1976  30.32,
                     30.34
1001     2-14-1977   54.10
1062     10-24-1977  54.10
                     70.07,
1079     2-27-1978   71.012,
                     71.069
1099     6-12-1978   72.07,
                     72.99
1110     9-25-1978   70.02,
                     Ch. 74, Sched. I
1121     12-11-1978  51.031
1164     6-25-1979   Ch. 74, Sched. I
1170     7-23-1979   94.45
1188     2-11-1980   96.04,
                     96.99
1207     6-30-1980   70.43
1214     9-8-1980    Ch. 74, Sched. I
1217     10-27-1980  32.024
1238     4-13-1981   53.33
1267     8-9-1982    52.27
1268     8-9-1982    52.99
1270     10-25-1982  71.095
1291     12-12-1983  32.025
1292     12-12-1983  32.057
1296     2-13-1984   73.01,
                     73.03
1297     2-13-1984   71.014
1300     4-12-1984   153.01
1302     6-11-1984   71.002
1304     6-11-1984   132.06
1314     12-10-1984  32.007
1316     12-10-1984  130.05
1318     1-28-1985   Ch. 74, Sched. I
1335     9-9-1985    72.05
1339     11-11-1985  Ch. 74, Sched. I
1343     12-23-1985  Ch. 74, Sched. I
1340     1-13-1986   96.25
1348     7-28-1986   111.01
                     96.12,
1372     8-24-1987   96.40-
                     96.43
1379     3-14-1988   150.005,
                     150.023
                     150.100-
1382     3-14-1988   150.113,
                     150.125-
                     150.153
1389     6-13-1988   96.08
1391     6-27-1988   Ch. 75, Sched. III
1397     11-14-1988  30.34
1407     5-8-1989    Ch. 74, Sched. I
1408     5-22-1989   113.01-
                     113.09
                     95.04,
1417     10-24-1989  97.01-
                     97.10
1432     8-20-1990   150.001,
                     150.002
1140     1-14-1991   52.24,
                     52.25
1447     4-8-1991    51.033
1450     4-29-1991   96.56
1689     9-24-1991   54.25
1464     10-14-1991  111.03
1466     12-21-1991  52.23
1468     1-27-1992   133.22
1469     3-23-1992   111.03
1470     4-13-1992   53.16
1474     5-28-1992   97.08,
                     97.09
1475     6-8-1992    71.013,
                     Ch. 74, Sched. III
1476     6-8-1992    51.030,
                     51.031
1477     7-13-1992   150.070
1489     12-14-1992  30.31,
                     30.32
                     51.075-
                     51.083,
1493     1-25-1993   51.095-
                     51.104,
                     51.106-
                     51.108
1495     2-8-1993    31.08
1496     2-8-1993    31.02
1513     9-27-1993   53.16
1519     12-13-1993  71.035
                     53.01,
1525     4-25-1994   53.32,
                     53.34
1530     6-13-1994   54.03
                     51.033,
1531     6-13-1994   51.040,
                     51.056
1538     8-8-1994    53.15
1542     9-12-1994   97.04
1552     9-25-1995   71.066
1554     11-13-1995  150.003,
                     150.004
1555     11-27-1995  150.023
1556     11-27-1995  70.22,
                     72.05
1560     2-12-1996   111.02
-        3-4-1996    154.01
1564     4-8-1996    150.023,
                     150.048
1573     9-23-1996   51.061
1599     1-12-1998   96.07
                     53.03,
1604     1-26-1998   53.15,
                     53.30,
                     53.31
1611     4-13-1998   Ch. 74, Sched. I
1623     9-28-1998   54.25
1624     9-28-1998   51.030,
                     51.057
1630     1-11-1999   132.05
1633     3-1-1999    131.03
1641     7-26-1999   90.27
1644     9-27-1999   31.08
1648     10-25-1999  92.22
1655     12-13-1999  54.25
1656     12-13-1999  Ch. 74, Sched. I
1660     3-27-2000   Ch. 74, Sched. I
1663     6-26-2000   130.27
                     70.02,
1666     7-24-2000   70.23,
                     70.24,
                     70.99
1667     7-24-2000   71.999
1668     7-24-2000   132.02
1669     8-28-2000   95.27
1672     9-25-2000   54.25
1673     9-25-2000   51.057
1674     9-25-2000   52.23
1678     12-11-2000  150.061
                     73.01,
                     73.02,
1682     6-11-2001   73.20-
                     73.24,
                     73.99
                     96.03,
1685     7-23-2001   96.04,
                     96.99
1686     8-13-2001   94.01,
                     94.24
1690     9-24-2001   51.057
1691     9-24-2001   52.23
1692     9-24-2001   53.15
1702     1-28-2002   111.05
1703     2-11-2002   71.068,
                     Ch. 74, Sched. I
1705     4-8-2002    133.22
1711     6-10-2002   133.22
1712     6-24-2002   113.01-
                     113.09
                     32.005,
                     91.01-
1728     6-23-2003   91.05,
                     97.01-
                     97.10,
                     132.08
                     32.005,
1732     7-28-2003   91.03,
                     97.01
1737     9-22-2003   54.03,
                     54.25
1738     9-22-2003   53.15,
                     53.16
1739     9-22-2003   52.23
1740     9-22-2003   51.057
1780     9-27-2003   52.23
                     150.001-
1750     1-12-2004   150.003,
                     150.005
1760     5-10-2004   94.01,
                     94.18
1763     6-28-2004   151.01
1764     6-28-2004   133.02
1765     6-28-2004   72.08,
                     72.09
1771     8-23-2004   72.10
1778     9-27-2004   54.25
1779     9-27-2004   53.15,
                     53.16
1781     9-27-2004   51.057
1786     12-13-2004  10.99
1787     1-24-2005   Ch. 74, Sched. I
1788     1-24-2005   Ch. 74, Sched. II
1789     2-7-2005    Ch. 74, Sched. I
1795     4-25-2005   150.073
1799     8-8-2005    71.068,
                     Ch. 74, Sched. I
1804     9-12-2005   130.03
1806     9-26-2005   73.20
1809     9-26-2005   51.061
1811     9-26-2005   52.24
1815     10-10-2005  111.02,
                     111.03
1819     1-23-2006   150.048
1821     2-27-2006   130.04
1826     4-24-2006   92.39
1828     7-10-2006   134.05
1831     8-14-2006   53.37
1841     10-23-2006  130.34,
                     130.99
1845     4-9-2007    72.11
1850     6-11-2007   30.01
1851     7-9-2007    72.01
                     96.03,
1852     7-9-2007    96.04,
                     96.12,
                     96.99
1853     7-9-2007    98.01-
                     98.18
1854     9-10-2007   134.01
1862     3-10-2008   94.01
1864     4-14-2008   71.016
1868     6-23-2008   32.004
1870     7-14-2008   94.25,
                     94.40
1871     7-14-2008   111.06
1872     7-28-2008   33.14,
                     33.15
1880     10-27-2008  111.06
                     76.01-
1882     2-9-2009    76.05,
                     76.99
1891     6-22-2009   30.34
1894     7-27-2009   94.41
                     10.99,
                     130.24,
1901     9-28-2009   130.25,
                     131.01,
                     131.16
                     71.016,
1905     11-23-2009  113.02-
                     113.06
                     130.20,
1906     1-11-2010   130.21,
                     132.03,
                     133.05
1910     4-12-2010   130.21
                     130.27,
                     130.28,
1911     4-26-2010   132.05,
                     132.09,
                     133.23
1921     9-27-2010   96.07
                     73.01,
1923     11-8-2010   73.35-
                     73.40,
                     73.99
1924     11-8-2010   30.34
1925     11-8-2010   150.001
                     73.35-
1935     11-8-2010   73.40,
                     73.99
1926     11-22-2010  73.35
1929     12-7-2010   92.20
                     30.32,
1931     1-10-2011   30.33,
                     33.03
1933     3-14-2011   51.140-
                     51.152
1934     5-9-2011    72.08,
                     72.09
1940     9-26-2011   52.23
1947     10-24-2011  51.057
1935     11-8-2011   73.01
                     73.01,
1946     11-14-2011  73.55-
                     73.58
1951     2-29-2012   30.16,
                     32.021
1961     9-24-2012   51.056,
                     51.057
1964     10-22-2012  Ch. 74, Sched. I
1965     10-22-2012  Ch. 74, Sched. I
1966     1-14-2013   32.006
1967     1-14-2013   73.01,
                     73.04
                     51.120-
1969     3-11-2013   51.126,
                     51.999
1972     9-23-2013   52.23
1973     9-23-2013   53.15,
                     53.16
1974     9-23-2013   54.25
1943     11-25-2013  54.25
1979     3-10-2014   94.26
                     150.165-
1980     6-23-2014   150.174,
                     150.999
1984     9-22-2014   54.25
1985     9-22-2014   52.23
1986     9-22-2014   51.056,
                     51.057
1987     9-22-2014   53.15,
                     53.16
1990     4-13-2015   90.28
1991     4-27-2015   152.01
1996     6-8-2015    Ch. 74, Sched. III
1997     6-29-2015   113.01-
                     113.09
2003     7-27-2015   33.03
2010     9-28-2015   53.15,
                     53.16
2011     9-28-2015   52.23
2012     9-28-2015   54.25
2016     10-12-2015  111.02
2019     2-8-2016    153.01
2021     2-29-2016   153.01
2027     7- -2016    133.20-
                     133.22
2028     7-11-2016   Ch. 74, Sched. IV
2031     8- -2016    32.085-
                     32.091
2032     8-29-2016   153.01
2034     9-26-2016   53.15
2035     9-26-2016   51.057
2036     9-26-2016   52.23
2037     9-26-2016   54.25
2038     9-26-2016   95.01
2040     10-24-2016  153.01
2041     10-24-2016  72.01
2041     1- -2017    72.01
2047     5-8-2017    92.23
2051     9-25-2017   52.23
                     76.01-
2053-2   12-11-2017  76.05,
                     76.99
2060     - -2018     153.01
2061     - -2018     96.05
2062     - -2018     32.002
2063     - -2018     153.01
2064     - -2018     Ch. 74, Sched. I
                     70.03,
2065     - -2018     72.01,
                     Ch. 75, Sched. I
2059     2-12-2018   95.01
                     70.02,
                     70.07,
2065     5- -2018    71.012,
                     71.065-
                     71.067,
                     71.069
                     10.99,
2069     11-26-2018  72.08,
                     72.99
2072     12-10-2018  153.01
2078     - -2019     112.15-
                     112.24
                     55.01–
                     55.06,
                     55.15–
2079     - -2019     55.31,
                     55.50–
                     55.77,
                     55.99
                     117.01-
                     117.03,
                     117.15-
                     117.29,
2085     - -2019     117.40-
                     117.43,
                     117.55-
                     117.61,
                     117.99
2082     9-30-2019   51.057
2086     2-10-2020   150.001
2088     8- -2020    155.01
2090     9- -2020    91.20-
                     91.27
2091     9-28-2020   51.057
2105     - -2021     52.23
2106     - -2021     51.057
2107     - -2021     52.23
2097     - -2021     90.01-
                     90.11
2104     9- -2021    53.16
2114     - -2022     51.057
2115     - -2022     52.23
2116     - -2022     52.23
2117     - -2022     153.01
2118     - -2022     153.01
2110     5-23-2022   35.36
2113     9- -2022    53.15-
                     53.17
2121     - -2023     Ch. 74, Sched. III
2122     - -2023     50.02,
                     50.03
                     95.02,
2124     - -2023     113.10-
                     113.12,
                     133.02
                     118.01-
2126     - -2023     118.07,
                     118.99
2131     9- -2023    Adopting Ordinance
                     53.15,
2134     9- -2023    53.16,
                     53.17
2135     - -2023     51.057
2136     - -2023     52.23
2137     - -2023     55.32
2138     - -2023     54.25
2140     11- -2023   51.057
2141     - -2024     130.20
2144     - -         Ch. 75, Sched. I
                     53.15,
2147     - -2024     53.16,
                     53.17
2148     - -2024     51.057
2149     - -2024     52.23
2150     - -2024     155.01
2152     - -2025     32.041,
                     32.044
2153     - -2025     150.005
2154     - -2025     114.13
2155     - -2025     52.23
2156     - -2025     116.01–
                     116.11
2157     - -2025     119.01–
                     119.09
2159     - -2025     11.01
2161     - -2025     51.057
                     76.01–
2172     - -2025     76.05,
                     76.99
                    
 
 
 
