GIBBON, NEBRASKA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-4 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 708, passed 10-20-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
 www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
      
11.   CITY SEAL
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Section histories; statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances shall be designated as the Gibbon City Code
of Ordinances and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Gibbon,
Nebraska.
      CITY COUNCIL or GOVERNING BODY. The legislative body of the City of
Gibbon.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. The Gibbon City Code, as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COUNTY. Buffalo County, Nebraska.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR
and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Includes bodies politic and corporate, societies, communities,
the public generally, individuals, partnerships, limited liability companies,
joint-stock companies and associations.
(Neb. RS 49-801(16))
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Nebraska.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the following
rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the Mayor
and City Council or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever a section refers to another section hereof, that reference shall
extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised,
recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is materially altered by the
amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this city for the transaction of all city business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code contains all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to
the subjects enumerated and embraced in this code. All prior ordinances
pertaining to the subjects treated by this code are repealed, except that
nothing shall affect any rights acquired under, actions involving, or fines,
penalties, forfeitures or liabilities incurred pursuant to those ordinances
prior to repeal.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   (A)   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code, including
ordinances specified in this section, shall remain in full force and effect
unless repealed expressly or by necessary implication:
      (1)   Vacating or setting the boundaries of streets, alleys or other
public places;
      (2)   Annexing or detaching territory;
      (3)   Granting or accepting easements, plats or dedication of land to
public use;
      (4)   Providing for the acquisition or conveyance of real or personal
property;
      (5)   Authorizing or directing public improvements to be made;
      (6)   Levying taxes or special assessments;
      (7)   Appropriating money;
      (8)   Granting franchises or special licenses; or
      (9)   Providing for the issuance of bonds or other instruments of
indebtedness.
   (B)   All ordinances codified herein shall remain in full force and effect
unless repealed expressly.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance is repealed or modified
by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed
or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the ordinance
repealing or modifying it to give effect thereto.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, liability, fine, forfeiture or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to
its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be
prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in
force, unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
is itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former
ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
Statutory reference:
   Requirements for amendments and revisions, see Neb. RS 17-614
§ 10.16 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the text of
the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example: (Neb. RS 18-
132)
   (B)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
         § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
            This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection
or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
         Statutory reference:
            Inspection of public records, see Neb. RS 84-712 et seq.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this city code, unless
otherwise specifically provided herein, shall be deemed guilty of an offense
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not exceeding $500. A new
violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of failure to
comply with the provisions of this code.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to abate nuisances, see Neb. RS 18-1720 and 18-1722
   Authority to impose fines, see Neb. RS 17-505
CHAPTER 11: CITY SEAL
Section
   
11.01   Corporate seal; official corporate
§ 11.01 CORPORATE SEAL; OFFICIAL CORPORATE.
   The official corporate seal of the municipality shall be kept in the office
of the Municipal Clerk and shall bear the following inscription: “Corporate
Seal, City of Gibbon, Nebraska.” The Municipal Clerk shall affix an impression
of the said seal to all warrants, licenses, permits, ordinances and all other
official papers issued by order of the governing body and countersigned by the
Municipal Clerk.
(Neb. RS 17-502) (2000 Code, § 1-401)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   MAYOR AND COUNCIL
      
32.   APPOINTED CITY OFFICIALS
      
33.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
34.   ELECTIONS
      
35.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
30.01   Eminent domain
   
30.02   Municipal limits
§ 30.01 EMINENT DOMAIN.
   The governing body may, after negotiations in good faith have failed, bring
condemnation actions for the acquisition of property within the municipality.
Such procedure shall be prescribed by state law and damages shall be paid to
the condemned according to the provisions therein.
(Neb. RS 76-701 through 76-724) (2000 Code, § 1-1001)
§ 30.02 MUNICIPAL LIMITS.
   (A)   Defined. All additions, lots, lands, subdivisions and parcels of
ground included within the official municipal map and plat on file at the
office of the County Register of Deeds, having been by act or ordinance of the
governing body or by law duly annexed to or made a part of this municipality or
having been by the act, authority, acquiescence, consent, platting and
dedication of their respective owners, created either as the original town site
or as additions to the municipality are hereby declared to be within the
corporate limits of the municipality. Lawfully constituted additions or changes
in said municipal limits shall be indicated upon said maps and plat by the
governing body after such addition or changes have been completed in accordance
with the ordinances of this municipality and the laws of the state.
(2000 Code, § 11-101)
   (B)   Original plats. Each and all plats, lots, blocks, additions,
subdivisions, outlots and parcels of ground included within the corporate
limits of the municipality and not vacated of record prior to the enactment of
this section, including the original plat of the municipality, are hereby
accepted, approved and confirmed as valid and each and all of said lots,
blocks, additions, subdivisions and outlots as heretofore platted and recorded
in the office of the County Register of Deeds and not heretofore vacated and
all other parcels of ground, included within said corporate limits, are hereby
declared to be within said municipality and an integral part thereof.
(2000 Code, § 11-102)
CHAPTER 31: MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Section
Mayor and Council
   
31.001   City Mayor, selection and duties
   
31.002   City Council, acting President
   
31.003   Council; selection and duties
   
31.004   Organization
   
31.005   Vacancy
   
31.006   Mayor, vacancy
Meetings
   
31.020   Defined
   
31.021   Public body defined
   
31.022   Public meetings
   
31.023   Closed sessions
   
31.024   Emergency meetings
   
31.025   Minutes
   
31.026   Votes
   
31.027   Notice to news media
   
31.028   Public participation
   
31.029   Governing body
   
31.030   Agenda
   
31.031   Presiding officer
   
31.032   Call to order
   
31.033   Order of business
   
31.034   Reading of minutes
   
31.035   Robert’s Rules of Order
   
31.036   Rules of debate
   
31.037   Addressing Council
   
31.038   Manner of addressing Council; time limit
   
31.039   Decorum; generally
   
31.040   Preservation of decorum
   
31.041   Persons authorized to be in front of Clerk’s table
   
31.042   Protests by members against Council action
   
31.043   Motions to adjourn
   
31.044   Change in office
   
31.045   Organizational
   
31.046   Time and place
   
31.047   Open to public; notice; agenda
   
31.048   Council meetings; when; quorum; votes
Ordinances, Resolutions, and Motions
   
31.060   Grant of power
   
31.061   Introduction of ordinances
   
31.062   Procedure for resolutions and motions
   
31.063   Ordinances; style, title
   
31.064   Reading and passage of ordinances, resolutions, orders, bylaws
   
31.065   Publication or posting
   
31.066   Certificate of publication or posting
   
31.067   Effective date; emergency ordinances
   
31.068   Amendments and revisions
Bonds and Oaths
   
31.080   Bonds; requirements
   
31.081   Oath of office; city officials
Compensation; Conflicts of Interest
   
31.095   Compensation; how fixed; limitations
   
31.096   Conflict of interest involving contracts
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
§ 31.001 CITY MAYOR, SELECTION AND DUTIES.
   (A)   (1)   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council. The
Mayor may vote on any matter that requires either a majority vote of the City
Council or a majority vote of all the elected members of the City Council if:
(a) the Mayor’s vote is required due to the City Council members being equally
divided; or (b) a majority of the City Council members or majority vote of all
the elected members cannot be reached due to absence, vacancy, or abstention of
one or more City Council members. For purposes of such vote, the Mayor is
deemed to be a member of the City Council.
      (2)   The Mayor shall have superintendence and control of all the
officers and affairs of the city, and shall take care that the ordinances of
the city and all laws governing cities of the second class are complied with.
(Neb. RS 17-110)
   (B)   The Mayor shall have the power to veto or sign any ordinance passed by
the City Council and to approve or veto any order, bylaw, resolution, award of
or vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance of any claim. If the Mayor
approves the ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution, contract, or claim, he or she
shall sign it, and it shall become effective. If the Mayor vetoes the
ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution, contract, or any item or items of
appropriations or claims, he or she shall return it to the City Council stating
that the measure is vetoed. The Mayor may issue the veto at the meeting at
which the measure passed or within seven calendar days after the meeting. If
the Mayor issues the veto after the meeting, the Mayor shall notify the City
Clerk of the veto in writing. The Clerk shall notify the City Council in
writing of the Mayor’s veto. Any order, bylaw, resolution, award of or vote to
enter into any of two-thirds of the members of the Council. If the Mayor
neglects or refuses to sign any ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution, award of
or vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance of any claim, but fails to
veto the measure within the time required by this section, the measure shall
become effective without his or her signature. The Mayor may veto any item or
items of any appropriation bill or any claims bill, and approve the remainder
thereof, and the item or items vetoed may be passed by the Council over the
veto as in other cases.
(Neb. RS 17-111)
   (C)   The Mayor shall, from time to time, communicate to the City Council
such information and recommend such measures as, in his or her opinion, may
tend to the improvement of the finances, the police, health, security,
ornament, comfort, and general prosperity of the city.
(Neb. RS 17-112)
   (D)   The Mayor shall have the power to remove at any time an appointed
police officer of the municipality.
(Neb. RS 17-107)
   (E)   The Mayor shall have the power, when he or she deems it necessary, to
require any officer of the city to exhibit his or her accounts or other papers,
and to make reports to the Council, in writing, touching any subject or matter
pertaining to his or her office.
(Neb. RS 17-113)
   (F)   The Mayor shall have such jurisdiction as may be vested in him or her
by ordinance, over all places within five miles of the corporate limits of the
city, for the enforcement of any health or quarantine ordinance and regulation
thereof, and shall have jurisdiction in all matters vested in him or her by
ordinance, excepting taxation, within the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction
of the city.
(Neb. RS 17-114)
   (G)   The Mayor shall have the power to remit fines and forfeitures, and to
grant reprieves and pardons for all offenses arising under the ordinances of
the city.
(Neb. RS 17-117)
   (H)   The Mayor shall hold no other elective or appointive office or
employment with the city.
   (I)   The Mayor shall sign the City Clerk’s minutes of all meetings of the
City Council, and he or she shall sign all resolutions that have been passed
and warrants for the payment of money when ordered by the Council.
   (J)   The Mayor shall have such other duties as are reposed in the Mayor by
the laws of the State of Nebraska or as the Council may by resolution confer
upon the Mayor.
   (K)   The Mayor shall be elected at the municipal election and shall serve a
four-year term of office.
   (L)   Any candidate for Mayor must have resided within the municipality for
40 days prior to filing for the said office and must in addition be a qualified
taxpayer.
(2000 Code, § 1-101) (Ord. 687, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 31.002 CITY COUNCIL, ACTING PRESIDENT.
   (A)   The City Council shall elect one of its own body each year who shall
be styled the President of the Council and who shall preside at all meetings of
the City Council in the absence of the Mayor.
   (B)   In the absence of the Mayor and the President of the Council, the City
Council shall elect one of its own body to occupy his or her place temporarily,
who shall be styled acting President of the Council.
   (C)   Both the President of the Council and the acting President of the
Council, when occupying the position of the Mayor, shall have the same
privileges as the other members of the City Council and all acts of the
President of the Council, or acting President of the Council, while so acting,
shall be as binding upon the City Council and upon the municipality as if done
by the elected Mayor.
(Neb. RS 17-148) (2000 Code, § 1-102)
§ 31.003 COUNCIL; SELECTION AND DUTIES.
   The members of the City Council shall be elected and serve for a four-year
term. The City Council shall be the legislative division of the municipal
government, and shall perform such duties and have such powers as may be
authorized by law. The City Council shall maintain the peace, regulate
business, protect the public health and safety and assess such taxes and fees
as are necessary and appropriate in the exercise of these functions.
(Neb. RS 17-103, 17-104) (2000 Code, § 1-103)
§ 31.004 ORGANIZATION.
   City Council members of this municipality shall take office and commence
their duties on the first regular meeting in December following their election.
The newly elected Council members who have qualified as prescribed by law,
together with the members of the City Council holding over, shall assemble in a
regular meeting at the hour and place hereinafter prescribed and perfect the
reorganization of the City Council as herein provided, and all appointive
offices in which the terms of incumbents are expired shall be filled by
appointment. After the said meeting has been called to order, the Municipal
Clerk shall report to the City Council the names of all City Council members-
elect who have qualified for their respective offices, and this report shall be
spread upon the minutes of the meeting preceding the roll call. Each ward of
the municipality shall be represented by at least two Council members. No
person shall be eligible who is not at the time of his or her election an
actual resident of the ward for which he or she is qualified and should any
City Council member move from the ward from which he or she was elected, his or
her office shall thereby become vacant.
(Neb. RS 17-104, 17-107.02) (2000 Code, § 1-104)
§ 31.005 VACANCY.
   (A)   The office of a member of the City Council shall be vacant upon the
happening of any of the events specified in Neb. RS 32-560, except as provided
in Neb. RS 32-561.
   (B)   Any vacancy on the City Council shall be filled as provided in
division (C) below.
(Neb. RS 32-568)
   (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) or (C)(3)
below or § 30.03, vacancies in city elective offices shall be filled by the
Mayor and Council for the balance of the unexpired term. Notice of a vacancy,
except a vacancy resulting from the death of the incumbent, shall be in writing
and presented to the Council at a regular or special meeting and shall appear
as a part of the minutes of such meeting. The Council shall at once give public
notice of the vacancy by causing to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city or by posting in three public places in the city
the office vacated and the length of the unexpired term.
         (b)   The Mayor shall call a special meeting of the Council or place
the issue of filling such vacancy on the agenda at the next regular meeting, at
which time, the Mayor shall submit the name of a qualified registered voter to
fill the vacancy for the balance of the unexpired term. The regular or special
meeting shall occur upon the death of the incumbent or within four weeks after
the meeting at which such notice of vacancy has been presented. The Council
shall vote upon the nominee, and if a majority votes in favor of the nominee,
the vacancy shall be declared filled. If the nominee fails to receive a
majority of the votes, the nomination shall be rejected and the Mayor shall, at
the next regular or special meeting, submit the name of another qualified
registered voter to fill the vacancy. If the subsequent nominee fails to
receive a majority of the votes, the Mayor shall continue at that meeting to
submit the names of qualified registered voters in nomination, and the Council
shall continue to vote upon the nominations at such meeting until the vacancy
is filled. The Mayor shall cast his or her vote for or against the nominee in
case of a tie vote of the Council. All Council members present shall cast a
ballot for or against the nominee. Any member of the Council who has been
appointed to fill a vacancy on the Council shall have the same rights,
including voting, as if that person were elected.
      (2)   The Mayor and Council may, in lieu of filling a vacancy in a city
elected office as provided in division (C)(1) above, call a special city
election to fill such vacancy.
      (3)   If vacancies exist in the offices of one-half or more of the
members of the City Council, the Secretary of State shall conduct a special
city election to fill such vacancies. Candidates for such special election
shall file a candidate filing form pursuant to §
34.07(C).
(Neb. RS 32-569) (2000 Code, § 1-105) (Ord. 688, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 31.006 MAYOR, VACANCY.
   (A)   Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor or in the case of his
or her disability or absence, the President of the Council shall exercise the
office of Mayor until such vacancy is filled or such disability is removed, or
in the case of temporary absence, until the Mayor returns.
   (B)   When the successful candidate for Mayor shall be prevented from
assuming office, the incumbent Mayor shall not be entitled to hold over the
term, but such office shall automatically become vacant and the President of
the Council shall exercise the office of Mayor until such vacancy is filled.
   (C)   If the President of the Council shall for any cause assume the office
of Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term, there shall be a vacancy on
the Council which shall be filled as provided in §
31.005.
(Neb. RS 17-107, 17-115)
MEETINGS
§ 31.020 DEFINED.
   MEETINGS, as used in this subchapter, shall mean all regular, special or
called meetings, formal or informal, of a public body for the purposes of
briefing, discussion of public business, formation of tentative policy or the
taking of any action.
(Neb. RS 84-1409(2)) (2000 Code, § 1-501)
§ 31.021 PUBLIC BODY DEFINED.
   (A)   PUBLIC BODY, as used in this subchapter, shall mean:
      (1)   The governing body of the municipality;
      (2)    All independent boards, commissions, bureaus, committees,
councils, sub-units, certificate of need appeal panels or any other bodies now
or hereafter created by Constitution, statute or otherwise pursuant to law; and
      (3)    Advisory committees of the bodies listed above.
   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to subcommittees of such bodies unless
such subcommittees are holding hearings, making policy or taking formal action
on behalf of their parent body.
(Neb. RS 84-1409(1)) (2000 Code, § 1-502)
§ 31.022 PUBLIC MEETINGS.
   All public meetings as defined by law shall be held in a municipal public
building which shall be open to attendance by the public. All meetings shall be
held in the Council Chambers unless the publicized notice hereinafter required
shall designate some other public building or other specified place. The
advance publicized notice of all public convened meetings shall be
simultaneously transmitted to all members of the governing body and to the
public by a method designated by the governing body or by the Mayor if the
governing body has not designated a method. Such notice shall contain the time
and specific place for each meeting and either an enumeration of the agenda
subjects known at the time of the notice or a statement that such an agenda
kept continually current shall be readily available for public inspection at
the office of the Municipal Clerk. Except for items of an emergency nature, the
agenda shall not be altered later than 24 hours before the scheduled
commencement of the meeting. The governing body shall have the right to modify
the agenda to include items of an emergency nature only at such public
meetings. The minutes of the Municipal Clerk shall include the record of the
manner and advance time by which the advance publicized notice was given, a
statement of how the availability of an agenda of the then known subjects was
communicated, the time and specific place of the meetings and the names of each
member of the governing body present or absent at each convened meeting. The
minutes of the governing body shall be a public record open to inspection by
the public upon request at any reasonable time at the office of the Municipal
Clerk. Any official action on any question or motion duly moved and seconded
shall be taken only by roll call vote of the governing body in open sessions.
The record of the Municipal Clerk shall show how each member voted or that the
member was absent and did not vote.
(Neb. RS 84-1408, 84-1409, 84-1411, 84-1413) (2000 Code, § 1-503)
§ 31.023 CLOSED SESSIONS.
   (A)   Any public body may hold a closed session by the affirmative vote of a
majority of its voting members if a closed session is clearly necessary for the
protection of the public interest or for the prevention of needless injury to
the reputation of an individual and if such individual has not requested a
public meeting.
   (B)   Closed sessions may be held for but shall not be limited to such
reasons as:
      (1)   Strategy sessions with respect to collective bargaining real estate
purchases or litigation;
      (2)   Discussion regarding deployment of security personnel or devices;
      (3)   Investigative proceedings regarding allegations or criminal
misconduct; or
      (4)   Evaluation of the job performance of a person when necessary to
prevent needless injury to the reputation of a person and if such person has
not requested a public meeting.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall permit a closed meeting for discussion
of the appointment or election of a new member to any public body.
   (D)   The vote to hold a closed session shall be taken in open session. The
vote of each member on the question of holding a closed session, the reason for
the closed session and the time when the closed session commenced and concluded
shall be recorded in the minutes. The public body holding such a closed session
shall restrict its consideration to matters during the closed portions to only
those purposes set forth in the minutes as the reason for the closed session.
The meeting shall be reconvened in open session before any formal action may be
taken.
   (E)   Any member of any public body shall have the right to challenge the
continuation of a closed session if the member determines that the session has
exceeded the reason stated in the original motion to hold a closed session or
if the member contends that the closed session is neither clearly necessary
for: the protection of the public interest; or the prevention of needless
injury to the reputation of an individual. Such challenge shall be overruled
only by a majority vote of the members of the public body. Such challenge and
its disposition shall be recorded in the minutes.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that any meeting
be closed to the public. No person or public body shall fail to invite a
portion of its members to a meeting nor shall a public body designate itself a
subcommittee of the whole body for the purpose of circumventing the provisions
of this subchapter, nor shall any closed session, informal meeting, chance
meeting, social gathering or electronic communication be used for the purpose
of circumventing the provisions of this subchapter. The provisions of this
subchapter shall not apply to chance meetings or to attendance at or travel to
conventions or workshops of members of a public body at which there is no
meeting of the body then intentionally convened and there is no vote or other
action taken regarding any matter over which the public body has supervision,
control, jurisdiction or advisory power.
(Neb. RS 84-1410) (2000 Code, § 1-504)
§ 31.024 EMERGENCY MEETINGS.
   When it is necessary to hold an emergency meeting without reasonable advance
public notice, the nature of the emergency shall be stated in the minutes and
any formal action taken in such meeting shall pertain only to the emergency.
Such emergency meetings may be held by means of electronic or telecommunication
equipment. The provisions of §
31.027 shall be complied with in conducting emergency meetings. Complete
minutes of such emergency meetings specifying the nature of the emergency and
any formal action taken at the meeting shall be made available to the public by
no later than the end of the next regular business day.
(Neb. RS 84-1411) (2000 Code, § 1-505)
§ 31.025 MINUTES.
   (A)    Each public body shall keep minutes of all meetings showing the time,
place, members present and absent, and the substance of all matters discussed.
   (B)   The minutes of all meetings and evidence and documentation received or
disclosed in open session shall be public records and open to public inspection
during normal business hours.
   (C)   Minutes shall be written or kept as an electronic record and shall be
available for inspection within ten working days or prior to the next convened
meeting, whichever occurs earlier, except that the city may have an additional
ten working days if the employee responsible for writing or keeping the minutes
is absent due to a serious illness or emergency.
(2000 Code, § 1-506) (Ord. 665, passed 11-20-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 84-1412 and 84-1413
§ 31.026 VOTES.
   (A)   Any action taken on any question or motion duly moved and seconded
shall be by roll call vote of the public body in open session and the record
shall state how each member voted or if the member was absent or not voting.
The requirements of a roll call or voice vote shall be satisfied by the
municipality utilizing an electronic voting device which allows the yeas and
nays of each member of the governing body to be readily seen by the public.
   (B)   The vote to elect leadership within a public body may be taken by
secret ballot but the total number of votes for each candidate shall be
recorded in the minutes.
(Neb. RS 17-616, 84-1413) (2000 Code, § 1-507)
§ 31.027 NOTICE TO NEWS MEDIA.
   The Municipal Clerk, Secretary or other designee of each public body shall
maintain a list of the news media requesting notification of meetings and shall
make reasonable efforts to provide advance notification to them of the time and
place of each meeting and the subjects to be discussed at that meeting.
(Neb. RS 84-1411) (2000 Code, § 1-508)
§ 31.028 PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   Subject to this subchapter and the Open Meetings Act, Neb. RS 84-1407
et seq., the public has the right to attend and the right to speak at meetings
of public bodies, and all or any part of a meeting of a public body, except for
closed sessions called pursuant to §
33.07, may be videotaped, televised, photographed, broadcast, or recorded by
any person in attendance by means of a tape recorder, a camera, video
equipment, or any other means of pictorial or sonic reproduction or in writing.
Except for closed sessions called pursuant to § 33.07, a public body shall
allow members of the public an opportunity to speak at each meeting.
   (B)   It shall not be a violation of division (A) above for any public body
to make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations regarding the conduct of
persons attending, speaking at, videotaping, televising, photographing,
broadcasting, or recording its meetings, including meetings held by virtual
conferencing.
   (C)   No public body shall require members of the public to identify
themselves as a condition for admission to the meeting nor shall such body
require that the name of any member of the public be placed on the agenda prior
to such meeting in order to speak about items on the agenda. The body shall
require any member of the public desiring to address the body to identify
himself or herself, including an address and the name of any organization
represented by such person, unless the address requirement is waived to protect
the security of the individual.
   (D)   No public body shall, for the purpose of circumventing this subchapter
or the Open Meetings Act, Neb. RS 84-1407 et seq., hold a meeting in a place
known by the body to be too small to accommodate the anticipated audience.
   (E)   No public body shall be deemed in violation of this section if it
holds its meeting in its traditional meeting place which is located in this
state.
   (F)   No public body shall be deemed in violation of this section if it
holds a meeting outside of this state if, but only if, a member entity of the
public body is located outside of this state and the other requirements of Neb.
RS 84-1412 are met.
   (G)   The public body shall, upon request, make a reasonable effort to
accommodate the public's right to hear the discussion and testimony presented
at the meeting.
   (H)   Public bodies shall make available at the meeting, for examination and
copying by members of the public, at least one copy of all reproducible written
material to be discussed at an open meeting, either in paper or electronic
form. Public bodies shall make available at least one current copy of the Open
Meetings Act, Neb. RS 84-1407 et seq., posted in the meeting room at a location
accessible to members of the public. At the beginning of the meeting, the
public shall be informed about the location of the posted information.
(2000 Code, § 1-509) (Ord. 638, passed 2-22-2022; Ord. 689, passed 4-21-2025)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 84-1412
§ 31.029 GOVERNING BODY.
   The meetings of the governing body shall be held in the Council chambers.
Regular meetings shall be held on the third Monday of each month at the hour of
7:00 p.m. If the day fixed for any regular meeting of the Council falls upon a
day designated by law as a legal or national holiday, such meeting shall be
held the same hour on a following day as may be determined by the Council.
Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or by three members of the City
Council, the object of which shall be submitted to the Council in writing. The
call and object, as well as the disposition thereof, shall be entered upon the
journal by the Municipal Clerk. On filing the call for a special meeting, the
Municipal Clerk shall notify the Council members of the special meeting,
stating the time and its purpose. Notice of a special meeting need not be given
to a Council member known to be out of the state or physically unable to be
present. A majority of the members of the City Council shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business, but a smaller number may adjourn from
day to day and compel the attendance of the absent members; provided, that on
the request of any two members, whether a quorum is present or not, all absent
members shall be sent for and compelled to attend. At the hour appointed for
the meeting, the Municipal Clerk shall proceed to call the roll of members and
announce whether a quorum is present. If a quorum is present, the Council shall
be called to order by the Mayor, if present, or if absent, by the President of
the Council. In the absence of both the Mayor and the President of the Council,
the City Council members shall elect a President pro tempore.
(Neb. RS 17-105, 17-106) (2000 Code, § 1-510)
§ 31.030 AGENDA.
   All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract documents or
other matters to be submitted to the Council shall at least eight business
hours prior to each Council meeting, be delivered to the Municipal Clerk,
whereupon the Municipal Clerk shall immediately arrange a list of such matters
according to the order of business and furnish each member of the Council, the
City Administrator and the City Attorney with a copy of the same prior to the
Council meeting and as far in advance of the meeting as time for preparation
will permit.
(2000 Code, § 1-511)
§ 31.031 PRESIDING OFFICER.
   The presiding officer of the City Council shall be the Mayor or, in his or
her absence, the President of the Council. The presiding officer shall preserve
strict order and decorum at all regular and special meetings of the Council. He
or she shall state every question coming before the Council, announce the
decision of the Council on all subjects and decide all question of order,
subject, however, to an appeal to the Council in which event, a majority vote
of the Council shall govern and conclusively determine such questions of order.
Such appeal shall be immediately presented and voted upon by the Council. He or
she shall vote on all questions, his or her name being called last. He or she
shall sign all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Council during his or
her presence. In the event of the absence of the Mayor, the presiding officer
shall sign ordinances or resolutions as then adopted.
(2000 Code, § 1-512)
§ 31.032 CALL TO ORDER.
   (A)   The Mayor, or, in his or her absence, the President of the Council,
shall take the chair precisely at the hour appointed for the Council meeting
and shall immediately call the City Council to order. In the absence of the
Mayor or President of the Council, the Municipal Clerk or his or her assistant
shall call the Council to order whereupon a temporary Chairperson shall be
elected by the members of the Council present.
   (B)   Upon the arrival of the Mayor or President of the Council, the
temporary Chairperson shall immediately relinquish the chair upon the
conclusion of the business immediately before the Council. Before proceeding
with the business of the City Council, the Municipal Clerk or his or her deputy
shall call the roll of the members and the names of those present shall be
entered in the minutes.
   (C)   A majority of all the members elected to the City Council shall
constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the Council. In the
absence of a quorum, a smaller number may adjourn from time to time and compel
the attendance of absent members.
(2000 Code, § 1-513)
§ 31.033 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   All meetings of the City Council shall be open to the public.
   (B)   Promptly at the hour set by law on the day of each regular meeting,
the members of the Council, the Municipal Clerk, City Attorney and City
Administrator or their assistants shall take their regular stations in the
Council chambers and the business of the Council shall be taken up for
consideration and disposition in the following order:
       (1)   Roll call;
      (2)   Approval of minutes of previous meeting;
      (3)   Claims and payroll;
      (4)   Report of officers, boards and committees;
      (5)   Petitions, remonstrances and communications;
      (6)   Introduction and adoption of resolutions;
      (7)   Introduction of ordinances:
         (a)   First reading:
         (b)   Consideration; amendment; debate; and
         (c)   Second reading and final passage.
      (8)   Unfinished business;
      (9)    New business;
      (10)   Miscellaneous; and
      (11)   Adjournment.
(2000 Code, § 1-514)
§ 31.034 READING OF MINUTES.
   Unless a reading of the minutes of a City Council meeting is requested by a
member of the Council, such minutes may be approved without reading if the
Municipal Clerk has previously furnished each member with a synopsis thereof.
(2000 Code, § 1-515)
§ 31.035 ROBERT’S RULES OF ORDER.
   Unless otherwise specified or unless changed by a specific provision of this
subchapter, the City Council shall be governed in all matters of procedure by
that compilation of rules of procedure known as Robert’s Rules of Order.
(2000 Code, § 1-516)
§ 31.036 RULES OF DEBATE.
   (A)   Presiding office may debate and vote and the like. The Mayor or such
other member of the City Council as may be presiding may move, second and
debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are
imposed by these rules on all members and shall not be deprived of any of the
rights and privileges of a Council member by reason of his or her acting as the
presiding officer.
   (B)   Getting the floor; improper references to be avoided. Every member
desiring to speak shall address the chair and upon recognition by the presiding
officer, shall confine himself or herself to the question under debate,
avoiding all personalities and indecorous language.
   (C)   Interruptions. A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted
when speaking unless it is to call him or her to order or as otherwise provided
in this subchapter. if a member, while speaking, is called to order, he or she
shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined and if in order,
he or she shall be permitted to proceed.
   (D)   Yielding the floor. A member having the floor shall yield the same for
a point of order addressed to the chair, a question of personal privilege
raised by any member and an inquiry for information addressed to the chair. He
or she may upon request of any other member, temporarily yield the floor for
any interrogation or a statement by any member, at the conclusion of which he
or she will again be entitled to the floor.
   (E)   Limitation on debate.
      (1)   The Council may by general rule, limit debate or discussion on any
matter or may by motion adopted at the time, limit debate or discussion on any
particular subject or motion and may by majority vote of the members present,
extend any such limit.
      (2)   No member shall speak more than once on any subject under
discussion without permission from the presiding officer.
   (F)   Privilege of closing debate. The Council member moving the adoption of
an ordinance or resolution shall have the privilege of closing the debate.
   (G)   Motion to reconsider. A motion to reconsider any action taken by the
Council may be made only on the day such action was taken. It may be made
either immediately during the same session or at a recessed or adjourned
session thereof. Such motion must be made by one of the prevailing side, but
may be seconded by any member and may be made at any time and have precedence
over all other motions, or while a member has the floor and it shall be
debatable. Nothing in this division (G) shall be construed to prevent any
member of the Council from making or remaking the same or any other motion at a
subsequent meeting of the Council.
   (H)   When remarks of Council member entered in minutes. A Council member
may request, through the Mayor, the privilege of having an abstract of his or
her statement on any subject under consideration by the Council entered in the
minutes. If the Council consents thereto, such statement shall be entered in
the minutes.
   (I)   When synopsis of debate entered in minutes. The Municipal Clerk may be
directed by the Mayor with consent of the Council, to enter in the minutes a
synopsis of the discussion of any question coming regularly before the Council.
(2000 Code, § 1-517)
§ 31.037 ADDRESSING COUNCIL.
   (A)   The presiding officer of the City Council shall provide opportunity
during Council meetings for discussion by interested persons or their
authorized representatives on any Council bill or other matter before the
Council prior to final passage; provided, that the preference shall be given to
any person who, at least four days prior to the Council meeting, shall have
requested opportunity for discussion by written notice directed to the
Municipal Clerk.
   (B)   Any person may direct a written communication to the City Council on
any matter concerning the city’s business by directing the communication to the
City Council through the Municipal Clerk. Any such written communication shall
be placed on the agenda of the next regular Council meeting under the order of
business entitled “Petitions, Remonstrances and Communications.”
   (C)   Any person desiring to personally address the Council on any matter
not then before it shall notify the Municipal Clerk in writing of his or her
desire at least four days prior to the Council meeting at which he or she
wishes to appear.
   (D)   After a motion is made in the City Council, no person except a member
of the Council shall address the Council.
   (E)   The presiding officer of the Council shall from time to time, make
such rules as he or she may deem necessary to fulfill and carry out the intent
of the provisions of this section.
(2000 Code, § 1-518)
§ 31.038 MANNER OF ADDRESSING COUNCIL; TIME LIMIT.
   (A)   Each person addressing the City Council shall step up to the Municipal
Clerk’s table, shall give his or her name and address for the records and
unless further time is granted by the Council, shall limit his or her address
to five minutes.
   (B)   All remarks shall be addressed to the Council as a body and not to any
member thereof.
   (C)   No person, other than the Council and the person having the floor,
shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a
member of the Council, without the permission of the Mayor. No question shall
be asked a Council member, except through the presiding officer.
(2000 Code, § 1-519)
§ 31.039 DECORUM; GENERALLY.
   (A)   By Council members. While the City Council is in session, the members
shall preserve order and decorum and no member shall by conversation or
otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the Council, nor
disturb any member while speaking, nor refuse to obey the orders of the Council
or its Mayor except as otherwise provided in this subchapter.
   (B)   By other persons. No person shall make personal impertinent or
slanderous remarks, nor otherwise disturb the order and decorum of any Council
meeting. The sergeant-at-arms at the direction of the Mayor, shall remove any
person violating the provisions of this section.
(2000 Code, § 1-520)
§ 31.040 PRESERVATION OF DECORUM.
   (A)   The Chief of Police or such members of the Police Department as he or
she may designate shall be sergeant-at-arms of the City Council meetings.
   (B)   He or she shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the
Mayor for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the Council meetings.
(2000 Code, § 1-521)
§ 31.041 PERSONS AUTHORIZED TO BE IN FRONT OF CLERK’S TABLE.
   No person, except city officials, their representatives and recognized news
representatives, shall be permitted in front of the Municipal Clerk’s table in
the Council Chamber without the express consent of the Council.
(2000 Code, § 1-522)
§ 31.042 PROTESTS BY MEMBERS AGAINST COUNCIL ACTION.
   Any member shall have the right to have the reasons for his or her dissent
from or protest against any action of the City Council entered on the minutes.
(2000 Code, § 1-523)
§ 31.043 MOTIONS TO ADJOURN.
   A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be decided without
debate.
(2000 Code, § 1-524)
§ 31.044 CHANGE IN OFFICE.
   The change in office shall be made as follows: the Mayor and Council shall
meet on the first regular meeting date in December of each year in which a
municipal election is held and the outgoing officers and the outgoing members
of the Council shall present their reports and upon the old Council having
completed its business up to the said time, the outgoing members of the Council
shall surrender their offices to the incoming members and the outgoing officers
shall thereupon each surrender to his or her successor in office all property,
records, papers and moneys belonging to the same.
(Neb. RS 17-107.02(9)) (2000 Code, § 1-525)
§ 31.045 ORGANIZATIONAL.
   The newly elected Council shall convene at the regular place of meeting in
the city on the first regular meeting in December of each year in which a
municipal election is held immediately after the prior Council adjourns and
proceed to organize themselves for the ensuing year. The Mayor elected for the
new municipal year shall call the meeting to order. The Council shall then
proceed to examine the credentials of its members and other elective officers
of the city to see that each has been duly and properly elected and to see that
such oaths and bonds have been given as are required. After ascertaining that
all members are duly qualified, the Council shall then elect one of its own
body who shall be styled as “President of the Council.” The Mayor shall then
nominate his or her candidates for appointive offices. He or she shall then
proceed with the regular order of business. It is hereby made the duty of each
and every member of the Council or his or her successor in office, and of each
officer elected to any office, to qualify prior to the first regular meeting in
December following his or her election. All appointive officers shall qualify
within two weeks following their appointments. Qualification for each officer
who is not required to give bond shall consist in his or her subscribing and
taking an oath to support the Constitution of the United States, the
Constitution of the state, the laws of the municipality and to perform
faithfully and impartially the duties of his or her office, said oath to be
filed in the office of the Municipal Clerk. Each officer who is required to
give a bond shall file the required bond in the office of the Municipal Clerk
with sufficient sureties, conditioned on the faithful discharge of the duties
of his or her office, with the oath endorsed thereon.
(2000 Code, § 1-526)
§ 31.046 TIME AND PLACE.
   The regular meetings of the City Council shall be at the City Hall on the
third Monday of each and every month. The meeting shall begin at 7:00 p.m. If
the day fixed for a regular meeting of the Council falls upon a date designated
by law as a legal or national holiday, such meeting shall be held at the same
hour on the following day.
(2000 Code, § 1-527) (Ord. 553, passed 12-20-2010; Ord. 599, passed 7-17-2017;
Ord. 604, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 31.047 OPEN TO PUBLIC; NOTICE; AGENDA.
   (A)   The formation of public policy is public business and may not be
conducted in secret. Every meeting of a public body shall be open to the public
in order that citizens may exercise their democratic privilege of attending and
speaking at meetings of public bodies, except as otherwise provided by theState
Constitution, federal statutes, and the Open Meetings Act, Neb. RS 84-1407 et
seq.
(Neb. RS 84-1408)
   (B)   (1)   Each public body shall give reasonable advance publicized notice
of the time and place of each meeting as provided in division (B)(2) of this
section. The notice shall be transmitted to all members of the public body and
to the public.
      (2)   The notice shall be given by one of the following procedures:
         (a)   1.   A.   Publication in newspaper of general circulation within
the public body’s jurisdiction that is finalized for printing prior to the time
and date of the meeting;
               B.   Posting on such newspaper’s website, if available; and
               C.   Posting on a statewide website established and maintained
as a repository for such notices by a majority of state newspapers.
            2.   Such notice shall be placed in the newspaper and on the
websites by the newspaper.
         (b)   1.   A.   Posting to the newspaper’s website, if available; and
               B.   Posting on a statewide website established and maintained
as a repository for such notices by a majority of state newspapers if no
edition of a newspaper of general circulation within the public body’s
jurisdiction is to be finalized for printing prior to the time and date of the
meeting.
            2.   Such notice shall be placed in the newspaper and on the
websites by the newspaper.
         (c)   Posting written notice in three conspicuous public places in
such city, village, or district. Such notice shall be posted by the public body
in the same three places for each meeting.
      (3)   (a)   In case of refusal, neglect, or inability of the newspaper to
publish the notice, the public body shall:
            1.   Post such notice on its website, if available;
            2.   Submit a post on a statewide website established and
maintained as a repository for such notices by a majority of state newspapers;
and
            3.   Post such notice in a conspicuous public place in such public
body’s jurisdiction.
      (4)   Each public body shall record the methods and dates of the notice
in its minutes.
      (5)   The notice shall contain an agenda of subjects known at the time of
the publicized notice or a statement that the agenda, which shall be kept
continually current, is readily available for public inspection at the office
of the public body during normal business hours. Agenda items shall be
sufficiently descriptive to give the public reasonable notice of the matters to
be considered at the meeting. Except for items of an emergency nature, the
agenda shall not be altered later than 24 hours before the scheduled
commencement of the meeting or 48 hours before the scheduled commencement of a
meeting of the City Council scheduled outside the corporate limits of the city.
The public body shall have the right to modify the agenda to include items of
an emergency nature only at such public meeting. (Neb. RS 84-1411) (Ord. 629,
passed 6-21-2021; Ord. 690, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 31.048 COUNCIL MEETINGS; WHEN; QUORUM; VOTES.
   (A)   Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held at such times as
the Council may provide by ordinance. A majority of all the members elected to
the Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business, but
a fewer number may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of
absent members. When the City Council consists of four members as established
by ordinance or home rule charter, the Mayor shall be deemed a member of the
City Council for purposes of establishing a quorum when the Mayor's presence is
necessary to establish the quorum. Unless a greater vote is required by law, an
affirmative vote of at least one-half of the elected members shall be required
for the transaction of any business.
(Neb. RS 17-105)
   (B)   (1)   The Mayor or any three Councilmembers shall have power to call
special meetings of the City Council, the object of which shall be submitted to
the Council in writing; and the call and object, as well as the disposition
thereof, shall be entered upon the journal by the City Clerk.
(Neb. RS 17-106)
      (2)   On filing the call for a special meeting, the City Clerk shall
notify the Mayor and Councilmembers of the special meeting, stating the time
and purpose.
   (C)   Unless otherwise provided by the Council, on the request of any two
members, whether a quorum is present or not, all absent members shall be sent
for and compelled to attend.
   (D)   At the hour appointed for a meeting, the City Clerk shall proceed to
call the roll of members and announce whether a quorum is present. If a quorum
is present, the Council shall be called to order by the Mayor, if present, or
if absent, by the President of the Council.
(Ord. 630, passed 6-21-2021)
ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, AND MOTIONS
§ 31.060 GRANT OF POWER.
   In addition to its special powers specifically granted by law, the city
shall have the power to make all ordinances, bylaws, rules, regulations, and
resolutions, not inconsistent with the laws of the state, as may be expedient
for maintaining the peace, good government, and welfare of the city and its
trade, commerce, and manufactories, and to enforce all ordinances by inflicting
fines or penalties for the breach thereof, not exceeding $500 for any one
offense, recoverable with costs.
(Neb. RS 17-505)
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of standard codes, see Neb. RS 18-132 and 19-922
   Prosecution in county court, see Neb. RS 25-2703
§ 31.061 INTRODUCTION OF ORDINANCES.
   Unless the City Council provides otherwise, ordinances shall be introduced
by members of the City Council in one of the following ways:
   (A)   With the recognition of the Mayor, a member may, in the presence and
hearing of a majority of the members elected to the City Council, read aloud
the substance of the proposed ordinance and file a copy with the City Clerk for
future consideration; or
   (B)   With the recognition of the Mayor, a member may present the proposed
ordinance to the Clerk, who, in the presence and hearing of a majority of the
members elected to the City Council, shall read aloud the substance of the
ordinance and file it for future consideration.
§ 31.062 PROCEDURE FOR RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS.
   Unless the City Council provides otherwise, resolutions and motions shall be
introduced in one of the methods prescribed in §
31.061 for the introduction of ordinances. The issue raised by the resolution
or motion shall be disposed of in accordance with the usage of parliamentary
law adopted for the guidance of the City Council. A majority vote shall be
required to pass any resolution or motion. The vote on any resolution or motion
shall be by roll call vote.
§ 31.063 ORDINANCES; STYLE, TITLE.
   (A)   Style. The style of all city ordinances shall be: “Be it ordained by
the Mayor and Council of the City of Gibbon, Nebraska:….”
(Neb. RS 17-613)
   (B)   Title. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not clearly
expressed in the title.
(Neb. RS 17-614)
§ 31.064 READING AND PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, ORDERS, BYLAWS.
   (A)   (1)   All ordinances and resolutions or orders for the appropriation
or payment of money shall require for their passage or adoption the concurrence
of a majority of all elected members of the City Council. They Mayor may vote
on any such matter if: (i) the Mayor’s vote is required due to the City Council
members being equally divided; or (ii) a majority vote of all the elected
members of the City Council cannot be reached due to absence, vacancy, or
abstention of one or more City Council members. For purposes of such vote, the
Mayor is deemed to be a member of the City Council.
      (2)   Ordinances of a general or permanent nature shall be read by title
on three different days unless 3/4 of the City Council vote to suspend this
requirement. Such requirement shall not be suspended: (i) for any ordinance for
the annexation of territory, or the redrawing of boundaries for City Council
election districts or wards; (ii) or as otherwise provided by law.
      (3)   In case this requirement is suspended, the ordinance shall be read
by title and then moved for final passage.
      (4)   Three-fourths of the City Council may require a reading of any such
ordinance in full before enactment under either procedure set out in this
section.
(Neb. RS 17-614)
   (B)   On the passage or adoption of every bylaw or ordinance, and every
resolution or order to enter into a contract by the City Council, the yeas and
nays shall be called and recorded. To pass or adopt any bylaw, ordinance, or
any such resolution or order, a concurrence of a majority of the whole number
of members elected to the City Council shall be required. All appointments of
the officers by the City Council shall be made viva voce, and the concurrence
of a like majority shall be required, and the names of those, and for whom they
voted, on the vote resulting in an appointment, shall be recorded. The
requirements of a roll call or viva voce vote shall be satisfied by a city
which utilizes an electronic voting device which allows the yeas and nays of
each member of the City Council to be readily seen by the public.
(Neb. RS 17-616) (Ord. 644, passed 3-21-2022; Ord. 691, passed 4-21-2025)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-614 and 17-616
§ 31.065 PUBLICATION OR POSTING.
    All ordinances of a general nature shall, before they take effect, be
published within 15 days after they are passed:
   (A)   In legal newspaper in or of general circulation in the city or, if no
paper is published in the city, then by posting a written or printed copy in
each of three public places in the city; or
   (B)   In book, or pamphlet, or electronic form.
(Ord. 639, passed 2-22-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Additional provisions, see Neb. RS 18-131
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-613
§ 31.066 CERTIFICATE OF PUBLICATION OR POSTING.
   The passage, approval, and publication or posting of an ordinance shall be
sufficiently proved by a certificate under the seal of the city from the City
Clerk showing that the ordinance was passed and approved, and when and in what
paper the ordinance was published, or when and by whom and where the ordinance
was posted.
(Neb. RS 17-613)
Statutory reference:
   Passage; rules and regulations, see Neb. RS 17-615
§ 31.067 EFFECTIVE DATE; EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
31.065 and division (B) of this section, an ordinance for the government of the
city which has been adopted by the City Council without submission to the
voters of the city shall not go into effect until 15 days after the passage of
the ordinance.
(Neb. RS 19-3701)
   (B)   In the case of riot, infectious or contagious diseases, or other
impending danger, failure of a public utility, or any other emergency requiring
its immediate operation, an ordinance shall take effect upon the proclamation
of the Mayor and the posting thereof in at least three of the most public
places in the city. The emergency ordinance shall recite the emergency, be
passed by a three-fourths vote of the City Council, and be entered of record on
the City Clerk’s minutes.
(Neb. RS 17-613)
§ 31.068 AMENDMENTS AND REVISIONS.
   No ordinance or section thereof shall be revised or amended unless the new
ordinance contains the entire ordinance or section as revised or amended and
the ordinance or section so amended is repealed, except that an ordinance
revising all the ordinances of the city and modifications to zoning or building
districts may be adopted as otherwise provided by law.
(Neb. RS 17-614)
Statutory reference:
   Modifications to zoning or building districts, see Neb. RS 19-915
   Ordinances revising all the ordinances of the city, see Neb. RS 17-614
BONDS AND OATHS
§ 31.080 BONDS; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The city may enact ordinances or bylaws to require from all officers
and servants, elected or appointed, bonds and security or evidence of
equivalent insurance for the faithful performance of their duties. The city may
pay the premium for such bonds or insurance coverage.
(Neb. RS 17-604)
   (B)   (1)   All official bonds of officers of the city shall be in form
joint and several and made payable to the city in such penalty as the City
Council may fix.
      (2)   In place of the individual bonds required to be furnished by
municipal officers, a schedule, position, blanket bond or undertaking, or
evidence of equivalent insurance may be given by municipal officers, or a
single corporate surety fidelity, schedule, position, or blanket bond or
undertaking, or evidence of insurance coverage covering all the officers,
including officers required by law to furnish an individual bond or
undertaking, may be furnished. The municipality may pay the premium for the
bond or insurance coverage. The bond or insurance coverage shall be, at a
minimum, an aggregate of the amounts fixed by law or by the City Council, and
with such terms and conditions as may be required.
(Neb. RS 11-104)
      (3)   The penalty amount on any bond shall not fall below the legal
minimum, when one has been set by the state, for each particular official.
   (C)   (1)   Official bonds, with the oath endorsed thereon, shall be filed
in the City Clerk’s office within the following time:
         (a)    Of all officers elected at any general election, following
receipt of their election certificate and not later than ten days before the
first Thursday after the first Tuesday in January next succeeding the election;
         (b)   Of all appointed officers, within 30 days after their
appointment; and
         (c)   Of officers elected at any special election and city officers,
within 30 days after the canvass of the votes of the election at which they
were chosen.
      (2)   The filing of the bond with the oath endorsed thereon does not
authorize a person to take any official action prior to the beginning of his or
her term of office pursuant to Article XVII, section 5, of the Constitution of
Nebraska.
(Neb. RS 11-105)
   (D)   All official bonds of city officers shall be executed by the principal
named in such bonds and by at least two sufficient sureties who shall be
freeholders of the county in which such bonds are given, or any official bond
of a city officer may be executed by the officer as principal and by a
guaranty, surety, fidelity, or bonding company as surety, or by two or more
such companies. Only such companies as are legally authorized to transact
business in this state shall be eligible to suretyship on the bond of a city
officer.
(Neb. RS 11-109)
   (E)   The City Clerk shall carefully record and preserve the bonds in his or
her office and shall give certified copies thereof, when required, under the
seal of his or her office, and shall be entitled to receive for the same the
usual fee allowed by law for certified copies of records in other cases.
(Neb. RS 11-110)
   (F)   (1)   The approval of each official bond shall be endorsed upon such
bond by the officer approving the same, and no bond shall be filed and recorded
until so approved.
(Neb. RS 11-111)
      (2)   No bond shall be deemed to be given or complete until the approval
of the City Council and all sureties are endorsed in writing on the instrument
by the Mayor and City Clerk pursuant to the approval of the City Council.
   (G)   All official bonds shall obligate the principal and sureties for the
faithful discharge of all duties required by law of such principal and shall
inure to the benefit of any persons injured by a breach of the conditions of
such bonds.
(Neb. RS 11-112)
   (H)   No official bond shall be rendered void by reason of any informality
of irregularity in its execution or approval.
(Neb. RS 11-113)
   (I)   No city official shall be taken as security on the bond of any
administrator, executor, or other officer from whom by law bond is or may be
required.
(Neb. RS 11-114)
   (J)   If any person elected or appointed to any office neglects to have his
or her official bond executed and approved as provided by law and filed for
record within the time limited by this section, the City Clerk shall
immediately issue an order to such person to show cause why he or she has
failed to properly file such bond and why his or her office should not be
declared vacant. If such person properly files the official bond within ten
days of the issuance of the show cause order for appointed officials or before
the date for taking office for elected officials, such filing shall be deemed
to be in compliance with this section. If such person does not file the bond
within ten days of the issuance of such order for appointed officials or before
the date for taking office for elected officials and sufficient cause is not
shown within that time, his or her office shall thereupon ipso facto become
vacant and such vacancy shall thereupon immediately be filled by election or
appointment as the law may direct in other cases of vacancy in the same office.
(Neb. RS 11-115)
   (K)   Any person appointed to fill a vacancy, before entering upon the
duties of the office, must give a bond corresponding in substance and form with
the bond required of the officer originally elected or appointed, as herein
provided.
(Neb. RS 11-116)
   (L)   When the incumbent of an office is reelected or reappointed, he or she
shall qualify by taking the oath and giving the bond as above directed, but
when such officer has had public funds or property in his or her control, his
or her bond shall not be approved until he or she has produced and fully
accounted for such funds and property. When it is ascertained that the
incumbent of an office holds over by reason of the nonelection or
nonappointment of a successor or of the neglect or refusal of the successor to
qualify, he or she shall qualify anew within ten days from the time at which
his or her successor, if elected, should have qualified.
(Neb. RS 11-117)
   (M)   No person shall be surety for the same officer for more than two
successive terms of the same office, but this provision shall not apply to
incorporated surety companies.
(Neb. RS 11-118)
   (N)   If the sureties on the official bond of any appointed officer of the
city, in the opinion of the City Council, become insufficient, the Council may,
by resolution, fix a reasonable time within which the officer may give a new
bond or additional sureties as directed. If the officer fails, refuses, or
neglects to give a new bond or additional sureties to the satisfaction and
approval of the Council, the office shall, by such failure, refusal, or
neglect, become vacant and it shall be the duty of the Council to appoint a
competent and qualified person to fill the office.
§ 31.081 OATH OF OFFICE; CITY OFFICIALS.
   (A)   All officials of the city, whether elected or appointed, except when a
different oath is specifically provided herein, shall before entering upon
their respective duties take and subscribe the following oath, which shall be
endorsed upon their respective bonds:
      “I, ______________________________, do solemnly swear that I will support
the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Nebraska, against all enemies foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith
and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely and without
mental reservation or for the purpose of evasion; and that I will faithfully
and impartially perform the duties of the office of ____________________,
according to law and to the best of my ability. And I do further swear that I
do not advocate nor am I a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state
by force or violence; and that during such time as I am in this position I will
not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state
by force or violence. So help me God.”
   (B)   If any such officer is not required to give bond, the oath shall be
filed with the City Clerk.
(Neb. RS 11-101)
COMPENSATION; CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
§ 31.095 COMPENSATION; HOW FIXED; LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   The officers and employees of the city shall receive such compensation
as the Mayor and Council shall fix by ordinance.
(Neb. RS 17-108)
   (B)   The city may enact ordinances or bylaws to regulate and prescribe the
compensation of officers not provided for in state law.
(Neb. RS 17-604)
   (C)   No officer shall receive any pay or perquisites from the city other
than his or her salary. The City Council shall not pay or appropriate any money
or other valuable thing to any person not an officer for the performance of any
act, service, or duty, the doing or performance of which shall come within the
proper scope of the duties of any officer of the city.
(Neb. RS 17-611)
   (D)   The salary of any elective officer shall not be increased or
diminished during the term for which he or she shall have been elected, except
when there has been a combination and merger of offices as provided in §
32.03, except that when there are officers elected to the Council, or any other
board or commission having more than one member and the terms of one or more
members commence and end at different times, the compensation of all members of
such council, board or commission may be increased or diminished at the
beginning of the full term of any member thereof. No person who shall have
resigned or vacated any office shall be eligible to the same during the time
for which he or she was elected if during the same time the emoluments thereof
were increased.
(Neb. RS 17-612)
§ 31.096 CONFLICT OF INTEREST INVOLVING CONTRACTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BUSINESS ASSOCIATION.
         (a)   A business:
            (i)   In which the individual is a partner, limited liability
company member, director or officer; or
            (ii)   In which the individual or a member of the individual's
immediate family is a stockholder of closed corporation stock worth $1,000 or
more at fair market value or which represents more than a 5% equity interest or
is a stockholder of publicly traded stock worth $10,000 or more at fair market
value or which represents more than 10% equity interest.
         (b)   An individual who occupies a confidential professional
relationship protected by law shall be exempt from this definition. This
definition shall not apply to publicly traded stock under a trading account if
the filer reports the name and address of the stockbroker.
      IMMEDIATE FAMILY. A child residing in an individual's household, a spouse
of an individual, or an individual claimed by that individual or that
individual's spouse as a dependent for federal income tax purposes.
      OFFICER.
         (a)   Includes:
            (i)   A member of any board or commission of the city which spends
and administers its own funds, who is dealing with a contract made by such
board or commission; or
            (ii)   Any elected city official.
         (b)   OFFICER does not mean volunteer firefighters or ambulance
drivers with respect to their duties as firefighters or ambulance drivers.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 49-1499.04 or 70-624.04, no
officer may have an interest in any contract to which his or her governing
body, or anyone for its benefit, is a party. The existence of such an interest
in any contract shall render the contract voidable by decree of a court of
competent jurisdiction as to any person who entered into the contract or took
assignment of the contract with actual knowledge of the prohibited conflict. An
action to have a contract declared void under this section may be brought by
the County Attorney, the governing body, or any resident within the
jurisdiction of the governing body and shall be brought within one year after
the contract is signed or assigned. The decree may provide for the
reimbursement of any person for the reasonable value of all money, goods,
material, labor, or services furnished under the contract, to the extent that
the governing body has benefitted thereby.
      (2)   The prohibition in this division (B) shall apply only when the
officer or his or her parent, spouse, or child:
         (a)   Has a business association with the business involved in the
contract; or
         (b)   Will receive a payment, fee, or commission as a result of the
contract.
   (C)   Division (B) of this section does not apply if the contract is an
agenda item approved at a meeting of the governing body and the interested
officer:
      (1)   Makes a declaration on the record to the governing body responsible
for approving the contract regarding the nature and extent of his or her
interest prior to official consideration of the contract;
      (2)   Does not vote on the matters of granting the contract, making
payments pursuant to the contract, or accepting performance of work under the
contract, or similar matters relating to the contract, except that if the
number of members of the governing body declaring an interest in the contract
would prevent the body with all members present from securing a quorum on the
issue, then all members may vote on the matters; and
      (3)   Does not act for the governing body which is a party to the
contract as to inspection or performance under the contract in which he or she
has an interest.
   (D)   The receiving of deposits, cashing of checks, and buying and selling
of warrants and bonds of indebtedness of any such governing body by a financial
institution shall not be considered a contract for purposes of this section.
The ownership of less than 5% of the outstanding shares of a corporation shall
not constitute an interest within the meaning of this section.
   (E)   If an officer's parent, spouse, or child is an employee of the
officer's governing body, the officer may vote on all issues of the contract
which are generally applicable to all employees, or all employees within a
classification, and do not single out his or her parent, spouse, or child for
special action.
   (F)   Neb. RS 49-14,102 does not apply to contracts covered by this section.
   (G)   (1)   The person charged with keeping records for the governing body
shall maintain separately from other records a ledger containing the
information listed in divisions (a) through (e) of this subdivision about every
contract entered into by the governing body in which an officer of the body has
an interest and for which disclosure is made pursuant to division (C) of this
section. This information shall be kept in the ledger for five years from the
date of the officer's last day in office and shall include:
         (a)   The names of the contracting parties;
         (b)   The nature of the interest of the officer in question;
         (c)   The date that the contract was approved by the governing body;
         (d)   The amount of the contract; and
         (e)   The basic terms of the contract.
      (2)   The information supplied relative to the contract shall be provided
no later than ten days after the contract has been signed by both parties. The
ledger kept pursuant to this division (G) shall be available for public
inspection during the normal working hours of the office in which it is kept.
   (H)   An open account established for the benefit of any governing body with
a business in which an officer has an interest shall be deemed a contract
subject to this section. The statement required to be filed by division (G) of
this section shall be filed within ten days after the account is opened.
Thereafter, the person charged with keeping records for the governing body
shall maintain a running account of amounts purchased on the open account.
Purchases made from petty cash or a petty cash fund shall not be subject to
this section.
   (I)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) through (H) of this section, the
governing body may prohibit contracts over a specific dollar amount in which an
officer of the governing body may have an interest.
   (J)   The governing body may exempt from divisions (A) through (H) of this
section, contracts involving $100 or less in which an officer of that body may
have an interest.
(Ord. 640, passed 2-22-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Other provisions on conflicts of interest, see Neb. RS 18-305 through 18-312
and 49-1499.03 through 49-14,103
   Penalty for violation of restrictions on contracts, see Neb. RS 49-14,103.04
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 49-1408, Neb. RS 49-1425, Neb. RS 49-
14,103.01 through Neb. RS 49-14,103.03, Neb. RS 49-14,103.05 and Neb. RS 49-
14,103.06
CHAPTER 32: APPOINTED CITY OFFICIALS
Section
   
32.01   Appointment; terms; removal; powers; duties
   
32.02   Qualification for office
   
32.03   Merger of offices
   
32.04   City Clerk
   
32.05   City Treasurer
   
32.06   City Attorney
   
32.07   Fire Chief
   
32.08   City Engineer; Special Engineer
   
32.09   City Administrator
   
32.10   Building Inspector
   
32.11   Electrical Inspector
   
32.12   Plumbing Inspector
Cross-reference:
   City Organizations, see
Chapter 33
   Mayor and Council, see
Chapter 31
§ 32.01 APPOINTMENT; TERMS; REMOVAL; POWERS; DUTIES.
   (A)   (1)   The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, may appoint
such officers as shall be required by ordinance or otherwise required by law.
Such officers may be removed from office by the Mayor.
      (2)   The terms of office for all officers, except regular police
officers, appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council shall be
established by the City Council by ordinance. The ordinance shall provide that
either:
         (a)   The officers hold the office to which they have been appointed
until the end of the Mayor’s term of office and until their successors are
appointed and qualified unless sooner removed; or
         (b)   The officers hold office for one year unless sooner removed.
(Neb. RS 17-107)
   (B)   (1)   The city may enact ordinances or bylaws to regulate and
prescribe the powers and duties of officers not provided for in state law.
(Neb. RS 17-604)
      (2)   If the Mayor and City Council appoint any of the officials
specified in this chapter or any other officials, the officials shall have the
powers and duties, if any, provided in this chapter or as otherwise provided by
city ordinances and state law.
§ 32.02 QUALIFICATION FOR OFFICE.
   Each appointive officer who is required to give bond shall qualify by filing
the required bond and oath as provided in §§
31.080 and
31.081. Each appointive officer who is not required to give bond shall qualify
by filing the required oath as provided in §
31.081.
§ 32.03 MERGER OF OFFICES.
   (A)   The City Council may at its discretion by ordinance combine and merge
any elective or appointive office or employment or any combination of duties of
any such offices or employments, except Mayor and Councilmember, with any other
elective or appointive office or employment so that one or more of such offices
or employments or any combination of duties of any such offices or employments
may be held by the same officer or employee at the same time.
   (B)   The offices or employments so merged and combined shall always be
construed to be separate, and the effect of the combination or merger shall be
limited to a consolidation of official duties only.
   (C)   The salary or compensation of the officer or employee holding the
merged and combined offices or employments or offices and employments shall not
be in excess of the maximum amount provided by law for the salary or
compensation of the office, offices, employment, or employments so merged and
combined.
   (D)   For purposes of this section, volunteer firefighters and ambulance
drivers shall not be considered officers.
(Neb. RS 17-108.02)
§ 32.04 CITY CLERK.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall have the custody of all laws and ordinances and
shall keep a correct journal of the proceedings of the City Council. After the
period of time specified by the State Records Administrator pursuant to the
Records Management Act, the Clerk may transfer the journal of the proceedings
of the City Council to the State Archives of the Nebraska State Historical
Society for permanent preservation. The Clerk shall also perform such other
duties as may be required by the ordinances of the city. If the Clerk is acting
as the Treasurer, he or she shall also comply with the requirements of §
32.05.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the Clerk to prepare and publish the
official proceedings of the City Council within 30 days after any meeting of
the Council. The publication shall be in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city, shall set forth a statement of the proceedings of the meeting, and
shall also include the amount of each claim allowed, the purpose of the claim,
and the name of the claimant, except that the aggregate amount of all payroll
claims may be included as one item. Between July 15 and August 15 of each year,
the employee job titles and the current annual, monthly, or hourly salaries
corresponding to such job titles shall be published. Each job title published
shall be descriptive and indicative of the duties and functions of the
position. The charge for the publication shall not exceed the rates provided
for in Neb. RS 23-122.
      (2)   Publication under division (B)(1) shall be made in one legal
newspaper of general circulation in the city. If no legal newspaper is
published in the city, then the publication shall be made in one legal
newspaper published or of general circulation within the county in which the
city is located. The cost of publication shall be paid out of the general funds
of the city.
   (C)   The Clerk shall dispose of or destroy city public records when the
records have been determined to be of no further legal, administrative, fiscal,
or historical value by the State Records Administrator pursuant to the Records
Management Act. This shall not apply to the minutes of the Clerk and the
permanent ordinance and resolution books, or any other record classified as
permanent by the State Records Administrator.
   (D)   (1)   The Clerk shall permit any person to examine and copy the public
records in the Clerk's custody, and may charge a fee for providing copies of a
public record, as provided in Neb. RS 84-712 through 84-712.09.
      (2)   The Clerk may charge a reasonable fee for certified copies of any
record in his or her office as set by resolution of the City Council.
   (E)   The Clerk shall permit no records, public papers, or other documents
of the city kept and preserved in his or her office to be taken therefrom,
except by such officers of the city as may be entitled to the use of the same,
but only upon their leaving a receipt therefor, and except pursuant to Neb. RS
84-712(2). He or she shall keep all the records of his or her office, including
a record of all licenses issued by him or her, in a blank book with a proper
index. He or she shall include as part of his or her records all petitions
under which the City Council shall order public work to be done at the expense
of the property fronting thereon, together with references to all resolutions
and ordinances relating to the same. He or he shall endorse the date and hour
of filing upon every paper or document so filed in his or her office. All such
filings made by him or her shall be properly docketed. Included in his or her
records shall be all standard codes, amendments thereto, and other documents
incorporated by reference and arranged in triplicate in a manner convenient for
reference. He or she shall keep an accurate and complete account of the
appropriation of the several funds and draw, sign, and attest all warrants
ordered for the payment of money on the particular fund from which the same is
payable. At the end of each month, he or she shall then make a report of the
amounts appropriated to the various funds and the amount of the warrants drawn
thereon.
   (F)   The Clerk shall deliver all warrants, ordinances, and resolutions
under his or her charge to the Mayor for his or her signature. He or she shall
also deliver to officers, employees, and committees all resolutions and
communications which are directed at such officers, employees, or committees.
With the seal of the city, he or she shall duly attest the Mayor's signature to
all ordinances, deeds, and papers required to be attested to when ordered to do
so by the City Council.
   (G)   The Clerk shall issue and sign all licenses, permits, and occupation
tax receipts authorized by law and required by the city ordinances. He or she
shall collect all occupation taxes and license money, except where some other
city officer is specifically charged with that duty. He or she shall keep a
register of all licenses granted in the city and the purpose for which they
have been issued.
   (H)   The Clerk shall keep in a book with a proper index, copies of all
notices required to be published or posted by the Clerk by order of the City
Council or under the ordinances of the city. To each of the file copies of the
notices shall be attached the printer's affidavit of publication, if the
notices are required to be published, or the Clerk's certificate under seal
where the same are required to be posted only.
   (I)   The Clerk shall receive all objections to creation of paving districts
and other street improvements. He or she shall receive the claims of any person
against the city, and in the event that the claim is disallowed in part or in
whole, the Clerk shall notify the claimant or his or her agent or attorney by
letter within five days after the disallowance, and the Clerk shall then
prepare transcripts on appeals of any disallowance of a claim in all proper
cases.
(Ord. 634, passed 6-21-2021; Ord. 645, passed 3-21-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-605, Neb. RS 18-1701, Neb. RS 19-1102 and
Neb. RS 19-1103
§ 32.05 CITY TREASURER.
   (A)   (1)    The City Treasurer shall be the custodian of all money
belonging to the city. He or she shall keep a separate account of each fund or
appropriation and the debts and credits belonging thereto. He or she shall give
every person paying money into the treasury a receipt therefor, specifying the
date of payment and on what account paid. He or she shall also file copies of
such receipts with his or her monthly reports. The Treasurer shall, at the end
of every month, and as often as may be required, render an account to the City
Council, under oath, showing the state of the treasury at the date of such
account and the balance of money in the treasury. He or she shall also
accompany such accounts with a statement of all receipts and disbursements,
together with all warrants redeemed and paid by him or her, which warrants,
with any and all vouchers held by him or her, shall be filed with his or her
account in the City Clerk's office. If the Treasurer fails to render his or her
account within 20 days after the end of the month, or by a later date
established by the City Council, the Mayor may use this failure as cause to
remove the Treasurer from office.
      (2)   The Treasurer shall keep a record of all outstanding bonds against
the city, showing the number and amount of each bond, for and to whom the bonds
were issued, and the date upon which any bond is purchased, paid, or canceled.
The Treasurer shall accompany the annual statement submitted pursuant to Neb.
RS 19-1101 with a description of the bonds issued and sold in that year and the
terms of sale, with every item of expense thereof.
      (3)   The Treasurer shall annually complete continuing education through
a program approved by the Auditor of Public Accounts, and proof of completion
of such program shall be submitted to the Auditor of Public Accounts.
(Neb. RS 17-606)
   (B)   (1)   The Treasurer shall prepare and publish annually within 60 days
after the close of the city fiscal year a statement of the receipts and
expenditures of funds of the city for the preceding fiscal year. The statement
shall also include the information required by Neb. RS 16-318(3) or Neb. RS 17-
606(2). Not more than the legal rate provided for in Neb. RS 33-141 shall be
charged and paid for such publication.
(Neb. RS 19-1101)
      (2)   Publication shall be made in one legal newspaper of general
circulation in the city. If no legal newspaper is published in the city, then
such publication shall be made in one legal newspaper published or of general
circulation within the county in which the city is located.
(Neb. RS 19-1103)
   (C)   (1)   All warrants upon the Treasurer shall be paid in the order of
their presentation therefor and as otherwise provided in Neb. RS 77-2201
through 77-2215.
(Neb. RS 77-2201)
      (2)   The Treasurer shall keep a warrant register, which register shall
show in columns arranged for that purpose the number, the date, and the amount
of each warrant presented and registered, the particular fund upon which the
same is drawn, the date of presentation, the name and address of the person in
whose name the warrant is registered, the date of payment, the amount of
interest, and the total amount paid thereon, with the date when notice to the
person in whose name such warrant is registered is mailed.
(Neb. RS 77-2202)
      (3)   The Treasurer shall make duplicate receipts for all sums which
shall be paid into his or her office, which receipts shall show the source from
which such funds are derived, and shall, by distinct lines and columns, show
the amount received to the credit of each separate fund, and whether the same
was paid in cash, in warrants, or otherwise. The Treasurer shall deliver one of
the duplicates to the person making the payment and retain the other in his or
her office.
(Neb. RS 77-2209)
      (4)   The Treasurer shall daily, as money is received, foot the several
columns of the cash book and of the register, and carry the amounts forward,
and at the close of each year, in case the amount of money received by the
Treasurer is insufficient to pay the warrants registered, he or she shall close
the account for that year in the register and shall carry forward the excess.
(Neb. RS. 77-2210)
      (5)   The cash book, register, and retained receipts of the Treasurer
shall at all times be open to the inspection of any person in whose name any
warrants are registered and unpaid.
(Neb. RS 77-2212)
   (D)   The Treasurer shall permit any person to examine and copy the public
records in the Treasurer's custody, and may charge a fee for providing copies
of a public record, as provided in Neb. RS 84-712 through 84-712.09.
   (E)   (1)   The Treasurer shall keep all money belonging to the city
separate and distinct from his or her own money. He or she shall cancel all
bonds, coupons, warrants, and other evidences of debt against the city,
whenever paid by him or her, by writing or stamping on the face thereof, "Paid
by the City Treasurer," with the date of payment written or stamped thereon.
      (2)   He or she shall collect all special taxes, allocate special
assessments to the several owners, and obtain from the County Treasurer a
monthly report as to the collection of delinquent taxes.
(Ord. 633, passed 6-21-2021)
§ 32.06 CITY ATTORNEY.
   (A)   The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the City Council. He
or she shall commence, prosecute, and defend all suits and actions necessary to
be commenced, prosecuted, or defended on behalf of the city, or that may be
ordered by the Council. When requested, he or she shall attend meetings of the
Council and give them his or her opinion upon any matters submitted to him or
her, either orally or in writing, as may be required. He or she shall draft or
review for legal correctness ordinances, contracts, franchises, and other
instruments as may be required, and he or she shall perform such other duties
as may be imposed upon him or her by general law or ordinance. The Council
shall have the right to pay the City Attorney compensation for legal services
performed by him or her for it on such terms as the Council and Attorney may
agree, and to employ additional legal assistance and to pay for such legal
assistance out of the funds of the city.
(Neb. RS 17-610)
   (B)   The City Attorney shall also examine, when requested to do so by the
City Council, the ordinance records and advise and assist the City Clerk as
much as may be necessary to the end that each procedural step will be taken in
the passage of each ordinance to insure that it will be a valid and subsisting
local law in so far as its passage and approval are concerned.
§ 32.07 FIRE CHIEF.
   The Fire Chief shall be elected by the members of the Fire Department. He or
she shall enforce all laws and ordinances covering the prevention of fires, the
storage and use of explosives and flammable substances, the installation of
fire alarm systems, the maintenance of fire extinguishing equipment, the
regulation of fire escapes, and the inspection of all premises requiring
adequate fire escapes.
Cross-reference:
   Fire Department, see §
33.25 et seq.
§ 32.08 CITY ENGINEER; SPECIAL ENGINEER.
   (A)   (1)   The City Engineer shall, when requested by the Mayor or City
Council, make estimates of the cost of labor and material which may be done or
furnished by contract with the city and make all surveys, estimates, and
calculations necessary to be made for the establishment of grades, building of
culverts, sewers, electric light system, waterworks, power plant, public
heating system, bridges, curbing, and gutters, the improvement of streets, and
the erection and repair of buildings and shall perform such other duties as the
City Council may require.
      (2)   When the city has appointed a Board of Public Works and the Mayor
and City Council have by ordinance so authorized, the Board may utilize its own
engineering staff and may hire consulting engineers for the design and
installation of extensions and improvements of the works under the jurisdiction
of the Board.
(Neb. RS 17-568.01)
   (B)   The Mayor and City Council may employ a special engineer to make, or
assist in making, any estimate necessary or to perform any other duty provided
for in Neb. RS 17-568.01. Any work executed by such special engineer shall have
the same validity and serve in all respects as though executed by the City
Engineer.
(Neb. RS 17-568)   
   (C)   The City Engineer shall make a record of the minutes of his or her
surveys and of all work done for the city and, when directed by the Mayor and
City Council, shall accurately make such plats, sections, profiles, and maps as
may be necessary in the prosecution of any public work, which shall be public
records and belong to the city and be turned over to his or her successor.
Statutory reference:
   Duties related to areas to be annexed, see Neb. RS 17-405
   Duties related to sewerage systems, see Neb. RS 17-150 and 17-919
§ 32.09 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The City Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor by and with the
consent of a majority of the City Council. He or she shall be the
administrative head of the municipal government under the direction and control
of the Mayor and City Council and shall be responsible to the Mayor and City
Council for the efficient conduct of his or her office.
   (B)   The responsibilities of the City Administrator shall be as follows:
      (1)   To see that a current inventory of all property, real and personal,
owned by the municipality is kept on file;
      (2)   To act as purchasing agent for the purchase of all supplies, goods,
wares and merchandise, equipment and material which may be required for the
various departments, divisions or services of the municipality;
      (3)   To keep the Mayor and Council fully advised as to the financial
condition and needs of the municipality and be responsible for the preparation
of the annual estimate of expenditures for presentation to the Mayor and
Council prior to the passage of the annual appropriation ordinance;
      (4)   To serve as public relations officer of the municipal government
and in such capacity to endeavor to investigate all complaints filed against
any employee, department, division or service thereof and cooperate and work
with all community organizations whose aid and purpose is to advance the best
interests and development of the municipality and its people and to attend
meetings of such organizations within and outside the city if such attendance
is necessary and desirable;
      (5)   To attend all meetings of the Council with the duty of reporting
any matter concerning municipal affairs under his or her supervision or
direction and to attend such other meetings of the municipal departments and
officials as may be required to fulfill his or her responsibilities;
      (6)   To analyze the functions, duties and activities of the various
departments, divisions and services of the municipal government and of all
employees thereof, and to make his or her recommendations regarding the same to
the Mayor and Council;
      (7)   To carry out the Mayor and/or Council’s recommendations in
coordinating the administrative functions and operations of the various
departments;
      (8)   To procure facts and submit long range improvement recommendations
to the Mayor and Council;
      (9)   To recommend to the Mayor and Council the appointment and dismissal
of all department heads and other employees over which he or she exercises
supervisory responsibility. Appointment or dismissal of department heads will
be made upon the recommendations of the Mayor and confirmation by the Council.
In the absence of the Mayor, the City Administrator may suspend any employee
with or without pay, should the City Administrator determine that any city
employee is guilty of gross misconduct or wanton dereliction of duty, until
such time as the Mayor returns, or otherwise exercises jurisdiction over such
employee;
      (10)   To investigate and make recommendations to the Mayor and City
Council regarding duties and activities of any employee of the municipality and
recommend to the Mayor and Council the promotion, demotion, suspension,
transfer or discharge of such employee;
      (11)   To administer and be responsible for all departments and divisions
of the municipal government which are under the Mayor’s and Council’s
direction, including the Board of Public Works and any public utilities
hereafter acquired by the municipality and including Fire and Police
Departments, except insofar as such jurisdiction and administration conflicts
with the Civil Service Law pertaining to such Fire and Police Departments. The
office of the Municipal Attorney and Municipal Physician shall not come under
the Administrator, said Administrator, however, shall be available to assist
these offices in any administrative matter that may arise and those officers in
turn shall be available to assist the City Administrator in the discharge of
his or her duties;
      (12)   To recommend to the Mayor and Council for adoption such measures
and ordinances as are deemed necessary or expedient;
      (13)   To recommend to the Mayor and Council any changes he or she deems
appropriate in the employee manual;
      (14)   To make investigations into the affairs of the municipality and
any department or division thereof and any contract or the proper performance
of any obligation pertaining to the municipality;
      (15)   To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, streets
and other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the
Mayor and Council;
      (16)   To oversee the preparation and submission to the Mayor and Council
as of the end of the fiscal year, a complete report on the finances and
administrative activities of the municipality for the preceding year;
      (17)   To make recommendations regarding appropriate insurance coverage
for the municipality;
      (18)   To keep open his or her office for public affairs during days and
hours set by the Mayor and Council;
      (19)   To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may
be delegated to him or her from time to time by ordinances or resolutions of
the Council; and where action of the Council is not required, such duties and
powers as may be prescribed by the Mayor; the City Administrator in the
discharge of his or her duties shall have the right to expend an amount not to
exceed the limits set forth in the city’s purchasing procedure;
      (20)   The city may contract in writing with the City Administrator to
occupy such position and to assume such duties in writing, upon such terms and
conditions as the Council may approve; and
      (21)   In the event the City Administrator serves pursuant to a written
contract, his or her removal shall be governed by said writing. In the event
the City Administrator is serving by appointment and without a written
contract, he or she may be removed at any time by the Mayor.
(2000 Code, § 1-205)
§ 32.10 BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   The Municipal Building Inspector, if one is appointed, shall conduct surveys
and make inspections in any area of the municipality to determine whether all
buildings and structures are in compliance with the municipal ordinances. He or
she shall investigate all complaints whether they are verbal, written or in the
form of a petition alleging and charging that a violation of the municipal
ordinances exists and that a building or structure is unfit or unsafe for human
habitation. The Building Inspector is authorized, upon properly identifying
himself or herself, to enter, inspect, survey and investigate between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. or at any time if an emergency exists, or if
requested by the owner or occupant thereof. He or she shall keep records of all
complaints received, inspection reports, orders and complaints issued. The
records shall be available for public inspection and he or she shall prepare an
annual report including statistics based on the records kept. The Building
Inspector shall have no financial interest in the furnishing of labor,
materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a
building, except where he or she is the owner of a building and he or she shall
not act as an agent for any said dealer or as an agent for the sale, lease or
rental of any real estate. The Building Inspector shall report to the governing
body as often as it may deem necessary and shall have such other duties and
issue such permits as it may direct. The Building Inspector may be removed at
any time without cause by the Mayor.
(2000 Code, § 1-213)
§ 32.11 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.
   The Municipal Electrical Inspector, if one is appointed, shall enforce all
laws relating to the installation of electrical wiring and connections thereto.
When acting in good faith and without malice in the scope of his or her
official duties, he or she shall not himself or herself be held personally
liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as the result of
any act required by him or her or by reason of any act or omission in the
discharge of his or her duties. He or she shall, in the discharge of his or her
official duties and upon proper identification, have authority to enter into
any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour. He or she shall
perform such other duties and issue any permits that the governing body may
direct. The Electrical Inspector may be removed at any time without cause by
the Mayor.
(2000 Code, § 1-214)
§ 32.12 PLUMBING INSPECTOR.
   (A)   The Municipal Plumbing Inspector, if one is appointed, shall enforce
all laws relating to the installation of plumbing and connections thereto.
   (B)   When acting in good faith and without malice in the scope of his or
her official duties, he or she shall not himself or herself be held personally
liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as the result of
any act required by him or her or by reason of any act or omission in the
discharge of his or her duties.
   (C)   He or she shall in the discharge of his or her official duties and
upon proper identification, have authority to enter into any building,
structure or premises at any reasonable hour. He or she shall perform such
other duties and issue any permits that the governing body may direct. The
Plumbing Inspector may be removed at any time without cause by the Mayor.
(2000 Code, § 1-215)
CHAPTER 33: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Boards and Commissions
   
33.01   Library Board
   
33.02   Planning Commission
   
33.03   Board of Adjustment
   
33.04   Board of Health
   
33.05   Recreation Advisory Board
   
33.06   Board of Public Works
   
33.07   Reserved
   
33.08   Cemetery Board
   
33.09   Heritage Center Board
Fire Department
   
33.20   Operation and funding
   
33.21   Fire Chief
   
33.22   Membership
   
33.23   Records
   
33.24   Fires
   
33.25   Distant fires
   
33.26   Inspections
   
33.27   Notice of violation
   
33.28   Power of arrest
   
33.29   Fire investigation
Housing Agency
   
33.45   Continued existence
   
33.46   Ownership
   
33.47   Housing Agency Board
   
33.48   Appointment of Resident Commissioner
   
33.49   Operation and management
   
33.50   Reports
   
33.51   Definitions
   
33.52   Rules and regulations
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§ 33.01 LIBRARY BOARD.
   The Library Board shall be appointed. The nominated members must receive a
majority vote of the governing body. The Board shall consist of five members,
four of which shall be residents of the municipality. The fifth member may be a
nonresident of the municipality. The members of the Library Board shall serve a
four-year term of office as specified by state statutes. The Board shall serve
without compensation and may be required in the discretion of the governing
body, to give a bond in a sum set by resolution of the governing body and
conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties. At the time of the
Board’s first meeting in July of each year, the Board shall organize by
selecting from their number a Chairperson and Secretary. It shall be the duty
of the Secretary to keep the full and correct minutes and records of all
meetings and to keep them available for public inspection at any reasonable
time. A majority of the Board members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business. The Board shall meet at such times as the governing
body may designate. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the
Chairperson or any three members of the Board. The Library Board shall have the
authority to appoint a librarian and all other employees. It shall be the duty
of the Board to have general charge of the Municipal Library and to establish
appropriate rules and regulations for the management, operation and use of the
same. The Board shall have supervisory authority over all employees of the
library including the librarian. All actions of the Board shall be subject to
the review and supervision of the governing body. The Board shall be
responsible for making such reports and performing such additional duties as
the governing body may designate from time to time. No member of the governing
body shall serve as a member of the Library Board while serving a term of
office as a member of the governing body. No member of the Library Board shall
serve in the capacity of both the Chairperson and Secretary of the Board.
(Neb. RS 51-202) (2000 Code, § 2-201) (Ord. 566, passed 4-15-2013)
§ 33.02 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   (1)   If the City Council adopts zoning or other regulations pursuant
to Neb. RS 19-901 et seq., the Planning Commission shall consist of five,
seven, or nine regular members, as specified by the City Council by ordinance,
who shall represent, insofar as is possible, the different professions or
occupations in the city and shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the
approval of a majority vote of the members elected to the City Council. Two of
the regular members may be residents of the area over which the city is
authorized to exercise extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulation. When
there are 500 residents in the area over which the city exercises
extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulation, one regular member of the
Commission shall be a resident from such area. If it is determined by the City
Council that 500 residents reside in the area subject to extraterritorial
zoning or subdivision regulation, and no such resident is a regular member of
the Commission, the first available vacancy on the Commission shall be filled
by the appointment of such an individual. A number of commissioners equal to a
majority of the number of regular members appointed to the Commission shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business. All regular members of
the Commission shall serve without compensation. The term of each regular
member shall be three years, except that one-third or fewer of the regular
members of the first commission to be so appointed shall serve for terms of one
year, one-third or fewer for terms of two years, and the remaining members for
terms of three years. All regular members shall hold office until their
successors are appointed. Any member may, after a public hearing before the
Council, be removed by the Mayor with the consent of a majority vote of the
members elected to the Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or
malfeasance in office or other good and sufficient cause. Vacancies occurring
otherwise than through the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired
portion of the term by the Mayor.
      (2)   The Mayor may, with the approval of a majority vote of the elected
members of the Council, appoint one alternate member to the Planning
Commission. The alternate member shall serve without compensation. The term of
the alternate member shall be three years, and he or she shall hold office
until his or her successor is appointed and approved. The alternate member may
be removed from office in the same manner as a regular member. If the alternate
member position becomes vacant other than through the expiration of the term,
the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term by the Mayor
with the approval of a majority vote of the elected members of the Council. The
alternate member may attend any meeting and may serve as a voting and
participating member of the Commission at any time when less than the full
number of regular Commission members is present and capable of voting.
      (3)   A regular or alternate member of the Planning Commission may hold
any other municipal office except:
         (a)   Mayor;
         (b)   A member of the City Council;
         (c)   A member of any community redevelopment authority or limited
community redevelopment authority created under Neb. RS 18-2102.01; or
         (d) A member of any citizen advisory review committee created under
Neb. RS 18-2715.
(Neb. RS 19-926)
   (B)   The Commission shall elect its Chairperson from its members and create
and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of the
Chairperson shall be one year, and he or she shall be eligible for reelection.
The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each calendar
quarter, except the City Council may require the Commission to meet more
frequently and the Chairperson of the Commission may call for a meeting when
necessary to deal with business pending before the Commission. The Commission
shall adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of business and shall
keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations,
which shall be a public record.
(Neb. RS 19-927)
   (C)   No member of the Commission shall serve in the capacity of both the
Chairperson and Secretary of the Commission. The Secretary shall keep the full
and correct minutes and records of all meetings and file them with the City
Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection during office hours.
   (D)   The City Council may provide the funds, equipment, and accommodations
necessary for the work of the Commission, but the expenditures of the
Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for
that purpose by the Council; and no expenditures nor agreements for
expenditures shall be valid in excess of such amounts.
(Neb. RS 19-928)
   (E)   (1)   (a)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 19-930 to 19-933, the
Planning Commission shall:
            (i)   Make and adopt plans for the physical development of the
city, including any areas outside its boundaries which in the Commission's
judgment bear relation to the planning of such city and including a
comprehensive development plan as defined by Neb. RS 19-903;
            (ii)   Prepare and adopt such implemental means as a capital
improvement program, subdivision regulations, building codes, and a zoning
ordinance in cooperation with other interested city departments; and
            (iii)   Consult with and advise public officials and agencies,
public utilities, civic organizations, educational institutions, and citizens
with relation to the promulgation and implementation of the comprehensive
development plan and its implemental programs. The Commission may delegate
authority to any such group to conduct studies and make surveys for the
commission, make preliminary reports on its findings, and hold public hearings
before submitting its final reports.
         (b)   The City Council shall not take final action on matters relating
to the comprehensive development plan, capital improvements, building codes,
subdivision development, the annexation of territory, or zoning until it has
received the recommendation of the Planning Commission, provided that the
Planning Commission shall make its recommendation so that it is received by the
City Council within 60 days after the Commission begins consideration of a
matter or within such other number of days as the City Council has set by
ordinance.
         (c)   A recommendation from the Planning Commission shall not be
required for subdivision of existing lots and blocks whenever all required
public improvements have been installed, no new dedication of public rights-of-
way or easements is involved, and such subdivision complies with the ordinance
requirements concerning minimum areas and dimensions of such lots and blocks,
if the City Council has designated, by ordinance, an agent pursuant to Neb. RS
19-916.
      (2)   (a)   The Commission may, with the consent of the City Council, in
its own name (i) make and enter into contracts with public or private bodies,
(ii) receive contributions, bequests, gifts, or grant funds from public or
private sources, (iii) expend the funds appropriated to it by the city, (iv)
employ agents and employees, and (v) acquire, hold, and dispose of property.
         (b)   The Commission may on its own authority make arrangements
consistent with its program, conduct or sponsor special studies or planning
work for any public body or appropriate agency, receive grants, remuneration,
or reimbursement for such studies or work, and at its public hearings, summon
witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the giving of testimony.
      (3)   (a)   The Commission may grant conditional uses or special
exceptions to property owners for the use of their property if the City Council
has, through a zoning ordinance or special ordinance, generally authorized the
Commission to exercise such powers and has approved the standards and
procedures adopted by the Commission for equitably and judiciously granting
such conditional uses or special exceptions. The granting of a conditional use
permit or special exception shall only allow property owners to put their
property to a special use if it is among those uses specifically identified in
the zoning ordinance as classifications of uses which may require special
conditions or requirements to be met by the owners before a use permit or
building permit is authorized.
         (b)   The power to grant conditional uses or special exceptions shall
be the exclusive authority of the Commission, except that the City Council may
choose to retain for itself the power to grant conditional uses or special
exceptions for those classifications of uses specified in the zoning ordinance.
The Council may exercise such power if it has formally adopted standards and
procedures for granting such conditional uses or special exceptions in a manner
that is equitable and will promote the public interest.
         (c)   An appeal of a decision by the Commission or Council regarding a
conditional use or special exception shall be made to the district court.
(Neb. RS 19-929)
Statutory reference:
   Other provisions on planning commissions, see Neb. RS 19-924 through 19-933
§ 33.03 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   If the City Council adopts zoning or other regulations pursuant to
Neb. RS 19-901 et seq., except as provided in division (B), the Council shall
provide for the appointment of a Board of Adjustment. Any actions taken by the
Board of Adjustment shall not exceed the powers granted by division (F).
(Neb. RS 19-907)
   (B)   If the county has adopted a comprehensive development plan, as defined
by Neb. RS 23-114.02, and is enforcing zoning regulations based upon such a
plan, the zoning board of adjustment of the county shall, upon request of the
City Council, serve as the zoning Board of Adjustment for the city. If the city
is located in more than one county, it shall be served by request or otherwise
only by the county zoning board of adjustment of the county in which the
greatest area of the city is located, and the jurisdiction of such county
zoning board of adjustment shall include all portions of the city and its area
of extraterritorial control, regardless of county lines.
(Neb. RS 19-912.01)
   (C)   (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five regular members,
plus one additional member designated as an alternate who shall attend and
serve only when one of the regular members is unable to attend for any reason,
each to be appointed for a term of three years and removable for cause by the
appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearings. Vacancies
shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant.
One member only of the Board of Adjustment shall be appointed from the
membership of the Planning Commission, and the loss of membership on the
Planning Commission by such member shall also result in his or her immediate
loss of membership on the Board of Adjustment and the appointment of another
Planning Commissioner to the Board of Adjustment. The first vacancy occurring
on the Board of Adjustment shall be filled by the appointment of a person who
resides in the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of the city at such time as
more than 200 persons reside within such area if the Board does not already
include such a person. Thereafter, at all times, at least one member of the
Board of Adjustment shall reside outside of the corporate boundaries of the
city but within its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction.
      (2)   The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules in accordance with the
provisions of any ordinance adopted pursuant to Neb. RS 19-901 to 19-914.
Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. Such
Chairperson, or in his or her absence the Acting Chairperson, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall
be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing
the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the
Board and shall be a public record.
(Neb. RS 19-908)
   (D)   A number of members equal to a majority of the number of regular
members appointed to the Board of Adjustment shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of any business. All members of an appointed Board of Adjustment
shall serve without compensation and shall hold no other city office except for
the member of the Planning Commission appointed to serve on the Board of
Adjustment. No member of the Board of Adjustment shall serve in the capacity of
both Chairperson and Secretary of the Board. The Secretary shall keep the full
and correct minutes and records of all meetings and file them with the City
Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection during office hours.
   (E)   Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected
by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken
within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with
the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Adjustment a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the
appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An
appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless
the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment,
after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her, that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board
of Adjustment or by a court of record on application on notice to the officer
from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. The Board of Adjustment
shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice
thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same
within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by
agent or by attorney.
(Neb. RS 19-909)
   (F)   (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall, subject to such appropriate
conditions and safeguards as may be established by the City Council, have only
the following powers:
         (a)   To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is error in
any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative
official or agency based on or made in the enforcement of any zoning regulation
or any regulation relating to the location or soundness of structures, except
that the authority to hear and decide appeals shall not apply to decisions made
by the City Council or Planning Commission regarding a conditional use or
special exception under Neb. RS 19-929(3);
         (b)   To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of any
zoning regulation, requests for interpretation of any map; and
         (c)   When by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape
of a specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of the zoning
regulations, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other
extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property,
the strict application of any enacted regulation under Neb. RS 19-901 and 19-
903 to 19-904.01 and divisions (C) and (F) would result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardships upon
the owner of such property, to authorize, upon an appeal relating to the
property, a variance from such strict application so as to relieve such
difficulties or hardship, if such relief may be granted without substantial
detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and
purpose of any ordinance or resolution.
      (2)   (a)   No such variance shall be authorized by the Board unless it
finds that:
            (i)   The strict application of the zoning regulation would produce
undue hardship;
            (ii)   Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in
the same zoning district and the same vicinity;
            (iii)   The authorization of such variance will not be of
substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character of the district
will not be changed by the granting of the variance; and
            (iv)   The granting of such variance is based upon reason of
demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for
purposes of convenience, profit, or caprice.
         (b)   No variance shall be authorized unless the Board finds that the
condition or situation of the property concerned or the intended use of the
property is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably
practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an
amendment to the zoning regulations.
      (3)   In exercising the powers granted in this division (F), the Board
may, in conformity with Neb. RS 19-901 to 19-915, reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination
appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination
as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer
from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four members of the board
shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of any such administrative official or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such
regulation or to effect any variation in such regulation.
(Neb. RS 19-910)
   (G)   Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision
of the Board of Adjustment, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board,
or bureau of the city, may present to the district court a petition duly
verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and
specifying the grounds of such illegality. Such petition must be presented to
the court within 15 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the
board. Upon the filing of such petition a summons shall be issued and be served
upon the Board of Adjustment, together with a copy of the petition. Return of
service shall be made within four days after the issuance of the summons.
Within ten days after the return day of such summons, the Board of Adjustment
shall file an answer to the petition which shall admit or deny the substantial
averments of the petition and shall state the contentions of the Board with
reference to the matters in dispute as disclosed by the petition. The answer
shall be verified in like manner as required for the petition. At the
expiration of the time for filing answer, the court shall proceed to hear and
determine the cause without delay and shall render judgment thereon according
to the forms of law. If, upon the hearing, it appears to the court that
testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take
evidence or appoint a referee to take such evidence as it may direct and report
the same to the court with his or her findings of fact and conclusions of law,
which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination
of the court shall be made. The court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly,
or may modify the decision brought up for review. The appeal to the district
court shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court
may, on application, on notice to the Board and on due cause shown, grant a
restraining order. Any appeal from such judgment of the district court shall be
prosecuted in accordance with the general laws of the state regulating appeals
in actions at law.
(Neb. RS 19-912)
§ 33.04 BOARD OF HEALTH.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Health shall consist of four members: The Mayor,
who shall be chairperson, the President of the City Council, and two other
members. One member shall be a physician or health care provider, if one can be
found who is willing to serve. Such physician or health care provider, if
appointed, shall be the Board’s medical advisor. If the Mayor has appointed a
Chief of Police, the Chief of Police shall serve on the Board as secretary and
quarantine officer.
      (2)   A majority of the Board of Health shall constitute a quorum and
shall enact rules and regulations, which shall have the full force and effect
of law, to safeguard the health of the people of the city, may enforce them,
and may provide fines and punishments for the violation of such rules and
regulations. The Board shall have power to and shall make all needful rules and
regulations relating to matters of sanitation of the city, including the
removal of dead animals, the sanitary condition of the streets, alleys, vacant
grounds, stockyards, cattle and hog pens, wells, cisterns, privies,
waterclosets, cesspools, stables, and all buildings and places not specified
where filth, nuisances, or offensive matter is kept or is liable to or does
accumulate. It may regulate, suppress, and prevent the occurrence of nuisances
and enforce all laws of the state and ordinances of the city relating to
nuisances or to matters of sanitation of the city. The Board shall also have
control of hospitals, dispensaries, places for treatment of sick, and matters
relating to the same under such restrictions and provisions as may be provided
by ordinance of the city.
(Neb. RS 17-121)
   (B)   The members of the Board of Health other than the Mayor, President of
the Council, and Chief of Police shall serve terms of office of the length
specified by the City Council and may be reappointed.
   (C)   The Board of Health shall reorganize at its meeting after appointments
are regularly considered by the City Council and, if necessary, select a member
to serve as secretary. No member of the Board of Health shall hold more than
one Board of Health position. The secretary shall keep full and correct minutes
and records of all meetings and file the same with the City Clerk where they
shall be available for public inspection during office hours.
   (D)   The Board shall meet at such times as the City Council may designate.
Special meetings may be held upon the call of the Chairperson or any two
members of the Board of Health.
   (E)   The members of the Board of Health shall serve without compensation.
The Board of Health shall be funded by the City Council from time to time out
of the general fund.
   (F)   The Board of Health shall regularly inspect such premises and
businesses as the City Council may direct.
   (G)   All members of the Board of Health shall be responsible for making
such reports and performing such other duties as the City Council may, from
time to time, designate.
§ 33.05 RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD.
   The governing body shall appoint the Recreation Board. The Board shall
consist of at least seven members, one of which may be a nonresident of the
municipality. The members of the Board shall serve a three-year term of office
unless reappointed. The terms of the members shall be staggered. The Board
shall serve without compensation. At the time of the Board's first meeting in
January of each year, the Board shall organize by selecting from its number a
Chairperson and Secretary. It shall be the duty of the Secretary to keep the
full and correct minutes and records of all meetings and to keep them available
for public inspection at any reasonable time. A majority of the Board members
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Special meetings may
be held upon the call of the Chairperson or any two Board members. The Board
shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Administrator and the governing
body regarding the needs and maintenance of the parks, trails, pool, golf
course and similar recreational facilities of the municipality. The Board shall
be responsible for making such reports and performing such other duties as the
governing body may from time to time designate. No members of the Recreation
Board shall serve in the capacity of both the Chairperson and Secretary of the
Board.
(2000 Code, § 2-601) (Ord. 566, passed 4-15-2013; Ord. 592, passed 11-21-2016;
Ord. 660, passed 5-15-2023)
§ 33.06 BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   (A)   Whenever the city has or is about to establish or acquire any system
of waterworks, power plant, ice plant, gas plant, sewerage, heating or lighting
plant, or distribution system and the City Council has created a Board of
Public Works, the Board shall consist of not less than three, nor more than six
members, residents of the city, to be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the
approval of the City Council. The members may be removed by the Mayor and a
majority of the members elected to the City Council at any time. The term of
the first members of the Board shall be one, two, three, or four years in the
manner designated by the Mayor, as the case may be, after which the term of
each member shall be four years; and the terms of not more than two members
shall expire at any one time.
(Neb. RS 17-801)
   (B)   The Board of Public Works shall have the active direction and
supervision of any or all of the utility systems owned or operated by the city
as conferred on it by the City Council. The City Council shall approve the
budget of each proprietary function as provided in the Municipal Proprietary
Function Act. The Board shall have the power to operate any utility referred to
it and to exercise all powers conferred by law upon the city for the operation
and government of such utility to the same extent, in the same manner, and
under the same restrictions as the City Council could do if no such Board of
Public Works existed, except that the Board of Public Works shall not make any
expenditure or contract any indebtedness other than for ordinary running
expenses, exceeding the amount established by the City Council, without first
obtaining the approval of the City Council. The Board of Public Works shall
report to the City Council at regular intervals as it may require.
(Neb. RS 17-802)
   (C)   If so authorized and empowered by the Mayor and Council, the Board of
Public Works may cooperate and participate in a plan of insurance designed and
intended for the benefit of the employees of any public utility operated by the
city. For that purpose the Board of Public Works may make contributions to pay
premiums or dues under such plan, authorize deductions from salaries of
employees, and take such other steps as may be necessary to effectuate such
plan of insurance.
(Neb. RS 17-802.01)
   (D)   The members of the Board of Public Works shall organize as soon as
practicable after their appointment, by electing a chairperson and secretary,
who shall serve until the first meeting in June next following; and thereafter
the Board shall elect a chairperson and secretary at the first meeting in June
each year. In the absence of the regular officers, temporary officers to serve
in their places may be chosen by the members present at any meeting. They shall
establish regular times for meeting and may adopt such rules as may be
necessary or desirable for the conduct of their business. They shall keep a
record of their proceedings and if there is a legal newspaper published in or
of general circulation in the city, shall publish therein the minutes of each
meeting within 30 days after it is held.
(Neb. RS 17-805)
   (E)   Each of the members of the Board of Public Works shall take an oath to
discharge faithfully the duties of the office before entering upon the
discharge thereof. Each of the members of the Board before entering upon the
duties of the office shall be required to give bond to the city with corporate
surety. Such bond shall be in the sum of$5000 and shall be conditioned for the
faithful performance of the duties of member of the Board of Public Works; and
the surety on such bond shall be approved by the Mayor and Council and shall be
filed with the City Treasurer, provided that the premium on the bond shall be
paid out of any public utility fund designated by the Mayor and Council.
(Neb. RS 17-806)
   (F)   No member of the Board of Public Works shall ever be financially
interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract entered into by them on
behalf of such city for more than $10,000 in one year.
(Neb. RS 17-807)
   (G)   If the Board determines that the best interests of the city and the
patrons of the utility will be better or more economically served, they may
employ the duly elected City Clerk as ex officio bookkeeper and collector for
the utility or utilities, and he or she may be paid a reasonable salary for the
extra services required of him or her in such position in addition to his or
her salary as City Clerk.
(Neb. RS 17-808)
   (H)   Rates or charges for service may be fixed or changed by resolution
duly adopted by the Board of Public Works.
(Neb. RS 17-810)
§ 33.07 RESERVED.
§ 33.08 CEMETERY BOARD.
   The governing body shall appoint the Cemetery Board, which shall consist of
six members who are residents of the municipality and who shall serve without
compensation for a term of three years. Two members shall be appointed each
year and may be required in the discretion of the governing body, to give a
bond in a sum set by resolution of the governing body and conditioned upon the
faithful performance of their duties. At the first meeting of each year, the
Board shall organize by selecting from its membership a Chairperson and
Secretary. The Secretary shall keep the full and correct minutes and records of
all meetings and keep them available for public inspection at any reasonable
time. A majority of the Board members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose
of doing business. The Board shall meet at such times as the governing body may
designate. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the Chairperson or any
three members of the Board. The Board shall have the general care, management
and supervision of the Municipal Cemetery with the power and authority to limit
and regulate the number of cemetery lots that may be owned by the same person;
to prescribe rules for enclosing, adorning and erecting monuments and
tombstones on cemetery lots and to prohibit any diverse or improper use
thereof; provided, no religious tests shall be made as to the ownership of
lots, the burial therein and the ornamentation of graves. The Board shall pass
rules and regulations for the proper use of the cemetery and prescribe
penalties and fines for violations thereof. The Board shall use all revenue
received from the sale of lots, gifts or by devise for the care, management and
administration of the cemetery. All actions of the Board shall be subject to
the review and supervision of the governing body and it shall be responsible
for making such reports and performing such additional duties as the governing
body may designate. No member of the governing body shall serve as a member of
the Board while serving a term of office as a member of the governing body. No
member of the Cemetery Board shall hold more than one Cemetery Board office.
(Neb. RS 12-401 through 12-403) (2000 Code, § 2-701)
§ 33.09 HERITAGE CENTER BOARD.
   The governing body shall appoint the Heritage Center Board, which shall
consist of six members, one of which may be a nonresident of the municipality,
and who shall serve without compensation for a term of three years. Two members
shall be appointed each year and may be required in the discretion of the
governing body, to give a bond in a sum set by resolution of the governing body
and conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties. At the first
meeting of each year, the Board shall organize by selecting from its membership
a Chairperson and Secretary. The Secretary shall keep the full and correct
minutes and records of all meetings and keep them available for public
inspection at any reasonable time. A majority of the Board members shall
constitute a quorum for the purpose of doing business. The Board shall meet at
such times as the governing body may designate. Special meetings may be held
upon the call of the Chairperson or any three members of the Board. The Board
shall have the general care, management and supervision of the Heritage Center
with the power and authority to control the operation of Heritage Center. All
actions of the Board shall be subject to the review and supervision of the
governing body and it shall be responsible for making such reports and
performing such additional duties as the governing body may designate. No
member of the governing body shall serve as a member of the Board while serving
a term of office as a member of the governing body. No member of the Heritage
Center Board shall hold more than one Heritage Center Board office.
(2000 Code, § 2-901) (Ord. 566, passed 4-15-2013)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.20 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   (A)   The city may operate a Fire Department through the Fire Chief and
firefighters.
   (B)   The city shall have power to procure fire engines, hooks, ladders,
buckets, and other apparatus, to organize fire engine, hook and ladder, and
bucket companies, to prescribe rules of duty and the government of the Fire
Department with such penalties as the City Council may deem proper, not
exceeding $100, and to make all necessary appropriations for the Fire
Department.
(Neb. RS 17-147)
   (C)   If the city has only a voluntary fire department or companies, the
City Council may levy a tax annually of not more than $0.07 on each $100 upon
the taxable value of all the taxable property within the city for the
maintenance and benefit of the fire department or companies. The amount of such
tax shall be established at the beginning of the year and shall be included in
the adopted budget statement. Upon collection of such tax, the City Treasurer
shall disburse the same upon the order of the Fire Chief with the approval of
the City Council.
(Neb. RS 17-718)
Statutory reference:
   Fire station acquisition, construction, and maintenance, see Neb. RS 17-953
et seq.
§ 33.21 FIRE CHIEF.
   The Fire Chief shall manage the Fire Department, and it shall be his or her
duty to inform the City Council when any of the fire engines, hose, ladders, or
other apparatus needs repair. Upon the written consent and directive of the
City Council, the Fire Chief shall cause the repair, improvement, or
maintenance of the equipment and shall personally supervise and approve of the
same. It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to come before the City Council at
the regular meeting in January of each year to give an annual report to the
City Council of the general condition and the proposed additions or
improvements recommended by him or her.
§ 33.22 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Fire Department shall consist of so many members as may be decided
by the City Council. The members may organize themselves in any way they may
decide, subject to the review of the City Council.
   (B)   The volunteer Fire Department shall not have upon its rolls at one
time more than 25 persons, for each engine and hose company in the Fire
Department, and no hook and ladder company shall have upon its rolls at any one
time more than 25 members. No organization shall be deemed to be a bona fide
fire or hook and ladder company until it has procured for active service
apparatus for the extinguishment or prevention of fires, in case of a hose
company, to the value of $700, and of a hook and ladder company to the value of
$500.
(Neb. RS 35-102)
   (C)   Members in good standing are those who keep their dues promptly paid
up and are present and render active service when called out for the legitimate
purposes of the Fire Department.
(Neb. RS 35-103)
   (D)   Volunteer firefighters of the Fire Department shall be deemed
employees of the city while in the performance of their duties as members of
the Department. Members of the volunteer Fire Department, before they are
entitled to benefits under the Nebraska Workers' Compensation Act, shall be
recommended by the Fire Chief or some person authorized to act for the Chief
for membership therein to the Mayor and City Council and upon confirmation
shall be deemed employees of the city. Members of the Fire Department after
confirmation to membership may be removed by a majority vote of the City
Council and thereafter shall not be considered employees of the city.
Firefighters of the Fire Department shall be considered as acting in the
performance and within the course and scope of their employment when performing
activities outside of the corporate limits of the city, but only if directed to
do so by the Fire Chief or some person authorized to act for the Chief.
(Neb. RS 48-115)
   (E)   The City Council shall purchase and maintain in force a policy of
group term life insurance to age 65 covering the lives of all of the active
volunteer fire and rescue personnel, except that when any such person serves
more than one city or rural or suburban fire protection district, the policy
shall be purchased only by the first city or district which he or she serves.
The policy shall provide a minimum death benefit of $10,000 for death from any
cause and shall, at the option of the insured, be convertible to a permanent
form of life insurance at age 65. The coverage of such policy shall terminate
as to any individual who ceases to be an active volunteer member of the Fire
Department.
(Neb. RS 35-108)
   (F)   For purposes of the prohibition on receipt of any witness fee,
attendance fee, or mileage fee by an employee of the city called as a witness
in connection with his or her officially assigned duties, volunteer
firefighters and rescue squad members testifying in that capacity alone shall
not be deemed employees of the city.
(Neb. RS 33-139.01)
   (G)   The City Council may compensate or reimburse any member of the Fire
Department for expenses incurred in carrying out his or her duties in an amount
set by resolution.
   (H)   All members of the Fire Department shall be subject to such rules and
regulations, and shall perform such duties, as may be prescribed or required of
them by the Fire Chief or the City Council. The members of the Fire Department
shall, during the time of a fire or great public danger, have and exercise the
powers and duties of police officers and shall have full power and authority to
arrest all persons guilty of any violation of the city code or the laws of the
state.
   (I)   Members of the Fire Department may hold meetings and engage in social
activities with the approval of the City Council. The secretary shall, upon
request, keep a record of all meetings and shall make a report to the City
Council of all meetings and activities of the Fire Department.
§ 33.23 RECORDS.
   The Fire Chief shall keep or cause to be kept a record of all meetings of
the Fire Department, the attendance record of all members, and a record of all
fires and shall make a full report of these records to the City Clerk during
the last week in April each year. The record of any fire shall include the
cause, origin, circumstances, property involved, and whether criminal conduct
may have been involved. In the event of sizable property damage, the Fire Chief
shall include the information of whether the losses were covered by insurance,
and if so, in what amount. All records shall be available to the public at any
reasonable time.
§ 33.24 FIRES.
   It shall be the duty of the Fire Department to use all proper means for the
extinguishment of fires, to protect property within the city, and to secure the
observance of all ordinances, laws, and other rules and regulations with
respect to fires and fire prevention.
§ 33.25 DISTANT FIRES.
   (A)   Upon the permission of the Mayor or Fire Chief, or pursuant to any
agreement with a fire district for mutual aid protection, such fire equipment
of the city as may be designated by the City Council as rural equipment may be
used beyond the corporate limits to extinguish reported fires.
   (B)   The firefighters of the city shall be considered as acting in the
performance and within the scope of their duties in fighting fire or saving
property or life outside the corporate limits of the city when directed to do
so by the City Council or the Fire Chief or some person authorized to act for
the Chief, and in so doing, may take such fire equipment of the city as may be
designated by the City Council.
§ 33.26 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Fire Chief where a Fire Department is established or the Mayor
where no Fire Department exists, at all reasonable hours, may enter into all
buildings and upon all premises within his or her jurisdiction for the purposes
of examination, in harmony with Neb. RS 81-501.01 to 81-531, the Nebraska
Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act of 1969, the Petroleum Products and Hazardous
Substances Storage and Handling Act, and any other statutory duties imposed
upon the State Fire Marshal.
(Neb. RS 81-512)
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief, when directed to do so by the
City Council, to inspect or cause to be inspected by Fire Department officers,
members, or some other official as often as may be necessary, but not less than
two times a year, all buildings, premises, and public thoroughfares, except the
interiors of private dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to
be corrected any conditions liable to create a fire hazard. The inspection
shall be of the storage, sale, and use of flammable liquids, combustibles, and
explosives; electric wiring and heating; the means and adequacy of exits, in
case of fire in schools, churches, hotels, halls, theaters, factories,
hospitals, and all other buildings in which numbers of persons congregate from
time to time for any purpose whether publicly or privately owned; the design,
construction, location, installation, and operation of equipment for storing,
handling, and utilizing liquefied petroleum gases, specifying the odorization
of such gases and the degree thereof; and chemicals, prozylin plastics,
nitrocellulose films, or any other hazardous material that may now or hereafter
exist.
§ 33.27 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Upon the finding that the city code has been violated, the Fire Chief
shall notify, or cause to be notified, the owner, occupant, or manager of the
premise where a violation has occurred. Notice may be made personally or by
delivering a copy to the premise and affixing it to the door of the main
entrance of the premise. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order
upon the owner, the order may be served personally, or by mailing a copy to the
owner’s last known post office address if the owner is absent from the
jurisdiction.
   (B)   Any such order shall be immediately complied with by the owner,
occupant, or manager of the premise or building. The owner, occupant, or
manager may, within five days after the order by the Fire Chief or his or her
agent, appeal the order with the City Council requesting a review, and it shall
be the duty of the City Council to hear the same within not less than five days
nor more than ten days from the time when the request was filed in writing with
the City Clerk. The City Council shall then affirm, modify, or rescind the
order as safety and justice may require, and the decision shall then be final,
subject only to any remedy which the aggrieved person may have at law or
equity. The order shall be modified or rescinded only where it is evident that
reasonable safety exists and that conditions necessitate a variance due to the
probable hardship in complying literally with the order of the Fire Chief. A
copy of any decision so made shall be sent to both the Fire Chief and the
owner, occupant, or manager making the appeal.
§ 33.28 POWER OF ARREST.
   The Fire Chief or the Assistant Fire Chief shall have the power, during the
time of a fire and for a period of 36 hours after its extinguishment, to arrest
any suspected arsonist, or other person hindering or resisting the fire
fighting effort, or any person who conducts himself or herself in a noisy or
disorderly manner. The officials shall be severally vested with the usual
powers and authority of city police officers to command all persons to assist
them in the performance of their duties.
§ 33.29 FIRE INVESTIGATION.
   The Fire Chief shall investigate or cause to be investigated the cause,
origin, and circumstances of every fire occurring in the city by which property
has been destroyed or damaged. All fires of unknown origin shall be reported,
and such officer shall especially make an investigation and report as to
whether the fire was the result of carelessness, accident, or design. The
investigation shall begin immediately after of the occurrence of the fire, and
the State Fire Marshal shall have the right to supervise and direct the
investigation whenever he or she deems it expedient or necessary. The officer
making the investigation of fires occurring in the city shall forthwith notify
the State Fire Marshal and shall within one week of the occurrence of the fire
furnish him or her written statement of all the facts relating to the cause and
origin of the fire and such further information as he or she may call for.
(Neb. RS 81-506)
HOUSING AGENCY
§ 33.45 CONTINUED EXISTENCE.
   The Municipal Housing Authority established under state law prior to January
1, 2000, shall have continued existence after that date under the State Housing
Agency Act, being Neb. RS 71-1572 to 71-15,168 and shall be known as the
“Gibbon Housing Agency.” All Commissioners of such Authority and all officers,
legal counsel, technical experts, directors and other appointees or employees
of such Authority, holding office or employment by virtue of prior state law on
January 1, 2000, shall be deemed to have been appointed or employed by the
Mayor under the provisions of the State Housing Agency Act, being Neb. RS 71-
1572 to 71-15,168 and shall from that date forward, conduct their operations
consistent with the provisions of that Act.
(Neb. RS 71-1576) (2000 Code, § 2-801) (Ord. 494, passed 3-19-2001)
§ 33.46 OWNERSHIP.
   The city’s Housing Agency is owned by the municipality and operated through
the Housing Agency Commission. The Housing Agency shall constitute a body
corporate and politic and shall have all the powers necessary or convenient to
carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of the State Housing
Agency Act, being Neb. RS 71-1572 to 71-15,168.
(Neb. RS 71-15,112) (2000 Code, § 2-802) (Ord. 494, passed 3-19-2001)
§ 33.47 HOUSING AGENCY BOARD.
   (A)   The Mayor, subject to confirmation or denial by the governing body,
shall appoint five persons who shall constitute the Housing Agency and such
persons shall be called the Commissioners. One Commissioner shall be appointed
each year. Each Commissioner shall serve a five-year term of office or until
his or her successor is duly appointed; provided, that all vacancies shall be
filled for the unexpired terms. The governing body may appoint one of its
members to serve as one of the five members of such Housing Agency for such
term as the governing body may determine. No person shall serve as a
Commissioner unless he or she resides within the area of operation of that
Housing Agency. A certificate of the appointment or reappointment of any
Commissioner shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk and such certificate shall
be conclusive evidence of the proper appointment of such Commissioner. A
Commissioner shall receive no compensation for his or her services, but he or
she shall be entitled to the necessary expenses, including travel expenses,
incurred in discharge of his or her duties. A majority of Commissioners shall
constitute a quorum of the Agency for the purpose of conducting its business,
exercising its powers and for all other purposes. Action may be taken by the
Agency upon the vote of the majority of the Commissioners present unless in any
case the by-laws of the Agency shall require a larger number. The Commissioners
shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among the Commissioners and
shall have the power to employ an executive director who shall serve as ex
officio Secretary of the Agency. The Agency may also employ legal counsel or it
may call upon the chief law officer of the municipality for such services as it
may require. It may employ technical experts and such other officers, agents
and employees as it may require and shall determine their qualifications,
duties, compensations and terms of office. The Agency may delegate such other
powers and duties to its agents or employees as it may deem proper. During his
or her tenure and for one year thereafter, no Commissioner, officer or employee
of the Municipal Housing Agency shall voluntarily acquire any interest, direct
or indirect, in any project or in any property included or planned to be
included in any project or in any contract or proposed contract relating to any
housing project. If any such Commissioner, officer or employee involuntarily
acquires any such interest or voluntarily or involuntarily acquired any such
interest prior to appointment or employment as Commissioner, officer or
employee, he or she shall immediately disclose his or her interest in writing
to the Agency and such disclosure shall be entered upon the minutes of the
Agency and he or she shall not participate in any action by the Agency relating
to the property or contract in which he or she has any such interest; provided,
that nothing herein shall apply to the acquisition of any interest in notes or
bonds of the Agency issued in connection with any housing project or to the
execution of agreements by banking institutions for deposit or handling of
funds in connection with a project or to act as trustee under any trust
indenture or to utility services, the rates for which are fixed or controlled
by a government agency. The Mayor may remove a Commissioner for neglect of duty
or misconduct in office in the manner prescribed hereinafter. The Mayor shall
send a notice of removal to such Commissioner which notice shall contain a
statement containing the charges against him or her. Unless, within ten days
from the receipt of such notice, such Commissioner files with the Clerk, a
request for a hearing before the governing body, the Commissioner shall be
deemed as removed from office. If a request for a hearing is filed with the
Clerk, the governing body of the municipality shall hold a hearing at which the
Commissioner shall have the right to appear in person or by counsel and the
governing body shall determine whether the removal shall be disapproved or
upheld. If the removal is disapproved, the Commissioner shall continue to hold
his or her position.
   (B)   The Housing Agency shall keep an accurate account of all its
activities and of all its receipts and disbursements and shall make a report to
the governing body on all such information.
(Neb. RS 71-1594 through 71-15,105, 71-15,141) (2000 Code, § 2-803) (Ord. 494,
passed 3-19-2001)
§ 33.48 APPOINTMENT OF RESIDENT COMMISSIONER.
   A sixth Commissioner, to be known as the Resident Commissioner, shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation or denial by the governing
body. To select the initial Resident Commissioner, or to fill subsequent
vacancies in the position, the Housing Agency shall notify any Resident
Advisory Board or other resident organization and all adult persons directly
assisted by such Agency, to the effect that the position of Resident
Commissioner is open and that if any such person is interested in being
considered as a candidate for the position, such person should notify the
Housing Agency, in writing, within 30 days of the person’s willingness to be
considered and to serve as Resident Commissioner. The names of all persons
interested who have notified the Housing Agency of their interest in so serving
shall be forwarded to the Mayor and the Resident Commissioner shall be
appointed from the list of names, subject to confirmation by the governing
body. Upon the appointment of a Resident Commissioner, the certificate of
appointment shall state the term is for five years or when he or she is no
longer an eligible resident, whichever occurs first. In the event that no
qualified person has submitted his or her name to the Housing Agency as being
interested as a candidate for the position, and the Housing Agency has received
no notification of interest in serving as a Resident Commissioner by any
person, no Resident Commissioner shall be required to be selected. In the event
a Resident Commissioner is appointed and resigns from the position prior to
completion of the appointed term, or is no longer an eligible resident, or is
otherwise disqualified or removed from the Board, and a vacancy is created, the
Housing Agency shall solicit new candidate(s) for the position following the
same procedure as set forth above. In the event that no Resident Commissioner
is selected and the position is unfilled, the Agency shall re-notify all adult
persons directly assisted by the Agency that the position of Resident
Commissioner is open and solicit these persons for candidates for the position
not less than once annually.
(Neb. RS 71-15,104) (2000 Code, § 2-804) (Ord. 494, passed 3-19-2001)
§ 33.49 OPERATION AND MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   The Housing Agency shall at all times observe the following duties
with respect to rentals and tenant selection.
      (1)   It may rent or lease dwelling accommodations therein only to
persons of low income, elderly or handicapped persons of low income and
displaced persons in need.
      (2)   There shall be no discrimination in the eligibility or occupancy of
tenants on the basis of race, sex, marital status, religion, color, creed,
national origin or ancestry.
      (3)   The Agency shall not accept any person as a tenant in any dwelling
in the housing project if the persons who occupy the dwelling have an aggregate
annual income which equals or exceeds the amount which the Agency has
conclusively determined to be sufficient to enable one to secure safe, sanitary
and uncontested dwelling accommodations within the area served by the Agency
and to provide an adequate standard of living.
      (4)   The Agency may rent or lease to a tenant a dwelling unit consisting
of a number of rooms which is deemed necessary to provide safe and sanitary
accommodations to the occupants without overcrowding.
      (5)   The Agency shall fix income limits for occupancy and rents after
taking into consideration:
         (a)   The family size, composition, age, physical handicaps and other
factors which might affect the rent paying ability of the person; and
         (b)   The economic factors which affect the financial stability and
solvency of the project.
      (6)   The Agency may accept as a tenant, any displaced person or persons
in need, regardless of income, but in no event shall such person or persons
remain as a tenant or tenants of the Agency for more than a period of six
months unless such persons also qualify as persons of low income, elderly or
handicapped persons of low income.
      (7)   All persons of low income, elderly or handicapped persons of low
income, or displaced persons in need shall be entitled to the benefits of this
subchapter and the Agency may establish rules and regulations consistent with
the purposes of this subchapter concerning eligibility and occupancy of the
housing project or other such shelter.
      (8)   Nothing herein shall prohibit the right of the Agency to inquire
into the financial condition, family composition, medical, personal and
employment history of any tenant or prospective tenant.
      (9)    The Agency shall prohibit subletting by tenants.
   (B)   The Agency may establish from time to time, rules and regulations
consistent with federal and state laws and regulations and the purposes of the
article concerning the termination of tenancy. Any tenant so terminated shall
be sent a written notice of termination setting out the reasons for such
termination and any tenant served with a notice shall be given the opportunity
to contest the termination in an appropriate hearing, except that tenants who
have created or maintained a threat constituting a serious and clear danger to
the health or safety of other tenants or Agency employees need not be given
such a hearing by the Agency. Such notice may provide that if the tenant fails
to pay his or her rent or comply with any covenant or condition of his or her
lease, or the rules and regulations of such Agency, or cure a violation or
default thereof as the case may be, as specified in such notice, or follow the
procedure for a hearing as set forth in the notice, all within the time or
times set forth in such notice, the tenancy shall then be automatically
terminated and no other notice or notices need be given of such termination or
the intent to terminate the tenancy and upon such termination, and without any
notice other than as provided for in this section, the Agency may file suit
against any tenant for recovery of possession of the premises and may recover
the same as provided by law.
   (C)   The Agency may establish from time to time, rules and regulations
consistent with the purposes of this subchapter concerning personal property of
tenants and other persons located in projects of the Agency and if such
personal property is not removed from a dwelling unit at the time of the
termination of the least, at the time of vacation or abandonment of the
dwelling unit or at the time of the death of any tenant, then the Agency may
remove the same and store such property at the tenant’s risk and expense. In
the event that possession of such personal property is not taken by the tenant
or other person authorized by law to take possession within 45 days after such
termination, vacation or abandonment and any storage removal charges remain
unpaid, then the Agency may at its option dispose of the personal property in
any manner which the Agency deems fit, except that any proceeds from the
disposal of such personal property shall be paid to the General Fund of the
body which created the Agency. No tenant or other person shall have any cause
of action against the Agency for such removal or disposition of such personal
property.
(Neb. RS 71-15,124, 71-15,133 through 15,134, and 71-15,140) (2000 Code, § 2-
805) (Ord. 494, passed 3-19-2001)
§ 33.50 REPORTS.
   The Housing Agency shall keep an accurate account of all its activities and
of all its receipts and disbursements and shall make an annual report in
January of each year to the governing body. Such report shall include all
mortgages and other interests in real property held by the Housing Agency,
including options to purchase and land sale contracts; a listing of all bond
issues and their essential terms and obligations and all other financial
obligations of the Housing Agency over $50,000. Such reports shall be
considered public records. If there has been no change from the last report in
the status of any of the items reported pursuant to this section, the Housing
Agency may file a statement to that effect in lieu of the report.
(Neb. RS 71-15,141) (2000 Code, § 2-806) (Ord. 494, passed 3-19-2001)
§ 33.51 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided, the definitions and terms set out
in the state statutes relating to housing agencies under the State Housing
Agency Act, being Neb. RS 71-1572 to 71-15,168 are hereby adopted by reference
as they now exist or may hereafter be amended.
(Neb. RS 71-1575) (2000 Code, § 2-807) (Ord. 494, passed 3-19-2001)
§ 33.52 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Housing Agency may establish from time to time, rules and regulations
consistent with the purposes of this subchapter concerning the priority of
eligible applicants for occupancy. The Agency may give preferential treatment
to applicants who are servicemen or veterans, relatives of servicemen or
veterans, to disabled servicemen or veterans, the elderly of disabled, those in
urgent need of adequate housing or who have no adequate source of income;
provided, that in any such system of priority, displaced persons in need shall
have a priority ahead of all other persons; and provided further, that no
tenant in good standing then in occupancy and qualified for continued occupancy
shall have his or her tenancy terminated in order to provide dwelling units for
classes or categories of applicants as the Agency may establish.
(Neb. RS 71-15,140) (2000 Code, § 2-808) (Ord. 494, passed 3-19-2001)
CHAPTER 34: ELECTIONS
Section
   
34.01   Generally
   
34.02   Notice
   
34.03   Registered voters; qualifications
   
34.04   Special elections
   
34.05   Election of officers; certifications required
   
34.06   Partisan ballot; when allowed; requirements
   
34.07   Candidate filing forms; deadlines; filing officer
   
34.08   Filing fee
   
34.09   Petition, write-in, and other candidates for general election ballot;
procedures
   
34.10   Recall procedure
   
34.11   Exit polls; poll watchers
   
34.12   Wards
   
34.13   Council members
Statutory reference:
   Election Act, see Neb. RS 32-101
§ 34.01 GENERALLY.
   (A)   (1)   All city issues and offices shall be combined on the statewide
primary and general election ballots whenever possible. The issuance of
separate ballots shall be avoided in a statewide election if city offices or
issues can reasonably be combined with the nonpartisan ballot and state law
does not require otherwise.
      (2)   All city elections involving the election of officers shall be held
in accordance with the Election Act, Neb. RS 32-101 et seq., and in conjunction
with the statewide primary or general election.
(Neb. RS 32-556)
   (B)   When the city holds an election in conjunction with the statewide
primary or general election, the election shall be held as provided in the
Election Act, Neb. RS 32-101et seq. Any other election held by the city shall
be held as provided in the Election Act unless otherwise provided by the
charter, code, or bylaws of the city.
   (C)   The city shall furnish to the Secretary of State and Election
Commissioner or County Clerk any maps and additional information which the
Secretary of State and Election Commissioner or County Clerk may require in the
proper performance of their duties in the conduct of elections and the
certification of results.
(Neb. RS 32-404) (Ord. 692, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 34.02 NOTICE.
   The notice of election required to be published by the Election Commissioner
or County Clerk pursuant to Neb. RS 32-802 shall serve as the notice
requirement for all city elections which are held in conjunction with the
statewide primary or general election.
§ 34.03 REGISTERED VOTERS; QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      REGISTERED VOTER. An elector who has a current voter registration record
on file with the Election Commissioner or County Clerk in the county of his or
her residence.
(Neb. RS 32-115)
   (B)   All registered voters residing within the corporate limits of the city
on or before election day shall be entitled to vote at all city elections.
(Neb. RS 17-602)
Statutory reference:
   Definition of elector, see Neb. RS 32-110
§ 34.04 SPECIAL ELECTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 77-3444, any issue to be submitted
to the registered voters at a special election by the city shall be certified
by the City Clerk to the Election Commissioner or County Clerk on or before the
eighth Friday prior to the election. A special election may be held by mail as
provided in Neb. RS 32-952 through 32-959. Any other special election under
this section shall be subject to division (B) of this section.
      (2)   In lieu of submitting the issue at a special election, the city may
submit the issue at a statewide primary or general election or at any scheduled
county election, except that no such issue shall be submitted at a statewide
election or scheduled county election unless the issue to be submitted has been
certified by the City Clerk to the Election Commissioner or County Clerk by
March 1 for the primary election and by September 1 for the general election.
      (3)   (a)   After the Election Commissioner or County Clerk has received
the certification of the issue to be submitted, he or she shall be responsible
for all matters relating to the submission of the issue to the registered
voters, except that the City Clerk shall be responsible for the publication or
posting of any required special notice of the submission of the issue other
than the notice required to be given of the statewide election issues. The
Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall prepare the ballots and issue
ballots for early voting and shall also conduct the submission of the issue,
including the receiving and counting of ballots on the issue.
         (b)   The election returns shall be made to the Election Commissioner
or County Clerk. The ballots shall be counted and canvassed at the same time
and in the same manner as the other ballots. Upon completion of the canvass of
the vote by the County Canvassing Board, the Election Commissioner or County
Clerk shall certify the election results to the City Council. The canvass by
the County Canvassing Board shall have the same force and effect as if made by
the City Council.
   (B)   (1)   A city that has submitted an issue for a special election under
subdivision (A)(1) of this section may cancel the special election if the
Secretary of State, Election Commissioner, or County Clerk receives a
resolution adopted by the political subdivision canceling the special election
on or before the fourth Thursday prior to the election. No cancellation shall
be effective after such date. If a special election is canceled in such manner,
the city shall be responsible for the costs incurred that are related to the
canceled election. Such costs shall include all chargeable costs as provided in
section Neb. RS 32-1202 associated with preparing for and conducting a special
election.
      (2)   A city that has submitted an issue at a statewide primary or
general election or at any scheduled county election under subdivision (A)(2)
of this section may withdraw the issue from the ballot if the Secretary of
State, Election Commissioner, or County Clerk receives a resolution adopted by
the city withdrawing the issue from the ballot no later than March 1 prior to a
statewide primary election or September 1 prior to a statewide general
election. No withdrawal shall be effective after such date. Any issue withdrawn
in this manner shall not be printed on the ballot.
(Neb. RS 32-559)
   (C)   Any special election under the Election Act, Neb. RS 32-101 et seq.,
shall be held on the first Tuesday following the second Monday of the selected
month unless otherwise specifically provided. Except as otherwise specifically
provided, no special election shall be held under the Election Act in April,
May, June, October, November, or December of an even-numbered year unless it is
held in conjunction with the statewide primary or general election. No special
election shall be held under the Election Act in September of an even-numbered
year except as provided in Neb. RS 32-564 and except for a special election by
a political subdivision pursuant to Neb. RS 13-519 or Neb. RS 77-3444 to
approve a property tax levy or exceed a property tax levy limitation.
(Neb. RS 32-405) (Ord. 631, passed 6-21-2021; Ord. 666, passed 11-20-2023; Ord.
693, passed 4-21-2025)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 32-405 and Neb. RS 32-559
§ 34.05 ELECTION OF OFFICERS; CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED.
   No later than January 5 of each even-numbered year, the City Council shall
certify to the Secretary of State, the Election Commissioner, or the County
Clerk the name of the city, the number of officers to be elected, the length of
the terms of office, the vacancies to be filled by election and length of
remaining term, and the number of votes to be cast by a registered voter for
each office. The Secretary of State, Election Commissioner, and County Clerk
shall prescribe the forms to be used for certification to him or her.
(Neb. RS 32-404)
§ 34.06 PARTISAN BALLOT; WHEN ALLOWED; REQUIREMENTS.
   All elective city officers shall be nominated and elected on a nonpartisan
basis unless the city provides for a partisan ballot by ordinance. No ordinance
providing for nomination and election on a partisan ballot shall permit
affiliation with any party not recognized as a political party for purposes of
the Election Act. Such ordinance providing for nomination and election on a
partisan ballot shall be adopted and effective not less than 60 days prior to
the filing deadline.
(Neb. RS 32-557)
§ 34.07 CANDIDATE FILING FORMS; DEADLINES; FILING OFFICER.
   (A)   Any candidate may place his or her name on the primary election ballot
by filing a candidate filing form prescribed by the Secretary of State as
provided in division (B) below. If a candidate is an incumbent of any elective
office, the filing period for filing the candidate filing form shall be between
January 5 and February 15 prior to the date of the primary election. No
incumbent who resigns from elective office prior to the expiration of his or
her term shall file for any office after February 15 of that election year. All
other candidates shall file for office between January 5 and March 1 prior to
the date of the primary election.
(Neb. RS 32-606)
   (B)   Candidate filing forms shall be filed in the office of the Election
Commissioner or County Clerk.
(Neb. RS 32-607)
   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 32-564, any candidate in a special
election to fill a vacancy for an office of a political subdivision may have
his or her name placed on the special election ballot by filing a candidate
filing form prescribed by the Secretary of State as provided in Neb. RS 32-607
and this division (C).
      (2)   The filing period for filing the candidate filing form shall be:
         (a)   On or before March 1 for a special election to be held in
conjunction with the statewide primary election;
         (b)   On or before August 1 for a special election to be held in
conjunction with the statewide general election; and
         (c)   Between the eighth Friday prior to the election and the fifth
Friday prior to the election for all other elections.
      (3)   A candidate filing form for such special election shall meet the
requirements of Neb. RS 32-607, except that the form shall contain the
following statement: “I hereby swear that I will abide by the laws of the State
of Nebraska regarding the results of the special election, that I am a
registered voter and qualified to be elected, and that I will serve if
elected.”
      (4)   A candidate filing form for such special election shall be filed
with the filing officer specified in Neb. RS 32-607(2).
(Neb. RS 32-606.01) (Ord. 643, passed 3-21-2022; Ord. 694, passed 4-21-2025)
Statutory reference:
   Filling of vacancy on ballot, see Neb. RS 32-625 and 32-627
   Withdrawal after filing, see Neb. RS 32-622
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 32-606 and Neb. RS 32-607
§ 34.08 FILING FEE.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (D) or (E) of this section, a filing
fee shall be paid to the City Treasurer by or on behalf of each candidate for
city office prior to filing for office. The fee shall be placed in the general
fund of the city. No candidate filing forms shall be filed until the proper
payment or the proper receipt showing the payment of such filing fee is
presented to the filing officer. On the day of the filing deadline, the City
Treasurer's office shall remain open to receive filing fees until the hour of
the filing deadline.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (D) or (E) of this section, the filing
fee shall be a sum equal to 1% of the annual salary as of November 30 of the
year preceding the election for the office for which he or she files as a
candidate.
   (C)   All declared write-in candidates shall pay the filing fees that are
required for the office at the time that they present the write-in affidavit to
the filing officer.
   (D)   No filing fee shall be required for any candidate filing for an office
in which a per diem is paid rather than a salary or for which there is a salary
of less than $500 per year.
   (E)   (1)   No filing fee shall be required of any candidate completing an
affidavit requesting to file for elective office in forma pauperis.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         AVAILABLE RESOURCES. Includes every type of property or interest in
property that an individual owns and may convert into cash except:
            (i)   Real property used as a home;
            (ii)   Household goods of a moderate value used in the home; and
            (iii)   Assets to a maximum value of $3,000 used by a recipient in
a planned effort directed towards self-support.
         PAUPER. A person whose income and other resources for maintenance are
found under assistance standards to be insufficient for meeting the cost of his
or her requirements and whose reserve of cash or other available resources does
not exceed the maximum available resources that an eligible individual may own.
   (F)   If any candidate dies prior to an election, the spouse of the
candidate may file a claim for refund of the filing fee with the City Council
prior to the date of the election. Upon approval of the claim by the City
Council, the filing fee shall be refunded.
(Ord. 643, passed 3-21-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 32-608
§ 34.09 PETITION, WRITE-IN, AND OTHER CANDIDATES FOR GENERAL ELECTION BALLOT;
PROCEDURES.
   (A)   (1)   Any registered voter who was not a candidate in the primary
election and who was not registered to vote with a party affiliation on or
after March 1 and before the general election in the calendar year of the
general election may have his or her name placed on the general election ballot
for a partisan office by filing petitions as prescribed in this section and
Neb. RS 32-621 or by nomination by political party convention or committee
pursuant to Neb. RS 32-627 or 32-710.
      (2)   Any candidate who was defeated in the primary election and any
registered voter who was not a candidate in the primary election may have his
or her name placed on the general election ballot if a vacancy exists on the
ballot under Neb. RS 32-625(2) and the candidate:
         (a)   Files for the office by petition as prescribed in divisions (B)
and (C) below;
         (b)   Files as a write-in candidate as prescribed in Neb. RS 32-615;
or
         (c)   Is nominated by political party convention or committee pursuant
to Neb. RS 32-710.
(Neb. RS 32-616)
   (B)   (1)   Petitions for nomination shall conform to the requirements of
Neb. RS 32-628. Petitions shall state the office to be filled and the name and
address of the candidate. Petitions for partisan office shall also indicate the
party affiliation of the candidate. A sample copy of the petition shall be
filed with the filing officer prior to circulation. Petitions shall be signed
by registered voters residing in the city, if candidates are chosen at large,
or in the ward in which the officer is to be elected, if candidates are chosen
by ward, and shall be filed with the filing officer in the same manner as
provided for candidate filing forms in §
34.07. Petition signers and petition circulators shall conform to the
requirements of Neb. RS 32-629 and 32-630.
      (2)   No petition for nomination shall be filed unless there is attached
thereto a receipt showing the payment of the filing fee required pursuant to §
34.08. The petitions shall be filed by September 1 in the year of the general
election, and all signed petitions not filed with the Secretary of State by
such date shall become invalid.
(Neb. RS 32-617)
   (C)   (1)   The number of signatures of registered voters needed to place
the name of a candidate upon the nonpartisan ballot for the general election
shall be at least 10% of the total number of registered voters voting for
Governor or President of the United States at the immediately preceding general
election in the city or in the ward in which the officer is to be elected, not
to exceed 2,000.
      (2)   The number of signatures of registered voters needed to place the
name of a candidate for an office upon the partisan ballot for the general
election shall be as follows:
         (a)   For each partisan office to be filled by the registered voters
of the entire state, at least 4,000, and at least 750 signature shall be
obtained in each congressional district in the state;
         (b)   For each partisan office to be filled by the registered voters
of a county, at least 20% of the total number of registered voters voting for
Governor or President of the United States at the immediately preceding general
election within the county, not to exceed 2,000, except that the number of
signatures shall not be required to exceed 25% of the total number of
registered voters voting for the office at the immediately preceding general
election; and
         (c)   For each partisan office to be filled by the registered voters
of a political subdivision other than a county, at least 20% of the total
number of registered voters voting for Governor or President of the United
States at the immediately preceding general election within the political
subdivision, not to exceed 2,000.
(Neb. RS 32-618) (Ord. 695, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 34.10 RECALL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      FILING OFFICER. The Election Commissioner or County Clerk.
(Neb. RS 32-1301)
   (B)   (1)   The Mayor, any member of the City Council, and any other elected
official of the city may be removed from office by recall pursuant to this
section.
      (2)   The recall procedure and special election provisions of this
section shall apply to members of the City Council who are elected by ward.
Only registered voters of such member's ward may sign a recall petition or vote
at the recall election. The recall election shall be held within the member's
ward. When a member of the City Council is nominated by ward in the primary
election and elected at large in the general election, the recall provisions
shall apply to the registered voters at the general election.
(Neb. RS 32-1302)
   (C)   (1)   A petition demanding that the question of removing the Mayor, a
member of the City Council, or any other elected official be submitted to the
registered voters shall be signed by registered voters equal in number to at
least 35% of the total vote cast for that office in the last general election,
except that for City Council office for which more than one candidate is
chosen, the petition shall be signed by registered voters equal in number to at
least 35% of the number of votes cast for the person receiving the most votes
for such office in the last general election. The signatures shall be affixed
to petition papers and shall be considered part of the petition.
      (2)   Petition circulators shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS
32-629 and 32- 630.
      (3)   The petition papers shall be procured from the filing officer.
Prior to the issuance of such petition papers, a recall petition filing form
shall be signed and filed with the filing officer by at least one registered
voter. Such voter or voters shall be deemed to be the principal circulator or
circulators of the recall petition. The filing form shall state the name and
office of the official sought to be removed, shall include in concise language
of 60 words or less the reason or reasons for which recall is sought, and shall
request that the filing officer issue initial petition papers to the principal
circulator for circulation.
      (4)   After receiving the filing form, the filing officer shall notify
the official sought to be removed by any method specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01
or, if notification cannot be made with reasonable diligence by any of the
methods specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01, by leaving a copy of the filing form at
the official's usual place of residence and mailing a copy by first-class mail
to the official's last-known address. If the official chooses, he or she may
submit a defense statement in concise language of 60 words or less for
inclusion on the petition. Any such defense statement shall be submitted to the
filing officer within 20 days after the official receives the copy of the
filing form. The filing officer shall prepare the petition papers within five
business days after receipt of the defense statement. The principal circulator
or circulators shall gather the petition papers within 20 days after being
notified by the filing officer that the petition papers are available. The
filing officer shall notify the principal circulator or circulators that the
necessary signatures must be gathered within 30 days from the date of issuing
the petitions.
      (5)   The filing officer, upon issuing the initial petition papers or any
subsequent petition papers, shall enter in a record, to be kept in his or her
office, the name of the principal circulator or circulators to whom the papers
were issued, the date of issuance, and the number of papers issued. The filing
officer shall certify on the papers the name of the principal circulator or
circulators to whom the papers were issued and the date they were issued. No
petition paper shall be accepted as part of the petition unless it bears such
certificate. The principal circulator or circulators who check out petitions
from the filing officer may distribute such petitions to persons who may act as
circulators of such petitions.
      (6)   Petition signers shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS 32-
629 and 32-630. Each signer of a recall petition shall be a registered voter
and qualified by his or her place of residence to vote for the office in
question.
(Neb. RS 32-1303)
   (D)   Each petition paper shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS 32-
1304.
   (E)   (1)   The principal circulator or circulators shall file, as one
instrument, all petition papers comprising a recall petition for signature
verification with the filing officer within 30 days after the filing officer
issues the initial petition papers to the principal circulator or circulators
as provided in division (C) of this section.
      (2)   Within 15 business days after the filing of the petition, the
filing officer shall ascertain whether or not the petition is signed by the
requisite number of registered voters. No new signatures may be added after the
initial filing of the petition papers. Any person may remove his or her name
from a petition as provided in Neb. RS 32-632. If the petition is found to be
sufficient, the filing officer shall attach to the petition a certificate
showing the result of such examination. If the requisite number of signatures
has not been gathered, the filing officer shall file the petition in his or her
office without prejudice to the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
(Neb. RS 32-305)
   (F)   (1)   If the recall petition is found to be sufficient, the filing
officer shall notify the official whose removal is sought and the City Council
that sufficient signatures have been gathered. Notification of the official
sought to be removed may be by any method specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01 or, if
notification cannot be made with reasonable diligence by any of the methods
specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01, by leaving such notice at the official's usual
place of residence and mailing a copy by first- class mail to the official's
last-known address.
      (2)   The City Council shall, within 21 days after receipt of the
notification from the filing officer pursuant to division (F)(1) of this
section, order an election. The date of the election shall be the first
available date that complies with Neb. RS 32-405 and that can be certified to
the Election Commissioner or County Clerk at least 50 days prior to the
election, except that if any other election is to be held in the city within 90
days after such notification, the City Council shall provide for the holding of
the recall election on the same day.
      (3)   All resignations shall be tendered as provided in Neb. RS 32-562.
If the official whose removal is sought resigns before the recall election is
held, the City Council may cancel the recall election if the City Council
notifies the Election Commissioner or County Clerk of the cancellation on or
before the fourth Thursday prior to the election, otherwise the recall election
shall be held as scheduled.
      (4)   If a filing officer is subject to a recall election, the Secretary
of State shall conduct the recall election.
(Neb. RS 32-1306)
   (G)   The form of the official ballot at a recall election held pursuant to
division (F) of this section shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS 32-
1307.
   (H)   (1)   If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election are against
the removal of the official named on the ballot or the election results in a
tie, the official shall continue in office for the remainder of his or her term
but may be subject to further recall attempts as provided in division (I) of
this section.
      (2)   If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election are for the
removal of the official named on the ballot, he or she shall, regardless of any
technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office unless
a recount is ordered. If the official is deemed removed, the removal shall
result in a vacancy in the office, which shall be filled as otherwise provided
in this section and Neb. RS 32-567 to 32-570 and 32-574, and 32-606.01.
      (3)   If the election results show a margin of votes equal to 1% or less
between the removal or retention of the official in question, the Secretary of
State, Election Commissioner, or County Clerk shall order a recount of the
votes cast unless the official named on the ballot files a written statement
with the filing officer that he or she does not want a recount.
      (4)   If there are vacancies in the offices of one-half or more of the
members of the City Council or any other governing body at one time due to the
recall of such members, a special election to fill such vacancies shall be
conducted as expeditiously as possible by the Secretary of State, Election
Commissioner, or County Clerk. Candidates for the special election shall file a
candidate filing form pursuant to §
34.07(C).
      (5)   No official who is removed at a recall election or who resigns
after the initiation of the recall process shall be appointed to fill the
vacancy resulting from his or her removal or the removal of any other member of
the same governing body during the remainder of his or her term of office.
(Neb. RS 32-1308)
   (I)   No recall petition filing form shall be filed against an elected
official within 12 months after a recall election has failed to remove him or
her from office or within six months after the beginning of his or her term of
office or within six months prior to the incumbent filing deadline for the
office.
(Neb. RS 32-1309) (Ord. 632, passed 6-21-2021; Ord. 667, passed 11-20-2023;
Ord. 696, passed 4-21-2025)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 32-1301 through Neb. RS 32-1303, Neb. RS 32-
1305, Neb. RS 32-1306, Neb. RS 32-1308 and Neb. RS 32-1309
 § 34.11 EXIT POLLS; POLL WATCHERS.
   (A)   No person shall conduct an exit poll, a public opinion poll, or any
other interview with voters on election day seeking to determine voter
preference within 20 feet of the entrance of any polling place or, if inside
the polling place or building, within 100 feet of any voting booth.
   (B)   (1)   No poll watcher shall interfere with any voter in the
preparation or casting of such voter’s ballot or prevent any election worker
from performing the worker’s duties.
      (2)   A poll watcher shall not provide assistance to a voter as described
in Neb. RS 32-918 unless selected by the voter to provide assistance as
provided in Neb. RS 32-918.
      (3)   A poll watcher shall not do any electioneering or disseminate any
information or materials advertising or advocating for or against any ballot
measure while engaged in observing at a polling place.
      (4)   A poll watcher shall maintain a distance of at least eight feet
from the sign-in table, the sign-in register, the polling booths, the ballot
box, and any ballots which have not been cast, except that if the polling place
is not large enough for a distance of eight feet, the judge of election shall
post a notice of the minimum distance the poll watcher must maintain from the
sign-in table, the sign-in register, the polling booths, the ballot box, and
any ballots which have not been cast. The posted notice shall be clearly
visible to the voters and shall be posted prior to the opening of the polls on
election day. The minimum distance shall not be determined to exclude a poll
watcher from being in the polling place.
(Neb. RS 32-1525)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 34.12 WARDS.
   (A)   The municipality shall redistrict as often as necessary using the most
recent Federal Census to ensure that each ward is substantially equal in
population.
   (B)   The municipality shall stand divided into the following wards as set
forth herein.
      (1)   Ward No. 1. The first ward to be known as Ward No. 1 and consisting
of all that portion of the municipality located north of Highway No. 30, and
all that portion of said municipality located south of Highway No. 30 which
lies west of West Avenue and north of 7th Street and all of that portion of
said municipality located west of Court Street and south of 7th Street.
      (2)   Ward No. 2. The second ward to be known as Ward No. 2 and
consisting of all that portion of the municipality located south of Highway No.
30 which lies east of Court Street and all of that portion of said municipality
located south of Highway No. 30 which lies east of West Avenue and north of 7th
Street.
(Neb. RS 17-102) (2000 Code, § 1-718) (Ord. 514, passed 2-16-2004)
§ 34.13 COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   (A)   Council members shall be elected from the municipality at large unless
the residents of the municipality have voted to elect its Council members by
wards. Council members shall serve for a term of four years and shall be a
resident and qualified elector.
   (B)   If the election of Council members takes place by wards, each nominee
for Council member shall be a resident and qualified elector of the ward for
which he or she is a candidate and only residents of that ward may sign the
candidate’s nomination petitions.
(Neb. RS 5-108) (2000 Code, § 1-720)
CHAPTER 35: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
General Provisions
   
35.01   Definitions
   
35.02   Annual audit; financial statements
   
35.03   Contracts and purchases; bidding and other requirements
   
35.04   Orders or warrants for money; contracts; expenditures; requirements
   
35.05   Claims and accounts payable
   
35.06   Collection of special assessments; procedure
   
35.07   Special assessment fund
   
35.08   Sinking funds; gifts of money or property
   
35.09   Deposit of funds
   
35.10   Certificates of deposit; time deposits; conditions
   
35.11   Investment and use of surplus funds
   
35.12   Bond issues
   
35.13   Debt collection; authority to contract with collection agency
   
35.14   Credit cards; authority to accept
Annual Budget
   
35.25   Fiscal year
   
35.26   Budget procedures
   
35.27   Expenditures prior to adoption of budget
   
35.28   Proposed budget statement; contents; availability; correction
   
35.29   Proposed budget statement; hearing; adoption; certification of tax
amount
   
35.30   Adopted budget statement; filing; certification of tax amount
   
35.31   Appropriation bill
   
35.32   General Fund
   
35.33   Transfer of funds
   
35.34   Budget revision
   
35.35   Proprietary functions; fiscal year; budget statements; filing; hearing;
adoption; reconciliation
Tax Levies
   
35.45   Property tax levy for general revenue purposes
   
35.46   Levies for other taxes and special assessments
   
35.47   All-purpose levy; extraordinary levies; allocation; abandonment
   
35.48   Property tax levy; maximum; authority to exceed
   
35.49   Property tax levy; certification of amount; collection
   
35.50   Property tax request; increase by more than allowable growth
percentage; procedure for setting
   
35.50.01   Property tax request; procedure for setting
   
35.51   Motor vehicle fee
Funds
   
35.65   Cemetery, perpetual fund
Sales Tax
   
35.75   Imposition of sales and use tax
   
35.76   Property tax relief
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BIENNIAL BUDGET. A budget by the city that provides for a biennial period to
determine and carry on the city’s financial and taxing affairs.
   BIENNIAL PERIOD. The two fiscal years comprising a biennium commencing in
odd-numbered or even-numbered years used by the city in determining and
carrying on its financial and taxing affairs.
   PUBLIC FUNDS. All money, including non-tax money, used in the operation and
functions of governing bodies. If the city has a lottery established under the
Nebraska County and City Lottery Act, only those net proceeds which are
actually received by the city from a licensed lottery operator shall be
considered PUBLIC FUNDS, and PUBLIC FUNDS shall not include amounts awarded as
prizes.
(Neb. RS 13-503)
§ 35.02 ANNUAL AUDIT; FINANCIAL STATEMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   For the purpose of this division (A), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         ACCOUNTANT. A duly licensed public accountant or certified public
accountant who otherwise is not an employee of or connected in any way with the
city.
         ANNUAL AUDIT REPORT. The written report of the accountant and all
appended statements and schedules relating thereto presenting or recording the
findings of an examination or audit of the financial transactions, affairs, or
financial condition of the city and its proprietary functions for the fiscal
year immediately prior to the making of the annual report.
         FISCAL YEAR. The fiscal year for the city or the fiscal year
established in Neb. RS 18-2804 for a proprietary function if different than the
city fiscal year.
(Neb. RS 19-2902)
      (2)   The City Council shall cause an audit of the city’s accounts to be
made by a recognized independent and qualified accountant as expeditiously as
possible following the close of the fiscal year and to cover all financial
transactions and affairs of the city for that preceding fiscal year. The audit
shall be made on a cash or accrual method at the discretion of the City
Council. The audit shall be completed and the annual audit report made by the
accountant shall be submitted within six months after the close of the fiscal
year in any event, unless an extension of time is granted by a written
resolution adopted by the City Council. If the city owns or operates any type
of public utility or other enterprise which substantially generates its own
revenue, that phase of the affairs of the city shall be audited separately from
other functions of the city and the result shall appear separately in the
annual audit report made by the accountant to the city and such audit shall be
on an accrual basis and shall contain statements and materials which conform to
generally accepted accounting principles. For the utilities operated through
the Board of Public Works, the City Council may provide for an entirely
separate audit, on an accrual basis, of such operations and report and by a
different accountant than the one making the general audit.
(Neb. RS 19-2903)
      (3)   The annual audit report shall set forth, insofar as possible, the
financial position and results of financial operations for each fund or group
of accounts of the city. When the accrual method is selected for the annual
audit report, the report shall be in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles. The annual audit report shall also include the
professional opinion of the accountant with respect to the financial
statements, or, if an opinion cannot be expressed, a declaration that the
accountant is unable to express such an opinion with an explanation of the
reasons why he or she cannot do so.
(Neb. RS 19-2904)
      (4)   At least three copies of such annual audit report shall be properly
signed and attested by the accountant; two copies shall be filed with the City
Clerk, and one copy shall be filed with the Auditor of Public Accounts. The
annual audit report filed, together with any accompanying comment or
explanation, shall become a part of the public records of the City Clerk and
shall at all times thereafter be open and subject to public inspection.
(Neb. RS 19-2905)
   (B)   The City Council shall provide and file with the City Clerk, not later
than August 1 of each year, financial statements showing the city’s actual and
budgeted figures for the most recently completed fiscal year.
(Neb. RS 13-606)
Statutory reference:
   Other provisions on audits, Neb. RS 19-2906 through 19-2909
§ 35.03 CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES; BIDDING AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 18-412.01 for a contract with a public
power district to operate, renew, replace, or add to the electric distribution,
transmission, or generation system of the city, no contract for enlargement or
general improvements, such as water extensions, sewers, public heating system,
bridges, work on streets, or any other work or improvement when the cost of the
enlargement or improvement is assessed to the property, costing over $30,000,
shall be made unless it is first approved by the City Council.
   (B)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 18-412.01, before the City Council makes
any contract in excess of $30,000 for enlargement or general improvements, such
as water extensions, sewers, public heating system, bridges, work on streets,
or any other work or improvement when the cost of the enlargement or
improvement is assessed to the property, an estimate of the cost shall be made
by the City Engineer and submitted to the City Council. In advertising for bids
as provided in divisions (C) and (E) of this section, the City Council may
publish the amount of the estimate.
   (C)   Advertisements for bids shall be required for any contract costing
over $30,000 entered into:
      (1)   For enlargement or general improvements, such as water extensions,
sewers, public heating system, bridges, work on streets, or any other work or
improvement when the cost of the enlargement or improvement is assessed to the
property; or
      (2)   For the purchase of equipment used in the construction of the
enlargement or general improvements.
   (D)   A city electric utility may enter into a contract for the enlargement
or improvement of the electric system or for the purchase of equipment used for
the enlargement or improvement without advertising for bids if the price is:
      (1)   $30,000 or less;
      (2)   $60,000 or less and the city electric utility has gross annual
revenue from retail sales in excess of $1,000,000;
      (3)   $90,000 or less and the city electric utility has gross annual
revenue from retail sales in excess of $5,000,000; or
      (4)   $120,000 or less and the city electric utility has gross annual
revenue from retail sales in excess of $10,000,000.
   (E)   The advertisement provided for in division (C) of this section shall
be published at least seven days prior to the bid closing in a legal newspaper
in or of general circulation in the city. In case of a public emergency
resulting from infectious or contagious diseases, destructive windstorms,
floods, snow, war, or an exigency or pressing necessity or unforeseen need
calling for immediate action or remedy to prevent a serious loss of or serious
injury or damage to life, health, or property, estimates of costs and
advertising for bids may be waived in the emergency ordinance authorized by
Neb. RS 17-613 when adopted by a 3/4 vote of the City Council and entered of
record.
   (F)   If, after advertising for bids as provided in this section, the City
Council receives fewer than two bids on a contract or if the bids received by
the City Council contain a price which exceeds the estimated cost, the City
Council may negotiate a contract in an attempt to complete the proposed
enlargement or general improvements at a cost commensurate with the estimate
given.
   (G)   If the materials are of such a nature that, in the opinion of the
manufacturer and with the concurrence of the City Council or Board of Public
Works, no cost can be estimated until the materials have been manufactured or
assembled to the specific qualifications of the city, the City Council or Board
of Public Works may authorize the manufacture and assemblage of those materials
and may thereafter approve the estimated cost expenditure when it is provided
by the manufacturer.
(Neb. RS 17-568.01)
   (H)   Any city bidding procedure may be waived by the City Council or Board
of Public Works:
      (1)   When materials or equipment are purchased at the same price and
from the same seller as materials or equipment which have formerly been
obtained pursuant to the state bidding procedure in Neb. RS 81-145 through 81-
162;
      (2)   When the contract is negotiated directly with a sheltered workshop
pursuant to Neb. RS 48-1503; or
      (3)   When required to comply with any federal grant, loan, or program.
(Neb. RS 17-568.02)
   (I)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law or a home rule
charter, a city which has established, by an interlocal agreement with any
county, a joint purchasing division or agency may purchase personal property
without competitive bidding if the price for the property has been established
by the federal General Services Administration or the materiel division of the
Department of Administrative Services.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division (I), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes but is not limited to supplies, materials,
and equipment used by or furnished to any officer, office, department,
institution, board, or other agency.
         PURCHASING or PURCHASE. The obtaining of personal property by sale,
lease, or other contractual means.
(Neb. RS 18-1756)
Statutory reference:
   Requirements for public lettings, see Neb. RS 73-101 et seq.
§ 35.04 ORDERS OR WARRANTS FOR MONEY; CONTRACTS; EXPENDITURES; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council shall have no power to appropriate, issue,
or draw any order or warrant on the City Treasurer for money, unless the same
has been appropriated or ordered by ordinance, or the claim for the payment of
which such order or warrant is issued has been allowed according to the
provisions of §
35.05, and funds for the class or object out of which such claim is payable
have been included in the adopted budget statement or transferred according to
law.
(Neb. RS 17-708)
   (B)   No contract shall be hereafter made by the City Council, or any
committee or member, and no expense shall be incurred by any of the officers or
departments of the city, whether the object of the expenditures shall have been
ordered by the City Council or not, unless an appropriation shall have been
previously made concerning such expense, except as otherwise expressly provided
in division (A).
(Neb. RS 17-709)
   (C)   All warrants drawn upon the City Treasurer must be signed by the Mayor
and countersigned by the City Clerk, stating the particular fund to which the
same is chargeable, the person to whom payable, and for what particular object.
No money shall be otherwise paid than upon such warrants so drawn. Each warrant
shall specify the amount included in the adopted budget statement for such fund
upon which it is drawn and the amount already expended of such fund.
(Neb. RS 17-711)
§ 35.05 CLAIMS AND ACCOUNTS PAYABLE.
   (A)   (1)   All liquidated and unliquidated claims and accounts payable
against the city shall:
         (a)   Be presented in writing;
         (b)   State the name and address of the claimant and the amount of the
claim; and
         (c)   Fully and accurately identify the items or services for which
payment is claimed or the time, place, nature, and circumstances giving rise to
the claim.
      (2)   As a condition precedent to maintaining an action for a claim,
other than a tort claim as defined in Neb. RS 13-903, the claimant shall file
such claim within 90 days of the accrual of the claim in the office of the City
Clerk.
      (3)   The City Clerk shall notify the claimant or his or her agent or
attorney by letter mailed to the claimant’s address within five days if the
claim is disallowed by the City Council.
      (4)   No costs shall be recovered against the city in any action brought
against it for any claim or for any claim allowed in part which has not been
presented to the City Council to be audited, unless the recovery is for a
greater sum than the amount allowed with the interest due.
(Neb. RS 17-714)
   (B)   Upon the allowance of claims by the City Council, the order for their
payment shall specify the particular fund or appropriation out of which they
are payable as specified in the adopted budget statement; and no order or
warrant shall be drawn in excess of 85% of the current levy for the purpose for
which it is drawn, unless there is sufficient money in the treasury at the
credit of the proper fund for its payment; provided that if there exists at the
time such warrant is drawn, obligated funds from the federal government or the
state, or both from the federal government and the state, for the general
purpose or purposes of such warrant, then such warrant may be drawn in excess
of 85% of the current levy for the purpose for which it is drawn to the
additional extent of 100% of such obligated federal or state funds. No claim
shall be audited or allowed unless an order or warrant for the payment thereof
may legally be drawn.
(Neb. RS 17-715)
§ 35.06 COLLECTION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The city shall have authority to collect the special assessments which
it levies and to perform all other necessary functions related thereto
including foreclosure.
   (B)   The City Council of any city collecting its own special assessments
shall direct that notice that special assessments are due shall be mailed or
otherwise delivered to the last known address of the person against whom those
special assessments are assessed or to the lending institution or other party
responsible for paying those special assessments. Failure to receive the notice
shall not relieve the taxpayer from any liability to pay the special
assessments and any interest or penalties accrued thereon.
   (C)   A city collecting its own assessments shall:
      (1)   File notice of the assessments and the amount of assessment being
levied for each lot or tract of land to the Register of Deeds; and
      (2)   File a release of assessment upon final payment of each assessment
with the Register of Deeds.
(Neb. RS 18-1216)
Statutory reference: 
   Refunding erroneously paid special assessments, see Neb. RS 17-703
§ 35.07 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUND.
   All money received on special assessments shall be held by the City
Treasurer as a special fund to be applied to the payment of the improvement for
which the assessment was made, and this money shall be used for no other
purpose whatever, unless to reimburse the city for money expended for any such
improvement.
(Neb. RS 17-710)
§ 35.08 SINKING FUNDS; GIFTS OF MONEY OR PROPERTY.
   (A)   The city is hereby empowered to receive money or property by donation,
bequest, gift, devise, or otherwise for the benefit of any one or more of the
public purposes for which sinking funds are established by the provisions of
this section, as stipulated by the donor. The title to the money or property so
donated shall vest in the City Council, or in its successors in office, who
shall become the owners thereof in trust to the uses of the sinking fund or
funds; provided, if the donation is real estate, the City Council may manage
the same as in the case of real estate donated to the city for city library
purposes under the provisions of Neb. RS 51-215 and 51-216.
(Neb. RS 19-1301)
   (B)   The City Council, subject to all the limitations set forth in this
section, shall have the power to levy a tax of not to exceed $0.105 on each
$100 in any one year upon the taxable value of all the taxable property within
the city for a term of not to exceed ten years, in addition to the amount of
tax which may be annually levied for the purposes of the adopted budget
statement of the city, for the purpose of establishing a sinking fund for the
construction, purchase, improvement, extension, original equipment, or repair,
not including maintenance, of any one or more of the following public
improvements, including acquisition of any land incident to the making thereof:
city library; city auditorium or community house for social or recreational
purposes; city hall; city public library, auditorium, or community house in a
single building; city swimming pool and appurtenances thereto; city jail; city
building to house equipment or personnel of a fire department, together with
firefighting equipment or apparatus; city park; city cemetery; city medical
clinic building, together with furnishings and equipment; or city hospital. The
city shall not be authorized to levy the tax or to establish the sinking fund
as provided in this division if, having bonded indebtedness, such city has been
in default in the payment of interest thereon or principal thereof for a period
of ten years prior to the date of the passage of the resolution providing for
the submission of the proposition for establishment of the sinking fund as
required in division (C).
(Neb. RS 19-1302)
   (C)   Before any sinking fund or funds are established or before any annual
tax is levied for any such planned city improvement mentioned in division (B)
by the city, the City Council shall declare its purpose by resolution to submit
to the qualified electors of the city at the next general city election the
proposition to provide the city with the specific city improvement planned for
consummation under this section. The resolution of submission shall, among
other things, set forth a clear description of the improvement planned, the
estimated cost according to the prevailing costs, the amount of annual levy
over a definite period of years, not exceeding ten years, required to provide
such cost, and the specific name or designation for the sinking fund sought to
be established to carry out the planned improvement, together with a statement
of the proposition for placement upon the ballot at the election. Notice of the
submission of the proposition, together with a copy of the official ballot
containing the same, shall be published in its entirety three successive weeks
before the day of the election in a legal newspaper published in the city or,
if no legal newspaper is published therein, in some legal newspaper published
in the county in which the city is located and of general circulation. If no
legal newspaper is published in the county, such notice shall be published in
some legal newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the city is
located. No such sinking fund shall be established unless the same has been
authorized by a majority or more of the legal votes of the city cast for or
against the proposition. If less than a majority of the legal votes favor the
establishment of the sinking fund, the planned improvement shall not be made,
no annual tax shall be levied therefor, and no sinking fund or sinking funds
shall be established in connection therewith, but such resolution of submission
shall immediately be repealed. If the proposition shall carry at such election
in the manner prescribed in this division, the City Council and its successors
in office shall proceed to do all things authorized under such resolution of
submission but never inconsistent with this section. Provisions of the statutes
of this state relating to election of officers, voting places, election
apparatus and blanks, preparation and form of ballots, information to voters,
delivery of ballots, conduct of elections, manner of voting, counting of votes,
records and certificates of elections, and recounts of votes, so far as
applicable, shall apply to voting on the proposition under this section.
(Neb. RS 19-1303)
   (D)   All funds received by the City Treasurer, by donation or by tax levy,
as hereinbefore provided, shall, as they accumulate, be immediately invested by
the Treasurer, with the written approval of the City Council, in the manner
provided in §
35.11. Whenever investments of such sinking fund or funds are made, as
aforesaid, the nature and character of the same shall be reported to the City
Council, and the investment report shall be made a matter of record by the City
Clerk in the proceedings of the City Council. The sinking fund, or sinking
funds, accumulated under the provisions of this section, shall constitute a
special fund, or funds, for the purpose or purposes for which the same was
authorized and shall not be used for any other purpose unless authorized by 60%
of the qualified electors of the city voting at a general election favoring
such change in the use of the sinking fund or sinking funds; provided that the
question of the change in the use of the sinking fund or sinking funds, when it
fails to carry, shall not be resubmitted in substance for a period of one year
from and after the date of such election.
(Neb. RS 19-1304)
Statutory reference:
   Additional levy limitations, see Neb. RS 17-702
   Investment in warrants, see Neb. RS 77-2337
§ 35.09 DEPOSIT OF FUNDS.
   (A)   (1)   The City Treasurer shall deposit, and at all times keep on
deposit, for safekeeping, in banks, capital stock financial institutions, or
qualifying mutual financial institutions of approved and responsible standing,
all money collected, received, or held by him or her as City Treasurer. These
deposits shall be subject to all regulations imposed by law or adopted by the
City Council for the receiving and holding thereof. The fact that a
stockholder, director, or other officer of the bank, capital stock financial
institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution is also serving as
Mayor, a member of the City Council, as a member of the Board of Public Works,
or as any other officer of the city shall not disqualify the bank, capital
stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution from
acting as a depository for the city funds.
      (2)   The City Council shall require from all banks, capital stock
financial institutions, or qualifying mutual financial institutions a bond in
such penal sum as may be the maximum amount on deposit at any time less the
amount insured or guaranteed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or,
in lieu thereof, security given as provided in the Public Funds Deposit
Security Act, to secure the payment of all such deposits and accretions. The
City Council shall approve this bond or giving of security. The City Treasurer
shall not be liable for any loss of any money sustained by reason of the
failure of any such depository so designated and approved.
(Neb. RS 17-607)
   (B)   The insurance afforded to depositors in banks, capital stock financial
institutions, or qualifying mutual financial institutions through the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation shall be deemed and construed to be a surety bond
or bonds to the extent that the deposits are insured or guaranteed by that
corporation, and for deposits so insured or guaranteed, no other surety bond or
bonds or other security shall be required.
(Neb. RS 77-2362)
   (C)   Neb. RS 77-2366 shall apply to deposits in capital stock financial
institutions. Neb. RS 77-2365.01 shall apply to deposits in qualifying mutual
financial institutions.
(Neb. RS 17-607 and 77-2362)
Statutory reference: 
   Other provisions on deposits of public funds, see Neb. RS 77-2363 and 77-
2364
   Public Funds Deposit Security Act, see Neb. RS 77-2386
§ 35.10 CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT; TIME DEPOSITS; CONDITIONS.
   The City Treasurer may, upon resolution of the Mayor and City Council
authorizing the same, purchase certificates of deposit from and make time
deposits in any bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual
financial institution in the state to the extent that those certificates of
deposit or time deposits are insured or guaranteed by the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation. Deposits may be made in excess of the amounts so secured
by the corporation, and the amount of the excess deposit shall be secured by a
bond or by security given in the same manner as is provided for cities of the
first class in Neb. RS 16-714 through 16-716 as of the time the deposit is
made. Neb. RS 77-2366 shall apply to deposits in capital stock financial
institutions. Neb. RS 77-2365.01 shall apply to deposits in qualifying mutual
financial institutions.
(Neb. RS 17-720)
§ 35.11 INVESTMENT AND USE OF SURPLUS FUNDS.
   (A)   When the City Treasurer holds funds of the city in excess of the
amount required for maintenance or set aside for betterments and improvements,
the Mayor and City Council may, by resolution, direct and authorize the
Treasurer to invest the surplus funds in the outstanding bonds or registered
warrants of the city, bonds and debentures issued either singly or collectively
by any of the 12 federal land banks, the 12 intermediate credit banks, or the
13 banks for cooperatives under the supervision of the Farm Credit
Administration, or in interest-bearing bonds or the obligations of the United
States. The interest on such bonds or warrants shall be credited to the fund
out of which the bonds or warrants were purchased.
(Neb. RS 17-608)
   (B)    All income received by the city from public utilities and from the
payment and collection of water taxes, rents, rates or assessments shall be
applied to the payment of running expenses, interest on bonds or money borrowed
and the erection and construction of public utilities; should there be any
surplus, it shall be annually created into a sinking fund for the payment of
public utility bonds or for the improvements of the works, or into the general
fund as the Council may direct. The surplus remaining, if any, may, if the
Council so directs, be invested in interest-bearing bonds or obligations of the
United States.
(Neb. RS 17-540)
   (C)   The Mayor and City Council may, by resolution, direct and authorize
the Treasurer to dispose of the surplus electric light, water, or gas funds, or
the funds arising from the sale of electric light, water, or natural gas
distribution properties, by the payment of outstanding electric light, water,
or gas distribution bonds or water warrants then due. The excess, if any, after
such payments, may be transferred to the general fund of the city.
(Neb. RS 17-609)
   (D)   Any surplus funds arising out of the operation of any system of
waterworks, power plant, ice plant, gas plant, sewerage, heating or lighting
plant, or distribution system by the Board of Public Works, or by the City
Council, where any of such utilities are not being operated by such a Board,
may be invested, if not invested pursuant to the provisions of any other law
upon the subject, in like manner and subject to the same conditions as the
investment of similar funds of cities of the first class, as provided in Neb.
RS 16-691.01.
(Neb. RS 17-803)
   (E)   (1)    Whenever the city has accumulated a surplus of any fund in
excess of its current needs or has accumulated a sinking fund for the payment
of its bonds and the money in such sinking fund exceeds the amount necessary to
pay the principal and interest of any such bonds which become due during the
current year, the City Council may invest any such surplus in excess of current
needs or such excess in its sinking fund in certificates of deposit, in time
deposits, and in any securities in which the State Investment Officer is
authorized to invest pursuant to the Nebraska Capital Expansion Act, Neb. RS
17-1269 et seq., and the Nebraska State Funds Investment Act, Neb. RS 17-1237
et seq., and as provided in the authorized investment guidelines of the
Nebraska Investment Council in effect on the date the investment is made. The
State Investment Officer shall, upon request, furnish a copy of current
authorized investment guidelines of the Nebraska Investment Council.
      (2)   Nothing in division (E)(1) shall be construed to authorize
investments in venture capital or to expand the investment authority of a local
government investment pool under the Public Entities Pooled Investment Act,
Neb. RS 77-23,109 et seq.
(Neb. RS 77-2341) (Ord. 698, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 35.12 BOND ISSUES.
   The City Council may, after meeting all the requirements of state law, issue
bonds, fund bonds, and retire bonds for such purposes as may be permitted by
state law. The City Council shall have the authority to levy special
assessments for the payment of interest and principal on these bonds and may
spread the payments up to the maximum number of years permitted by state law.
Statutory reference:
   Bonds in general, see Neb. RS 18-1801 through 18-1805
   Funding and refunding bonds, see Neb. RS 10-606 through 10-612
   General provisions, see Neb. RS 10-101 through 10-143
§ 35.13 DEBT COLLECTION; AUTHORITY TO CONTRACT WITH COLLECTION AGENCY.
   (A)   The city may contract to retain a collection agency licensed pursuant
to Neb. RS 45-601 through 45-622, within or without this state, for the purpose
of collecting public debts owed by any person to the city.
   (B)   No debt owed pursuant to division (A) of this section may be assigned
to a collection agency unless:
      (1)   There has been an attempt to advise the debtor by first-class mail,
postage prepaid, at the last known address of the debtor:
         (a)   Of the existence of the debt; and
         (b)   That the debt may be assigned to a collection agency for
collection if the debt is not paid; and
      (2)   At least 30 days have elapsed from the time the notice was sent.
   (C)   A collection agency which is assigned a debt under this section shall
have only those remedies and powers which would be available to it as an
assignee of a private creditor.
   (D)   For purposes of this section, debt shall include all delinquent fees
or payments except delinquent property taxes on real estate. In the case of
debt arising as a result of an order or judgment of a court in a criminal or
traffic matter, a collection fee may be added to the debt. The collection fee
shall be $25 or 4.5% of the debt, whichever is greater. The collection fee
shall be paid by the person who owes the debt directly to the person or agency
providing the collection service.
(Neb. RS 45-623)
§ 35.14 CREDIT CARDS; AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT.
   (A)   (1)   If authorized by the City Council, any city official may accept
credit cards, charge cards, or debit cards, whether presented in person or
electronically, or electronic funds transfers as a method of cash payment of
any tax, levy, excise, duty, custom, toll, interest, penalty, fine, license,
fee, or assessment of whatever kind or nature, whether general or special, as
provided by Neb. RS 77-1702.
      (2)   A county treasurer, county official, or political subdivision
official shall not accept a central bank digital currency as a method of cash
payment of any tax, levy, excise, duty, custom, toll, interest, penalty, fine,
license, fee, or assessment of whatever kind or nature.
   (B)   The total amount of the taxes, levies, excises, duties, customs,
tolls, interest, penalties, fines, licenses, fees, or assessments of whatever
kind or nature, whether general or special, paid for by credit card, charge
card, debit card, or electronic funds transfer shall be collected by the city
official.
   (C)   With respect to a facility which it operates in a proprietary
capacity, the City Council may choose to accept credit cards, charge cards, or
debit cards, whether presented in person or electronically, or electronic funds
transfers as a means of cash payment and may adjust the price for services to
reflect the handling and payment costs.
   (D)   The city official shall obtain, for each transaction, authorization
for use of any credit card, charge card, or debit card used pursuant to this
section from the financial institution, vending service company, credit card or
charge card company, or third-party merchant bank providing that service.
   (E)   (1)   The types of credit cards, charge cards, or debit cards accepted
and the payment services provided shall be determined by the State Treasurer
and the Director of Administrative Services, with the advice of a committee
convened by the State Treasurer and the director. The committee shall consist
of the State Treasurer, the Tax Commissioner, the director, and representatives
from counties, cities, and other political subdivisions as may be appropriate.
      (2)   The committee shall develop recommendations for the contracting of
such services. The State Treasurer and the director shall contract with one or
more credit card, charge card, or debit card companies or third-party merchant
banks for services on behalf of the state and those counties, cities, and
political subdivisions that choose to participate in the state contract for
such services. The State Treasurer and the director shall consider, for
purposes of this section, any negotiated discount, processing, or transaction
fee imposed by a credit card, charge card, or debit card company or third-party
merchant bank as an administrative expense.
      (3)   If the City Council chooses not to participate in the state
contract, it may choose types of credit cards, charge cards, and debit cards
and may negotiate and contract independently or collectively as a governmental
entity with one or more financial institutions, vending service companies,
credit card, charge card, or debit card companies, or third-party merchant
banks for the provision of these services.
   (F)   Subject to the direction of the City Council, a city official
authorizing acceptance of credit card or charge card payments shall be
authorized but not required to impose a surcharge or convenience fee upon the
person making a payment by credit card or charge card so as to wholly or
partially offset the amount of any discount or administrative fees charged to
the city, but the surcharge or convenience fee shall not exceed the surcharge
or convenience fee imposed by the credit card or charge card companies or
third-party merchant banks which have contracted under division (E) of this
section. The surcharge or convenience fee shall be applied only when allowed by
the operating rules and regulations of the credit card or charge card involved
or when authorized in writing by the credit card or charge card company
involved. When a person elects to make a payment to the city by credit card or
charge card and such a surcharge or convenience fee is imposed, the payment of
the surcharge or convenience fee shall be deemed voluntary by that person and
shall be in no case refundable. If a payment is made electronically by credit
card, charge card, debit card, or electronic funds transfer as part of a system
for providing or retrieving information electronically, the city official shall
be authorized but not required to impose an additional surcharge or convenience
fee upon the person making a payment.
   (G)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CENTRAL BANK DIGITAL CURRENCY. A digital medium of exchange, token, or
monetary unit of account issued by the United States Federal Reserve System or
any analogous federal agency that is made directly available to the consumer by
such federal entities. CENTRAL BANK DIGITAL CURRENCY includes a digital medium
of exchange, token, or monetary unit of account so issued that is processed or
validated directly by such federal entities.
      ELECTRONIC FUNDS TRANSFER. The movement of funds by nonpaper means,
usually through a payment system, including, but not limited to, an automated
clearinghouse or the Federal Reserve’s Fedwire system.
(Neb. RS 13-609) (Ord. 699, passed 4-21-2025)
ANNUAL BUDGET
§ 35.25 FISCAL YEAR.
   (A)   The fiscal year of the municipality for the purposes of taxation and
appropriations shall begin October 1 of each year.
   (B)   This fiscal year shall not apply to proprietary functions of the
municipality for which a separate budget has been approved by the City Council
as provided in the Municipal Proprietary Function Act.
(Neb. RS 17-701) (2000 Code, § 1-801)
§ 35.26 BUDGET PROCEDURES.
   The budget instruction manual prepared by the Auditor of Public Accounts is
incorporated by reference for the purpose of proper budget preparation.
§ 35.27 EXPENDITURES PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF BUDGET.
   (A)   On and after the first day of its fiscal year in 1993 and of each
succeeding year or on or after the first day of its biennial period and until
the adoption of the budget by the City Council in September, the City Council
may expend any balance of cash on hand for the current expenses of the city.
Except as provided in division (B) of this section, these expenditures shall
not exceed an amount equivalent to the total amount expended under the last
budget in the equivalent period of the prior budget year or biennial period.
These expenditures shall be charged against the appropriations for each
individual fund or purpose as provided in the budget when adopted.
(Neb. RS 13-509.01)
   (B)   The restriction on expenditures in division (A) of this section may be
exceeded upon the express finding of the City Council that expenditures beyond
the amount authorized are necessary to enable the city to meet its statutory
duties and responsibilities. The finding and approval of the expenditures in
excess of the statutory authorization shall be adopted by the City Council in
open public session. Expenditures authorized by this section shall be charged
against appropriations for each individual fund or purpose as provided in the
budget when adopted, and nothing in this section shall be construed to
authorize expenditures by the city in excess of that authorized by any other
statutory provision.
(Neb. RS 13-509.02)
§ 35.28 PROPOSED BUDGET STATEMENT; CONTENTS; AVAILABILITY; CORRECTION.
   (A)    The City Council shall annually or biennially prepare a proposed
budget statement on forms prescribed and furnished by the Auditor of Public
Accounts. The proposed budget statement shall be made available to the public
prior to publication of the notice of the hearing on the proposed budget
statement pursuant to §
35.29. A proposed budget statement shall contain the following information,
except as provided by state law:
      (1)   For the immediately preceding fiscal year or biennial period, the
revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other than revenue
received from personal and real property taxation, allocated to the funds and
separately stated as to each such source: the unencumbered cash balance at the
beginning and end of the year or biennial period; the amount received by
taxation of personal and real property; and the amount of actual expenditures;
      (2)   For the current fiscal year or biennial period, actual and
estimated revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, allocated to
the funds and separately stated as to each such source: the actual unencumbered
cash balance available at the beginning of the year or biennial period; the
amount received from personal and real property taxation; and the amount of
actual and estimated expenditures, whichever is applicable. This statement
shall contain the cash reserve for each fiscal year or biennial period and
shall note whether or not the reserve is encumbered. The cash reserve
projections shall be based upon the actual experience of prior years or
biennial periods. The cash reserve shall not exceed 50% of the total budget
adopted exclusive of capital outlay items;
      (3)   For the immediately ensuing fiscal year or biennial period, an
estimate of revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other than
revenue to be received from taxation of personal and real property, separately
stated as to each such source: the actual or estimated unencumbered cash
balances, whichever is applicable, to be available at the beginning of the year
or biennial period; the amounts proposed to be expended during the year or
biennial period; and the amount of cash reserve, based on actual experience of
prior years or biennial period, which cash reserve shall not exceed 50% of the
total budget adopted exclusive of capital outlay items;
      (4)   A statement setting out separately the amount sought to be raised
from the levy of a tax on the taxable value of real property:
         (a)   For the purpose of paying the principal or interest on bonds
issued or authorized to be issued by the City Council or the legal voters of
the political subdivision; and
         (b)   For all other purposes.
      (5)   A uniform summary of the proposed budget statement, including each
proprietary function fund included in a separate proprietary budget statement
prepared pursuant to the Municipal Proprietary Function Act, and a grand total
of all funds maintained by the City Council; and
      (6)   A list of the proprietary functions which are not included in the
budget statement. These proprietary functions shall have a separate budget
statement which is approved by the City Council as provided in the Municipal
Proprietary Function Act.
   (B)   The actual or estimated unencumbered cash balance required to be
included in the budget statement by this section shall include deposits and
investments of the city as well as any funds held by the County Treasurer for
the city and shall be accurately stated on the proposed budget statement.
   (C)   The city shall correct any material errors in the budget statement
detected by the Auditor of Public Accounts or by other sources.
   (D)   The estimated expenditures plus the required cash reserve for the
ensuing fiscal year or biennial period less all estimated and actual
unencumbered balances at the beginning of the year or biennial period and less
the estimated income from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other
than taxation of personal and real property shall equal the amount to be
received from taxes, and that amount shall be shown on the proposed budget
statement pursuant to this section. The amount to be raised from taxation of
personal and real property, as determined above, plus the estimated revenue
from other sources, including motor vehicle taxes, and the unencumbered
balances shall equal the estimated expenditures, plus the necessary required
cash reserve, for the ensuing year or biennial period.
(Ord. 668, passed 11-20-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 13-504 and Neb. RS 13-505
§ 35.29 PROPOSED BUDGET STATEMENT; HEARING; ADOPTION; CERTIFICATION OF TAX
AMOUNT.
   (A)    The City Council shall each year or biennial period conduct a public
hearing on its proposed budget statement. Such hearing shall be held separately
from any regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body and shall not be
limited by time. Notice of the place and time of the hearing, together with a
summary of the proposed budget statement, shall be published at least four
calendar days prior to the date set for hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city's jurisdiction. For purposes of such notice, the
four calendar days shall include the day of publication but not the day of
hearing. When the total operating budget, not including reserves, does not
exceed $10,000 per year or $20,000 per biennial period, the proposed budget
summary may be posted at the City Council's principal headquarters. At such
hearing, the governing body shall make at least three copies of the proposed
budget statement available to the public and shall make a presentation
outlining key provisions of the proposed budget statement, including, but not
limited to, a comparison with the prior year's budget. Any member of the public
desiring to speak on the proposed budget statement shall be allowed to address
the governing body at the hearing and shall be given a reasonable amount of
time to do so.
   (B)   After the hearing, the proposed budget statement shall be adopted, or
amended and adopted as amended, and a written record shall be kept of the
hearing. The amount to be received from personal and real property taxation
shall be certified to the levying board after the proposed budget statement is
adopted or is amended and adopted as amended. The certification of the amount
to be received from personal and real property taxation shall specify
separately the amount to be applied to the payment of principal or interest on
bonds issued or authorized to be issued by the City Council or the legal voters
of the political subdivision and the amount to be received for all other
purposes.
   (C)   If the adopted budget statement reflects a change from that shown in
the published proposed budget statement, a summary of the changes shall be
published within 20 calendar days after its adoption in the manner provided in
this section, but without provision for hearing, setting forth the items
changed and the reasons for the changes.
   (D)   Upon approval by City Council, the budget shall be filed with the
Auditor of Public Accounts. The Auditor may review the budget for errors in
mathematics, improper accounting, and noncompliance with the Nebraska Budget
Act or Neb. RS 13-518 to 13-522. If the Auditor detects such errors, he or she
shall immediately notify the Council of such errors. The Council shall correct
any such error as provided in §
35.34. Warrants for the payment of expenditures provided in the budget adopted
under this section shall be valid notwithstanding any errors or noncompliance
for which the Auditor has notified the Council.
   (E)   When a levy increase has been authorized by vote of the electors, the
adopted budget statement shall indicate the amount of the levy increase.
(Ord. 627-2, passed 6-21-2021; Ord. 669, passed 11-20-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 13-506 and Neb. RS 13-507
§ 35.30 ADOPTED BUDGET STATEMENT; FILING; CERTIFICATION OF AMOUNT OF TAX.
   (A)   (1)    After publication and hearing on the proposed budget statement
and within the time prescribed by law, the City Council shall file with and
certify to the levying board or boards on or before September 30 of each year
or September 30 of the final year of a biennial period and file with the
Auditor of Public Accounts a copy of the adopted budget statement which
complies with Neb. RS 13-518 to 13-522, together with the amount of the tax
required to fund the adopted budget, setting out separately:
         (a)   The amount to be levied for the payment of principal or interest
on bonds issued or authorized to be issued by the City Council or the legal
voters of the political subdivision; and
         (b)   The amount to be levied for all other purposes.
      (2)   Proof of publication shall be attached to the statements.
   (B)   If the prime rate published by the Federal Reserve Board is 10% or
more at the time of the filing and certification required under this section,
the City Council, in certifying the amount required, may make allowance for
delinquent taxes not exceeding 5% of the amount required plus the actual
percentage of delinquent taxes for the preceding tax year or biennial period
and for the amount of estimated tax loss from any pending or anticipated
litigation which involves taxation and in which tax collections have been or
can be withheld or escrowed by court order. For purposes of this section,
anticipated litigation shall be limited to the anticipation of an action being
filed by a taxpayer who or which filed a similar action for the preceding year
or biennial period which is still pending. Except for such allowances, the City
Council shall not certify an amount of tax more than 1% greater or lesser than
the amount determined under § 35.28.
   (C)   The City Council shall use the certified taxable values as provided by
the County Assessor pursuant to Neb. RS 13-509 for the current year in setting
or certifying the levy. The City Council may designate one of its members to
perform any duty or responsibility required of the Council by this section.
(Ord. 646, passed 3-21-2022; Ord. 670, passed 11-20-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 13-508
§ 35.31 APPROPRIATION BILL.
   The City Council shall adopt a budget statement pursuant to the Nebraska
Budget Act, to be termed, “The Annual Appropriation Bill,” in which the Council
may appropriate those sums of money as may be deemed necessary to defray all
necessary expenses and liabilities of the city.
(Neb. RS 17-706)
§ 35.32 GENERAL FUND.
   If the city has not decided to follow the all-purpose levy method of
financing for the fiscal year, all money not specifically appropriated in the
annual appropriation bill shall be deposited in and known as the General Fund.
§ 35.33 TRANSFER OF FUNDS.
   (A)   Whenever during the current fiscal year it becomes apparent to the
City Council that due to unforeseen emergencies there is temporarily
insufficient money in a particular fund to meet the requirements of the adopted
budget of expenditures for that fund, the Council may by a majority vote,
unless otherwise provided by state law, transfer money from other funds to such
fund.
   (B)   No expenditure during any fiscal year shall be made in excess of the
amounts indicated in the adopted budget statement, except as authorized in §
35.34 or by state law.
   (C)   Any officer or officers of the City Council who obligate funds
contrary to the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense.
(Neb. RS 13-510) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 35.34 BUDGET REVISION.
   (A)   (1)   Unless otherwise provided by law, the City Council may propose
to revise the previously adopted budget statement and shall conduct a public
hearing on that proposal whenever during the current fiscal year it becomes
apparent to the City Council that:
         (a)   There are circumstances which could not reasonably have been
anticipated at the time the budget for the current year was adopted;
         (b)   The budget adopted violated Neb. RS 13-518 through 13-522, such
that the revenue of the current fiscal year for any fund thereof will be
insufficient, additional expenses will be necessarily incurred, or there is a
need to reduce the budget requirements to comply with Neb. RS 13-518 through
13-522; or
         (c)   The City Council has been notified by the Auditor of Public
Accounts of a mathematical or accounting error or noncompliance with the
Nebraska Budget Act.
      (2)   The public hearing requirement shall not apply to emergency
expenditures pursuant to Neb. RS 81-829.51.
   (B)   Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published at
least four calendar days prior to the date set for hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation within the Council’s jurisdiction. For purposes of such
notice, the four calendar days shall include the day of publication but not the
day of hearing. This published notice shall set forth:
      (1)   The time and place of the hearing;
      (2)   The amount in dollars of additional or reduced money required and
for what purpose;
      (3)   A statement setting forth the nature of the unanticipated
circumstances and, if the budget requirements are to be increased, the reasons
why the previously adopted budget of expenditures cannot be reduced during the
remainder of the current year to meet the need for additional money in that
manner;
      (4)   A copy of the summary of the originally adopted budget previously
published; and
      (5)   A copy of the summary of the proposed revised budget.
   (C)   At the hearing any taxpayer may appear or file a written statement
protesting any application for additional money. A written record shall be kept
of all such hearings.
   (D)   Upon conclusion of the public hearing on the proposed revised budget
and approval of the proposed revised budget by the City Council, the Council
shall file with the County Clerk of the county or counties in which the City
Council is located, and with the Auditor of Public Accounts, a copy of the
revised budget, as adopted. The City Council may then issue warrants in payment
for expenditures authorized by the adopted revised budget. These warrants shall
be referred to as registered warrants and shall be repaid during the next
fiscal year from funds derived from taxes levied therefor.
   (E)   Within 30 days after the adoption of the budget under §
35.29, the City Council may, or within 30 days after notification of an error
by the Auditor of Public Accounts, the Council shall correct an adopted budget
which contains a clerical, mathematical, or accounting error which does not
affect the total amount budgeted by more than 1% or increase the amount
required from property taxes. No public hearing shall be required for such a
correction. After correction, the City Council shall file a copy of the
corrected budget with the County Clerk of the county or counties in which the
City Council is located and with the Auditor of Public Accounts. The City
Council may then issue warrants in payment for expenditures authorized by the
budget.
(Neb. RS 13-511)
§ 35.35 PROPRIETARY FUNCTIONS; FISCAL YEAR; BUDGET STATEMENTS; FILING; HEARING;
ADOPTION; RECONCILIATION.
   (A)    For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PROPRIETARY FUNCTION. A water supply or distribution utility, a
wastewater collection or treatment utility, an electric generation,
transmission, or distribution utility, a gas supply, transmission, or
distribution utility, an integrated solid waste management collection,
disposal, or handling utility, or a hospital or a nursing home owned by the
city.
      SUBSIDIZATION. The costs of operation of a proprietary function are
regularly financed by appropriations from the city's general fund in excess of
the amount paid by the city to the proprietary function for actual service or
services received.
   (B)   The City Council may establish a separate fiscal year for each
proprietary function, except that any proprietary function which is subsidized
by appropriations from the city's general fund shall have the same fiscal year
as the city.
   (C)   (1)   At least 30 days prior to the start of the fiscal year of each
proprietary function, a proposed proprietary budget statement shall be prepared
in writing and filed with the City Clerk containing the following information:
         (a)   For the immediately preceding fiscal year, the revenue from all
sources, the unencumbered cash balance at the beginning and end of the year,
the amount received by taxation, and the amount of actual expenditure;
         (b)   For the current fiscal year, actual and estimated revenue from
all sources separately stated as to each such source, the actual unencumbered
cash balance available at the beginning of the year, the amount received from
taxation, and the amount of actual and estimated expenditure, whichever is
applicable;
         (c)   For the immediately ensuing fiscal year, an estimate of revenue
from all sources separately stated as to each such source, the actual or
estimated unencumbered cash balance, whichever is applicable, to be available
at the beginning of the year, the amounts proposed to be expended during the
fiscal year, and the amount of cash reserve based on actual experience of prior
years; and
         (d)   A uniform summary of the proposed budget statement which shall
include a total of all funds maintained for the proprietary function.
      (2)   The statement shall contain the estimated cash reserve for each
fiscal year and shall note whether or not the reserve is encumbered. The cash
reserve projections shall be based upon the actual experience of prior years.
      (3)   Each proprietary budget statement shall be filed on forms
prescribed and furnished by the Auditor of Public Accounts following
consultation with representatives of such governing bodies as operate
proprietary functions subject to the provisions of the Municipal Proprietary
Function Act.
   (D)   (1)   After a proposed proprietary budget statement is filed with the
City Clerk, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the statement.
Notice of the time and place of the hearing, a summary of the proposed
proprietary budget statement, and notice that the full proposed proprietary
budget statement is available for public review with the City Clerk during
normal business hours shall be published one time at least five days prior to
the hearing in a legal newspaper in or of general circulation within the City
Council's jurisdiction or by mailing to each resident within the Council's
jurisdiction.
       (2)   After the hearing, the proposed proprietary budget statement shall
be adopted or amended and adopted as amended, and a written record shall be
kept of the hearing. If the adopted proprietary budget statement reflects a
change from the proposed proprietary statement presented at the hearing, a copy
of the adopted proprietary budget statement shall be filed with the City Clerk
within 20 days after its adoption and published in a legal newspaper in or of
general circulation within the Council's jurisdiction or by mailing to each
resident within the Council's jurisdiction.
   (E)   If the actual expenditures for a proprietary function exceed the
estimated expenditures in the proprietary budget statement during its fiscal
year, the City Council shall adopt a proprietary function reconciliation
statement within 90 days after the end of the fiscal year which reflects any
difference between the adopted proprietary budget statement for the previous
fiscal year and the actual expenditures and revenue for that fiscal year. After
the adoption of a proprietary function reconciliation statement, it shall be
filed with the City Clerk and published in a legal newspaper in or of general
circulation within the Council's jurisdiction or by mailing to each resident
within the Council's jurisdiction. If the difference between the adopted
proprietary budget for the previous fiscal year and the actual expenditures and
revenues for that fiscal year is greater than 10%, the proprietary function
reconciliation statement shall only be adopted following a public hearing.
   (F)   If the budget of a proprietary function is included in the city budget
statement created pursuant to the Nebraska Budget Act, the Municipal
Proprietary Function Act need not be followed for that proprietary function.
Any income from a proprietary function which is transferred to the general fund
of the city shall be shown as a source of revenue in the city budget statement
created pursuant to the Nebraska Budget Act.
(Ord. 647, passed 3-21-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 18-2803 through Neb. RS 18-2808
TAX LEVIES
§ 35.45 PROPERTY TAX LEVY FOR GENERAL REVENUE PURPOSES.
   The city shall have power to levy taxes for general revenue purposes in any
one year not to exceed $0.35 on each $100 upon the taxable value of all the
taxable property in the city. The valuation of such property shall be
ascertained from the books or assessment rolls of the County Assessor.
(Neb. RS 17-506)
§ 35.46 LEVIES FOR OTHER TAXES AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   The city shall have power to levy any other tax or special assessment
authorized by law.
(Neb. RS 17-507)
§ 35.47 ALL-PURPOSE LEVY; EXTRAORDINARY LEVIES; ALLOCATION; ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   Notwithstanding provisions in the statutes of Nebraska and this code
to the contrary, for any fiscal year the City Council may decide to certify to
the County Clerk for collection one all-purpose levy required to be raised by
taxation for all city purposes instead of certifying a schedule of levies for
specific purposes added together. Subject to the limits in §
35.48, the all-purpose levy shall not exceed an annual levy of $1.05 on each
$100 upon the taxable valuation of all the taxable property in the city.
Otherwise authorized extraordinary levies to service and pay bonded
indebtedness of the city may be made by the city in addition to such all-
purpose levy.
(Neb. RS 19-1309)
   (B)   If the method provided in division (A) is followed in city financing,
the city shall allocate the amount so raised to the several departments of the
city in its annual budget and appropriation ordinance, or in other legal
manner, as the City Council deems wisest and best.
(Neb. RS 19-1310)
   (C)   If the city elects to follow the method provided in division (A), it
shall be bound by that election during the ensuing fiscal year but may abandon
such method in succeeding fiscal years.
(Neb. RS 19-1311)
   (D)   If it is necessary to certify the amount to county officers for
collection, the same shall be certified as a single amount for general fund
purposes.
(Neb. RS 19-1312)
§ 35.48 PROPERTY TAX LEVY; MAXIMUM; AUTHORITY TO EXCEED.
   (A)    Property tax levies for the support of the city for fiscal years
beginning on or after July 1, 1998, shall be limited to the amounts set forth
in this division (A), except as provided in division (C). The city may levy a
maximum levy of $0.45 per $100 of taxable valuation of property subject to the
levy plus an additional $0.05 per $100 of taxable valuation to provide
financing for the city's share of revenue required under an agreement or
agreements executed pursuant to the Interlocal Cooperation Act or the Joint
Public Agency Act. The maximum levy shall include amounts levied to pay for
sums to support a library pursuant to Neb. RS 51-201, museum pursuant to Neb.
RS 51-501, visiting community nurse, home health nurse, or home health agency
pursuant to Neb. RS 71-1637, or statue, memorial, or monument pursuant to Neb.
RS 80-202. Property tax levies for judgments, except judgments or orders from
the Commission of Industrial Relations, obtained against the city which require
or obligate the city to pay that judgment, to the extent the judgment is not
paid by liability insurance coverage of the city, for preexisting lease-
purchase contracts approved prior to July 1, 1998, for bonded indebtedness
approved according to law and secured by a levy on property, and for payments
by a public airport to retire interest-free loans from the Division of
Aeronautics in lieu of bonded indebtedness at a lower cost to the public
airport are not included in the levy limits established by this division (A).
The limitations on tax levies provided in this division (A) are to include all
other general or special levies provided by law. Notwithstanding other
provisions of law, the only exceptions to the limits in this division (A) are
those provided by or authorized by this section. Tax levies in excess of the
limitations in this section shall be considered unauthorized levies under Neb.
RS 77-1606 unless approved under division (C).
   (B)   (1)   All city airport authorities established under the Cities
Airport Authorities Act, community redevelopment authorities established under
the Community Development Law, and off-street parking districts established
under the Offstreet Parking District Act may be allocated property taxes as
authorized by law which are authorized by the city and are counted in the
municipal levy limit provided by division (A), except that such limitation
shall not apply to property tax levies for preexisting lease-purchase contracts
approved prior to July 1, 1998, for bonded indebtedness approved according to
law and secured by a levy on property, and for payments by a public airport to
retire interest-free loans from the Division of Aeronautics in lieu of bonded
indebtedness at a lower cost to the public airport. For off-street parking
districts established under the Offstreet Parking District Act, the tax shall
be counted in the allocation by the city proportionately, by dividing the total
taxable valuation of the taxable property within the district by the total
taxable valuation of the taxable property within the city multiplied by the
levy of the district. The City Council shall review and approve or disapprove
the levy request of the political subdivisions subject to this division (B).
The City Council may approve all or a portion of the levy request and may
approve a levy request that would allow a levy greater than that permitted by
law. The levy allocated by the city may be exceeded as provided in division
(C).
      (2)   On or before August 1, all political subdivisions subject to city
levy authority under this division (B) shall submit a preliminary request for
levy allocation to the City Council. The preliminary request of the political
subdivision shall be in the form of a resolution adopted by a majority vote of
members present of the political subdivision's governing body. The failure of a
political subdivision to make a preliminary request shall preclude that
political subdivision from using procedures set forth in Neb. RS 77-3444 to
exceed the final levy allocation as determined in this division (B).
      (3)   (a)   The City Council shall:
            (i)   Adopt a resolution by a majority vote of members present
which determines a final allocation of levy authority to its political
subdivisions; and
            (ii)   Forward a copy of that resolution to the chairperson of the
governing body of each of its political subdivisions.
         (b)   No final levy allocation shall be changed after September 1
except by agreement between both the City Council and the governing body of the
political subdivision whose final levy allocation is at issue.
   (C)   (1)   The city may exceed the limits provided in division (A) by an
amount not to exceed a maximum levy approved by a majority of registered voters
voting on the issue in a primary, general, or special election at which the
issue is placed before the registered voters. A vote to exceed the limits must
be approved prior to October 10 of the fiscal year which is to be the first to
exceed the limits.
      (2)   The City Council may call for the submission of the issue to the
voters:
         (a)   By passing a resolution calling for exceeding the limits by a
vote of at least 2/3 of the members of the City Council and delivering a copy
of the resolution to the County Clerk or Election Commissioner of every county
which contains all or part of the city; or
         (b)   Upon receipt of a petition by the County Clerk or Election
Commissioner of every county containing all or part of the city requesting an
election signed by at least 5% of the registered voters residing in the city.
      (3)   The resolution or petition shall include the amount of levy which
would be imposed in excess of the limits provided in division (A) and the
duration of the excess levy authority. The excess levy authority shall not have
a duration greater than five years. Any resolution or petition calling for a
special election shall be filed with the County Clerk or Election Commissioner
on or before the fifth Friday prior to the election, and the time of
publication and providing a copy of the notice of election required in Neb. RS
32-802 shall be no later than 20 days prior to the election.
      (4)   The County Clerk or Election Commissioner shall place the issue on
the ballot at an election as called for in the resolution or petition which is
at least 31 days after receipt of the resolution or petition. The election
shall be held pursuant to the Election Act. For petitions filed with the County
Clerk or Election Commissioner on or after May 1, 1998, the petition shall be
in the form as provided in Neb. RS 32-628 through 32-631.
      (5)   Any excess levy authority approved under this division (C) shall
terminate pursuant to its terms, on a vote of the City Council to terminate the
authority to levy more than the limits, at the end of the fourth fiscal year
following the first year in which the levy exceeded the limit, or as provided
in division (C)(5), whichever is earliest.
      (6)   The City Council may pass no more than one resolution calling for
an election pursuant to this division (C) during any one calendar year. Only
one election may be held in any one calendar year pursuant to a petition
initiated under this division (C). The ballot question may include any terms
and conditions set forth in the resolution or petition and shall include the
language specified in Neb. RS 77-3444.
      (7)   If a majority of the votes cast upon the ballot question are in
favor of the tax, the County Board shall authorize a tax in excess of the
limits in division (A), but the tax shall not exceed the amount stated in the
ballot question. If a majority of those voting on the ballot question are
opposed to the tax, the City Council shall not impose the tax.
      (8)   (a)   The city may rescind or modify a previously approved excess
levy authority prior to its expiration by a majority of registered voters
voting on the issue in a primary, general, or special election at which the
issue is placed before the registered voters. A vote to rescind or modify must
be approved prior to October 10 of the fiscal year for which it is to be
effective.
          (b)   The City Council may call for the submission of the issue to
the voters:
            (i)   By passing a resolution calling for the rescission or
modification by a vote of at least 2/3 of the members of the City Council and
delivering a copy of the resolution to the County Clerk or Election
Commissioner of every county which contains all or part of the city; or
            (ii)   Upon receipt of a petition by the County Clerk or Election
Commissioner of every county containing all or part of the city requesting an
election signed by at least 5% of the registered voters residing in the city.
         (c)   The resolution or petition shall include the amount and the
duration of the previously approved excess levy authority and a statement that
either the excess levy authority will be rescinded or the excess levy authority
will be modified. If the excess levy authority will be modified, the amount and
duration of the modification shall be stated. The modification shall not have a
duration greater than five years. The County Clerk or Election Commissioner
shall place the issue on the ballot at an election as called for in the
resolution or petition which is at least 31 days after receipt of the
resolution or petition, and the time of publication and providing a copy of the
notice of election required in Neb. RS 32-802 shall be no later than 20 days
prior to the election. The election shall be held pursuant to the Election Act.
(Ord. 671, passed 11-20-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 77-3442 through Neb. RS 77-3444
§ 35.49 PROPERTY TAX LEVY; CERTIFICATION OF AMOUNT; COLLECTION.
   The City Council shall, at the time and in the manner provided by law, cause
to be certified to the County Clerk the amount of tax to be levied upon the
taxable value of all the taxable property of the city which the city requires
for the purposes of the adopted budget statement for the ensuing year,
including all special assessments and taxes assessed as otherwise provided. The
County Clerk shall place the same on the property tax lists to be collected in
the manner provided by law for the collection of county taxes in the county
where the city is situated. In all sales for any delinquent taxes for municipal
purposes, if there are other delinquent taxes due from the same person or a
lien on the same property, the sale shall be for all the delinquent taxes. Such
sales and all sales made under or by virtue of this section or the provision of
law herein referred to shall be of the same validity and in all respects be
deemed and treated as though such sales had been made for the delinquent county
taxes exclusively.
(Neb. RS 17-702)
§ 35.50 PROPERTY TAX REQUEST; INCREASE BY MORE THAN ALLOWABLE GROWTH
PERCENTAGE; PROCEDURE FOR SETTING.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, POLITICAL SUBDIVISION means any county,
city, school district, or community college.
   (B)   If any political subdivision seeks to increase its property tax
request by more than the allowable growth percentage, such political
subdivision may do so, subject to the limitations provided in the School
District Property Tax Limitation Act, Neb. RS 79-3401 et seq., and the Property
Tax Growth Limitation Act, Neb. RS 13-3401 et seq., if the following
requirements are met:
      (1)   A public hearing is held and notice of such hearing is provided in
compliance with division (C) of this section; and
      (2)   The governing body of such political subdivision passes a
resolution or an ordinance that complies with division (D) of this section.
   (C)   (1)   Each political subdivision within a county that seeks to
increase its property tax request by more than the allowable growth percentage
shall participate in a joint public hearing. Each such political subdivision
shall designate one representative to attend the joint public hearing on behalf
of the political subdivision. If a political subdivision includes area in more
than one county, the political subdivision shall be deemed to be within the
county in which the political subdivision's principal headquarters are located.
At such hearing, there shall be no items on the agenda other than discussion on
each political subdivision's intent to increase its property tax request by
more than the allowable growth percentage.
      (2)   At least one elected official from each participating political
subdivision shall attend the joint public hearing. An elected official may be
the designated representative from a participating political subdivision. The
presence of a quorum or the participation of elected officials at the joint
public hearing does not constitute a meeting as defined by Neb. RS 84-1409 of
the Open Meetings Act.
      (3)   The joint public hearing shall be held on or after September 14 and
prior to September 24 and before any of the participating political
subdivisions file their adopted budget statement pursuant to Neb. RS 13-508.
      (4)   The joint public hearing shall be held after 6:00 p.m. local time
on the relevant date.
      (5)   (a)   The joint public hearing shall be organized by the County
Clerk or his or her designee. At the joint public hearing, the designated
representative of each political subdivision shall give a brief presentation on
the political subdivision's intent to increase its property tax request by more
than the allowable growth percentage and the effect of such request on the
political subdivision's budget.
         (b)   The presentation shall include:
            1.   The name of the political subdivision;
            2.   The amount of the property tax request; and
            3.   The following statements:
               A.   The total assessed value of property differs from last
year's total assessed value by ___ percent;
               B.   The tax rate which would levy the same amount of property
taxes as last year, when multiplied by the new total assessed value of
property, would be $___ per $100 of assessed value;
               C.   The City of Gibbon proposes to adopt a property tax request
that will cause its tax rate to be $___ per $100 of assessed value;
               D.   Based on the proposed property tax request and changes in
other revenue, the total operating budget of the City of Gibbon will exceed
last year's by ___ percent; and
               E.   To obtain more information regarding the increase in the
property tax request, citizens may contact the City of Gibbon at (308) 468-6118
and gibboncityhall@cityofgibbon.org.
      (6)   Any member of the public shall be allowed to speak at the joint
public hearing and shall be given a reasonable amount of time to do so.
      (7)   Notice of the joint public hearing shall be provided:
         (a)   By sending a postcard to all affected property taxpayers. The
postcard shall be sent to the name and address to which the property tax
statement is mailed;
         (b)   By posting notice of the hearing on the home page of the
relevant county's website, except that this requirement shall only apply if the
county has a population of more than 10,000 inhabitants; and
         (c)   By publishing notice of the hearing in a legal newspaper in or
of general circulation in the relevant county.
      (8)   Each political subdivision that participates in the joint public
hearing shall electronically send the information prescribed in subdivision (C)
(9) below to the County Assessor by September 4. The County Clerk shall notify
the County Assessor of the date, time, and location of the joint public hearing
not later than September 4. The County Clerk shall notify each participating
political subdivision of the date, time, and location of the joint public
hearing. The County Assessor shall send the information required to be included
on the postcards pursuant to division (C)(9) below to a printing service
designated by the County Board. The initial cost for printing the postcards
shall be paid from the county’s General Fund. Such postcards shall be mailed at
least seven calendar days before the joint public hearing. The cost of creating
and mailing the postcards, including staff time, materials, and postage, shall
be charged proportionately to the political subdivisions participating in the
joint public hearing based on the total number of parcels in each participating
political subdivision. Each participating political subdivision shall also
maintain a prominently displayed and easily accessible link on the home page of
the political subdivision’s website to the political subdivision’s proposed
budget, except that this requirement shall not apply if the political
subdivision is a county with a population of less than 10,000 inhabitants, a
(city/village) with a population of less than 1,000 inhabitants, or, for joint
public hearings prior to January 1, 2024, a school district.
      (9)   (a)   The postcard sent under this division (C) and the notice
posted on the county's website, if required under division (C)(7)(b) above, and
published in the newspaper shall include the date, time, and location for the
joint public hearing, a listing of and telephone number for each political
subdivision that wlll be participating in the joint public hearing, and the
amount of each participating political subdivision's property tax request.
         (b)   The postcard shall also contain the following information:
            1.   The following words in capitalized type at the top of the
postcard: NOTICE OF PROPOSED TAX INCREASE;
            2.   The name of the county that will hold the joint public
hearing, which shall appear directly undemeath the capitalized words described
in division (C)(9)(b)1. above;
            3.   The following statement: The following political subdivisions
are proposing a revenue increase which would result in an overall increase in
property taxes in 2025. THE ACTUAL TAX ON YOUR PROPERTY MAY INCREASE OR
DECREASE. This notice contains estimates of the tax on your property as a
result of this revenue increase. These estimates are calculated on the basis of
the proposed 2025 data. The actual tax on your property may vary from these
estimates;
            4.   The parcel number for the property;
            5.   The name of the property owner and the address of the
property;
            6.   The property's assessed value in the previous tax year;
            7.   The amount of property taxes due in the previous tax year for
each participating political subdivision;
            8.   The property's assessed value for the current tax year;
            9.   The amount of property taxes due for the current tax year for
each participating political subdivision;
            10.   The change in the amount of property taxes due for each
participating political subdivision from the previous tax year to the current
tax year; and
            11.   The following statement: To obtain more information regarding
the tax increase, citizens may contact the political subdivision at the
telephone number provided in this notice.
   (D)   (1)   After the joint public hearing required in division (C) of this
section, the governing body of each participating political subdivision shall
pass an ordinance or resolution to set such political subdivision's property
tax request.
      (2)   If the political subdivision is increasing its property tax request
over the amount from the prior year, including any increase in excess of the
allowable growth percentage, then such ordinance or resolution shall include,
but not be limited to, the following information:
         (a)   The name of the political subdivision;
         (b)   The amount of the property tax request;
         (c)   The following statements:
            1.   The total assessed value of property differs from last year's
total assessed value by ___ percent;
            2.   The tax rate which would levy the same amount of property
taxes as last year, when multiplied by the new total assessed value of
property, would be $___ per $100 of assessed value;
            3.   The City of Gibbon proposes to adopt a property tax request
that will cause its tax rate to be $___ per $100 of assessed value; and
            4.   Based on the proposed property tax request and changes in
other revenue, the total operating budget of the City of Gibbon will exceed
last year's by ___ percent.
         (d)   The record vote of the governing body in passing such resolution
or ordinance.
   (E)   Any resolution or ordinance setting a property tax request under this
section shall be certified and forwarded to the County Clerk on or before
October 15 of the year for which the tax request is to apply.
   (F)   (1)   The County Clerk, or his or her designee, shall prepare a report
which shall include:
         (a)   The names of the representatives of the political subdivisions
participating in the joint public hearing;
         (b)   The name and address of each individual who spoke at the joint
public hearing, unless the address requirement is waived to protect the
security of the individual, and the name of any organization represented by
each such individual;
         (c)   The name of each political subdivision that participating in the
joint public hearing;
         (d)   The real growth value and real growth percentage for each
participating political subdivision;
         (e)   The amount each participating political subdivision seeks to
increase its property tax request in excess of the allowable growth percentage;
and
         (f)   The number of individuals who signed in to attend the joint
public hearing.
   (2)   Such report shall be delivered to the political subdivisions
participating in the joint public hearing within ten days after such hearing.
(Ord. 642, passed 2-22-2022; Ord. 650, passed 3-21-2022, Ord. 672, passed 11-
20-2023; Ord. 700, passed 4-21-2025)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 77-1633
§ 35.50.01 PROPERTY TAX REQUEST; PROCEDURE FOR SETTING.
   (A)   If the annual assessment of property would result in an increase in
the total property taxes levied by a county, municipality, school district,
learning community, sanitary and improvement district, natural resources
district, educational service unit, or community college, as determined using
the previous year's rate of levy, the City's property tax request for the
current year shall be not more than its property tax request in the prior year,
and the City's rate of levy for the current year shall be decreased accordingly
when such rate is set by the County Board of Equalization pursuant to Neb. RS
77-1601. The City Council shall pass a resolution or ordinance to set the
amount of its property tax request after holding the public hearing required in
division (C) below. If the City Council seeks to set its property tax request
at an amount that exceeds its property tax request in the prior year, it may do
so, subject to the limitations provided in the School District Property Tax
Limitation Act, Neb. RS 79-3401 et seq., and the Property Tax Growth Limitation
Act, Neb. RS 13-3401 et seq., after holding the public hearing required in
division (C) below and by passing a resolution or ordinance that complies with
division (D) below. If any county, city, school district, or community college
seeks to increase its property tax request by more than the allowable growth
percentage, such political subdivision shall comply with the requirements of
Neb. RS 77-1633 in lieu of the requirements in divisions (C) and (D) below.
   (B)   If the annual assessment of property would result in no change or a
decrease in the total property taxes levied by a county, city, village, school
district, learning community, sanitary and improvement district, natural
resources district, educational service unit, or community college, as
determined using the previous year's rate of levy, the city's tax request for
the current year shall be not more than its property tax request in the prior
year, and the city's rate of levy for the current year shall be adjusted
accordingly when such rate is set by the County Board of Equalization pursuant
to Neb. RS 77-1601. The City Council shall pass a resolution or ordinance to
set the amount of its property tax request after holding the public hearing
required in division (C) below. If the City Council seeks to set its property
tax request at an amount that exceeds its property tax request in the prior
year, it may do so, subject to the limitations provided in the School District
Property Tax Limitation Act, Neb. RS 79-3401 et seq., and the Property Tax
Growth Limitation Act, Neb. RS 13-3401 et seq., after holding the public
hearing required in division (C) below and by passing a resolution or ordinance
that complies with division (D) below. If any county, city, school district, or
community college seeks to increase its property tax request by more than the
allowable growth percentage, such political subdivision shall comply with the
requirements of Neb. RS 77-1633 in lieu of the requirements in divisions (C)
and (D) below.
   (C)   The resolution or ordinance required under this section shall only be
passed after a special public hearing called for the purpose is held and after
notice is published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area of the
city at least four calendar days prior to the hearing. For the purposes of such
notice, the four calendar days shall include the day of publication but not the
day of the hearing. If the city's total operating budget, not including
reserves, does not exceed $10,000 per year or $20,000 per biennial period, the
notice may be posted at the City Council's principal headquarters.
   (D)   The hearing notice shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The certified taxable valuation under Neb. RS 13-509 for the prior
year, the certified taxable valuation under Neb. RS 13-509 for the current
year, and the percentage increase or decrease in such valuations from the prior
year to the current year;
      (2)   The dollar amount of the prior year's tax request and the property
tax rate that was necessary to fund that tax request;
      (3)   The property tax rate that would be necessary to fund last year's
tax request if applied to the current year's valuation;
      (4)   The proposed dollar amount of the tax request for the current year
and the property tax rate that will be necessary to fund that tax request;
      (5)   The percentage increase or decrease in the property tax rate from
the prior year to the current year; and
      (6)   The percentage increase or decrease in the total operating budget
from the prior year to the current year.
   (E)   Any resolution or ordinance setting a city's property tax request
under Neb. RS 77-1632 at an amount that exceeds the city's property tax request
in the prior year shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
      (1)   The name of the city;
      (2)   The amount of the property tax request;
      (3)   The following statements:
         (a)   The total assessed value of property differs from last year's
total assessed value by percent;
         (b)   The tax rate which would levy the same amount of property taxes
as last year, when multiplied by the new total assessed value of property,
would be $           per $ 100 of assessed value;
         (c)   The City of Gibbon proposes to adopt a property tax request that
will cause its tax rate to be $              per $100 of assessed value; and
         (d)   Based on the proposed property tax request and changes in other
revenue, the total operating budget of the City of Gibbon will exceed last
year's by           percent.
      (4)   The record vote of the City Council in passing such resolution or
ordinance.
   (F)   Any resolution or ordinance setting a property tax request under this
section shall be certified and forwarded to the County Clerk on or before
October 15 of the year for which the tax request is to apply.
(Neb. RS 77-1632) (Ord. 701, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 35.51 MOTOR VEHICLE FEE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LIMITS OF THE CITY. Includes the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of
the city.
      PERSON. Includes bodies corporate, societies, communities, the public
generally, individuals, partnerships, limited liability companies, joint-stock
companies, cooperatives, and associations. Person does not include any federal,
state, or local government or any political subdivision thereof.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D) of this section, the
governing body of the city shall have power to require any individual whose
primary residence or person who owns a place of business which is within the
limits of the city and that owns and operates a motor vehicle within such
limits to pay an annual motor vehicle fee and to require the payment of such
fee upon the change of ownership of such vehicle. All such fees which may be
provided for under this section shall be used exclusively for constructing,
repairing, maintaining, or improving streets, roads, alleys, public ways, or
parts thereof or for the amortization of bonded indebtedness when created for
such purposes.
   (C)   No motor vehicle fee shall be required under this section if:
      (1)   A vehicle is used or stored but temporarily in the city for a
period of six months or less in a 12-month period;
      (2)   An individual does not have a primary residence or a person does
not own a place of business within the limits of the city and does not own and
operate a motor vehicle within the limits of the city; or
      (3)   An individual is a full-time student attending a postsecondary
institution within the limits of the city and the motor vehicle’s situs under
the Motor Vehicle Certificate of Title Act is different from the place at which
he or she is attending such institution.
   (D)   After December 31, 2012, no motor vehicle fee shall be required of any
individual whose primary residence is or person who owns a place of business
within the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of the city.
   (E)   The fee shall be paid to the County Treasurer of the county in which
the city is located when the registration fees as provided in the Motor Vehicle
Registration Act are paid. These fees shall be credited by the County Treasurer
to the road fund of the city.
(Neb. RS 18-1214)
Statutory reference:
   Motor Vehicle Registration Act, see Neb. RS 60-301
FUNDS
§ 35.65 CEMETERY, PERPETUAL FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a fund to be known as the Gibbon Riverside
Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund for the general care, management, maintenance,
improvement, beautifying and welfare of the Gibbon Riverside Cemetery. The city
may set aside a portion of the proceeds from the sale of lots to the Fund.
Others may add to the Fund by donation, bequest or otherwise.
   (B)   Income and principal of the Fund may be used for the general care,
management, maintenance, improvements, beautifying and welfare of the cemetery.
      (1)   However, no more than 20% of the principal may be used in any
fiscal year and no more than 40% of the principal may be used in any period of
ten consecutive fiscal years for these purposes.
      (2)   The principal may also be used for the purchase and development of
additional land to be used for cemetery purposes, however, no more than 25% of
the principal may be used in any fiscal year and no more than 35% of the
principal may be used in any period of ten consecutive fiscal years.
   (C)   A donor may designate the use of the income and principal donated by
that donor within the parameters of the above limitations.
   (D)   The city may invest and maintain such funds separate from the General
Fund of the city.
   (E)   This section shall not apply to any money that comes to the city that
is not designated to be credited to the Fund.
(2000 Code, § 3-901) (Ord. 600, passed 9-18-2017)
SALES TAX
§ 35.75 IMPOSITION OF SALES AND USE TAX.
   (A)   Pursuant to action of the City Council, the city submitted to the
voters a proposal to increase the city sales and use tax from 1% to 1.5% at the
general election held within the city on November 3, 2020, at which general
election said proposal was approved by a majority of the votes cast at the
election, following fulfillment of all requirements to submit the question to
all qualified voters as provided by law; and there is now hereby adopted,
pursuant to the provisions of the Nebraska Revenue Act, Neb. RS §§ 77-27,142 et
seq., as amended, an increase of the local sales and use tax rate by an
additional one-half of 1% from 1% to 1.5%, upon the same transactions that are
sourced under the provisions of Neb. RS §§ 77-2703.01 to 77-2703.04 within the
corporate limits of the City of Gibbon, Buffalo County, Nebraska, on which the
State of Nebraska is authorized to impose a tax pursuant to the Nebraska
Revenue Act of 1967, as amended.
   (B)   Revenues from the increased sales and use tax shall be used for such
public purposes as are allowed pursuant to the Local Option Revenue Act,
including, but not limited to, the general purposes of the city and community
improvements such as paying the costs of additions and improvements to the Fire
Hall of the city and funding debt service on bonds issued to pay the cost of
said improvements.
(2000 Code, § 1-823) (Ord. 620, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 35.76 PROPERTY TAX RELIEF.
   The sales and use taxes collected shall be used generally for property tax
relief and may be used to reduce property taxes, diminish any increase in
property taxes or in any other manner that provides property tax relief.
(2000 Code, § 1-825)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   MUNICIPAL UTILITIES
      
51.   SOLID WASTE
      
52.   WATER REGULATIONS
      
53.   SEWER REGULATIONS
      
54.   ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 50: MUNICIPAL UTILITIES
Section
   
50.01   Defined
   
50.02   Mandatory use of municipal utilities
   
50.03   Combined billing
   
50.04   User service fee and collection
   
50.05   Disconnection
   
50.06   Shutoff/turn-on fees; deposits and place of payment
§ 50.01 DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MUNICIPAL UTILITIES. Include:
      (1)   Water service;
      (2)   Sewer service; and
      (3)   Solid waste disposal service.
(2000 Code, § 3-801)
§ 50.02 MANDATORY USE OF MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.
   All owners, occupants or lessee of any premises that is occupied and used
for any purpose including but not limited to residential, commercial,
industrial, governmental, religious, civic and nonprofit with municipal water
and/or sewer utilities connected and/or serving said premises shall be deemed
users of all municipal utilities, including water service, sewer service and
solid waste disposal service, and pay a service fee, established by the
municipal governing body, for such use.
(2000 Code, § 3-802)
§ 50.03 COMBINED BILLING.
   Service fee for use of municipal utilities shall be established by the
governing body for each service individually and combined into one “municipal
utilities bill.” Municipal utilities bill shall be due and payable on the first
day of each month at the office of the Municipal Clerk or designee. Bills not
paid by the twentieth day of the month due shall be deemed to be delinquent.
Refusal or non-payment of any part of municipal utilities bill shall be
considered as refusal or non-payment of municipal utilities bill as a whole and
deemed to be delinquent.
(2000 Code, § 3-803)
§ 50.04 USER SERVICE FEE AND COLLECTION.
   (A)   The governing body has the power and authority to fix the rates to be
paid by the users of municipal utilities. All such fees shall be on file for
public inspection at the office of the Municipal Clerk. The Municipal Clerk
shall bill the consumers for use of municipal utilities and collect all money
received by the municipality.
   (B)   Upon receipt of municipal utilities user service fee the Municipal
Clerk shall remit said moneys to Municipal Treasurer who shall then credit, in
the following order, the departments of:
      (1)   Solid waste disposal;
      (2)   Water; and
      (3)   Sewer with their respective amounts.
(Neb. RS 17-539 and 19-2106) (2000 Code, § 3-804)
§ 50.05 DISCONNECTION.
    (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DOMESTIC SUBSCRIBER. Shall not include municipalities, cities, villages,
political subdivisions, companies, corporations, partnerships, limited
liability companies, or businesses of any nature.
(Neb. RS 70-1602)
   (B)   No public or private utility company, including any utility owned and
operated by the city, furnishing water, natural gas, or electricity at retail
in this city shall discontinue service to any domestic subscriber for
nonpayment of any past-due account unless the utility company first gives
notice to any subscriber whose service is proposed to be terminated. Such
notice shall be given in person, by first-class mail, or by electronic
delivery, except that electronic delivery shall only be used if the subscriber
has specifically elected to receive such notices by electronic delivery. If
notice is given by first-class mail or electronic delivery, such notice shall
be conspicuously marked as to its importance. Service shall not be discontinued
for at least seven days after notice is sent or given. Holidays and weekends
shall be excluded from the seven days. A public or private utility company
shall not charge a fee for the discontinuance or reconnection of utility
service that exceeds the reasonable costs of providing such service.
(Neb. RS 70-1605)
   (C)   Upon municipal utilities bill being deemed to be delinquent the
governing body shall initiate utilities disconnection according to the
following “Procedural Policy for Utilities Disconnection.”
PROCEDURAL POLICIES FOR UTILITY DISCONNECTION
      SECTION 1. RIGHT TO DISCONNECT. The municipality may disconnect utility
service for any of the following reasons or for any other reason permitted by
federal, state or municipal law:
      A.   Failure to meet the applicable provisions of law.
      B.    Violation of the ordinances or regulations pertaining to utility
service.
      C.    Nonpayment of past or present utility bills.
      D.    Willful or negligent waste of service due to improper or imperfect
pipes, fixtures, appliances or otherwise.
      E.    Molesting any meter, seal or other equipment controlling or
regulating the supply of utility service.
      F.    Theft or diversion and/or use of service without payment therefor.
      G.    Vacancy or abandonment of premises.
      SECTION 2. DELINQUENT BILLS. All bills for utility service are due and
payable the first day of each month. Payment at net is allowed until the
twentieth day of the month the bill is due. If the twentieth falls on a weekend
or federal holiday, you have until the end of the next day of normal business
hours of the office of the Municipal Clerk/Treasurer. Payments postmarked on or
before the twentieth by the U.S. Postal Service are considered to be on time.
After that date, the bill is delinquent and payable at the gross amount in
addition to a late charge. A reminder notice will be given by mail, in person
or phone call after the due date. If the bill remains delinquent seven days
from the date the reminder notice is mailed, a disconnect notice will be served
upon any domestic subscriber in compliance with Section 3 and 4 of this
procedural policy.
      SECTION 3. SERVING DISCONNECT NOTICE. Before disconnection of utility
service, the municipality shall give notice by first class mail, certified mail
or in person to the domestic subscriber whose utility service is to be
disconnected. If notice is given by first class mail or certified mail, such
mail shall be conspicuously marked as to its importance. The municipality also
has available to domestic subscribers third party notice whereby the
municipality will serve the notice of disconnection on the designated third
party by first class mail, certified mail or in person. Any subscriber who has
previously been identified as a welfare recipient to the utility by the
Department of Social Services shall be served notice by certified mail and
notice of such proposed termination shall be given to the Department of Social
Services.
      The utility shall establish a third-party notice procedure for the
notification of a designated third party of any proposed discontinuance of
service and shall advise its subscribers, including new subscribers, of the
availability of such procedures.
   (Neb. RS 70-1607)
      SECTION 4. CONTENTS OF DISCONNECT NOTICE. The notice required by division
(B) shall contain the following information:
      1.   The reason for the proposed disconnection;
      2.   A statement of the intention to disconnect unless the domestic
subscriber either pays the bill or reaches an agreement with the utility
regarding payment of the bill;
      3.   The date upon which service will be disconnected if the domestic
subscriber does not take appropriate action;
      4.   The name, address, and telephone number of the utility's employee or
department to whom the domestic subscriber may address an inquiry or complaint;
      5.   The domestic subscriber's right, prior to the disconnection date, to
request a conference regarding any dispute over such proposed disconnection;
      6.   A statement that the utility may not disconnect service pending the
conclusion of the conference;
      7.   A statement to the effect that disconnection shall be postponed or
prevented upon presentation of a duly licensed physician's, physician
assistant's, or advanced practice registered nurse's certificate, which shall
certify that a domestic subscriber or resident within such subscriber's
household has an existing illness or handicap which would cause such subscriber
or resident to suffer an immediate and serious health hazard by the
disconnection of the utility's service to that household. Such certificate
shall be filed with the utility within five days of receiving notice under this
section, excluding holidays, and weekends, and will prevent the disconnection
of the utility's service for a period of at least 30 days from such filing.
Only one postponement of disconnection shall be required under this division
for each incidence of nonpayment of any past-due account;
      8.   The cost that will be borne by the domestic subscriber for
restoration of service;
      9.   A statement that the domestic subscriber may arrange with the
utility for an installment payment plan;
      10.   A statement to the effect that those domestic subscribers who are
welfare recipients may qualify for assistance in payment of their utility bill
and that they should contact their caseworker in that regard; and
      11.   Any additional information not inconsistent with this section which
has received prior approval from the City Council or Board of Public Works, in
the case of a city utility, or the board of directors or administrative board
of any other utility.
   (Neb. RS 70-1606)
      SECTION 5. CONFERENCE WITH DOMESTIC UTILITY SUBSCRIBER. Upon a written
request by a customer for a conference, the municipality shall:
      1.    Hear and decide all matters at the conference.
      2.    Schedule a conference within 14 days of the receipt of the
customer’s request for a conference.
      3.    Notify the domestic subscriber in writing of the time, place and
date scheduled for the conference.
      The conference shall be informal and not governed by the Nebraska Rules
of Evidence. Failure by the customer to attend the conference shall relieve the
municipality of any further action prior to the disconnection of utility
service.
      The domestic subscriber may, prior to the scheduled conference, give good
and sufficient reason that they will be unable to attend the conference at the
appointed time and date. The municipality shall make a reasonable effort to
reschedule the conference.
      The municipality Board shall, based solely on the evidence presented at
the conference, affirm, reverse or modify any part of the disconnection notice
which is a result of a disputed billing. The employee shall allow disconnection
of utility service only when all less drastic remedies have been exhausted.
      If the municipal governing body determines at the conference that the
domestic subscriber did not receive proper notice or was denied any other legal
right, the governing body shall recess and continue the conference at such time
as the subscriber has been afforded his or her rights.
      SECTION 6. REPAIRS. Interruptions of service or disconnections made
pursuant to repair, maintenance, health or safety reasons shall not constitute
a disconnection for the purposes of this procedural policy.
   (D)   The provisions of Neb. RS 70-1608 through 70-1614 shall apply to
disputes over a proposed discontinuance of service.
   (E)   The procedures adopted for resolving utility bills by the City Council
or Board of Public Works for any city utility, one copy of which is on file in
the office of the City Clerk, are hereby incorporated by reference in addition
to any amendments thereto and are made a part of this section as though set out
in full.
   (F)   This section shall not apply to any disconnections or interruptions of
services made necessary by the utility for reasons of repair or maintenance or
to protect the health or safety of the domestic subscriber or of the general
public.
(Neb. RS 70-1615) (2000 Code, § 3-805) (Ord. 628, passed 6-21-2021)
§ 50.06 SHUTOFF/TURN-ON FEES; DEPOSITS AND PLACE OF PAYMENT.
   (A)   The service fee for shutting off or turning on a water line shall be
$50 during regular business hours and $100 at all other times.
   (B)   If a utility bill is not paid before it becomes delinquent, then a
late fee of $15 shall also be charged and collected.
   (C)   The municipality may require a deposit of $100 from a subscriber
before turning a utility service back on after the service was shut off for
non-payment.
   (D)   Payment of all bills and fees shall be made at the office of the
municipality and the employees of the municipality shall not accept payment at
any other location.
(2000 Code, § 3-806) (Ord. 505, passed 3-17-2003; Ord. 533, passed 4-17-2007)
CHAPTER 51: SOLID WASTE
Section
Municipal Solid Waste Department
   
51.01   Operation and funding
   
51.02   Customer classification
   
51.03   Fees
   
51.04   Residential rates
Garbage
   
51.15   Defined
   
51.16   Municipal solid waste
   
51.17   Trash and waste
   
51.18   Hauling
   
51.19   Garbage and refuse collection; authority
   
51.20   Collection; notice; removal
   
51.21   Collection; nuisance
   
51.22   Collection; lien
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE DEPARTMENT
§ 51.01 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   (A)   The municipality shall have the power to establish a solid waste
management system within the corporate limits.
   (B)   When such system shall have been established, the municipality may
provide by ordinance for the management and operation thereof, the rates to be
charged for such service, including collection and disposal, the manner of
payment and collection thereof and prescribe penalties for the violation of
such ordinance, and do whatever is necessary to protect the general health in
the matter of removal and disposal of garbage.
(Neb. RS 19-2101 through 19-2113) (2000 Code, § 3-401)
§ 51.02 CUSTOMER CLASSIFICATION.
   (A)   All municipal solid waste customers shall be classified, according to
primary usage, as one of the following.
      (1)   Residential. RESIDENTIAL shall be defined as a single-family
dwelling unit and shall include mobile homes, duplexes and single units of
condominiums.
      (2)   Commercial. COMMERCIAL shall be defined as all other
classifications not readily identified as residential that includes, but is not
limited to, multi-family dwelling unit, commercial, industrial, governmental,
religious, civic and nonprofit.
   (B)   Customers other than residential exhibiting unusual and/or extreme
fluctuations in volume of solid waste may appeal to the governing body for
special consideration.
(2000 Code, § 3-402)
§ 51.03 FEES.
   (A)   All customers of solid waste disposal service occupying the premises
being billed shall pay a monthly fee for said service. Residential customers
shall be billed by and remit payment to the Municipal Clerk.
   (B)   Commercial customers shall be billed by and remit payment to firm
under contract with the municipality for solid waste disposal service.
   (C)   If the premises becomes unoccupied and the customer request to
discontinue solid waste disposal service, it shall be the responsibility of the
customer to notify the municipality Clerk 30 days prior to discontinuance of
service.
   (D)   Service may be discontinued in monthly increments only. It also
becomes the responsibility of the customer to notify the Municipal Clerk 30
days prior to resumption of service.
(2000 Code, § 3-403) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.04 RESIDENTIAL RATES.
   Charges for the collection of refuse and garbage from a residential customer
shall be $17 per month for the first container furnished to a residential
customer and an additional $4 per month for each additional container furnished
to a residential customer.
(2000 Code, § 3-404) (Ord. 572, passed 6-17-2013; Ord. 595, passed 12-19-2016;
Ord. 654, passed 10-17-2022; Ord. 663, passed 10-16-2023; Ord. 982, passed 11-
25-2024; Ord. 708, passed 10-20-2025)
GARBAGE
§ 51.15 DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Items including, but not limited to, kitchen refuse, decayed waste,
dead animals or anything that may decompose and become offensive and pose an
immediate hazard to the public health.
   WASTE. Items including, but not limited to, cinders, ashes, paper, plastic,
metal, plaster, brick, stone, sawdust or sand and does not pose an immediate
hazard to the public health.
(2000 Code, § 4-201)
§ 51.16 MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE.
   All municipal solid waste, for the purposes of this subchapter, shall be
considered garbage.
(2000 Code, § 4-202)
§ 51.17 TRASH AND WASTE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep in, on or about any dwelling,
building or premises or any other place in the municipality decayed vegetable
or animal substance, garbage or refuse matter of any kind that may be injurious
to the public health or offensive to the residents of the municipality unless
the same is kept in receptacles which are as nearly airtight as may be
practical so as to prevent the spread of garbage. It shall be unlawful to throw
or sweep into the streets, alleys, parks or other public grounds any dirt,
paper, nails, pieces of glass, refuse, waste or rubbish of any kind. No person
may permit garbage, rubbish, waste or refuse to collect and all persons shall
remove the same from his or her property within 24 hours after being notified
to do so by the Municipal Law Enforcement Officer or Municipal Clerk who shall
represent the Board of Health. Any person having garbage, rubbish, waste or
refuse that is subject to decay or fermentation within a short period of time
shall be required to place the same in a standard garbage can with a tight
cover or a durable plastic container that is securely tied at its opening.
(Neb. RS 19-2106) (2000 Code, § 4-203) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.18 HAULING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to haul garbage, trash or waste within
the municipality without covering said material with a tarp or other cover
which prevents the escape of trash therefrom.
(2000 Code, § 4-204) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.19 GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION; AUTHORITY.
   The governing body may provide for the collection and removal of garbage or
refuse found upon any lot or land within its corporate roads, or alleys
abutting such lot or land which constitutes a public nuisance. The governing
body may require the owner, duly authorized agent, or tenant of such lot or
land to remove the garbage or refuse from such lot or land and streets and
roads, or alleys.
(Neb. RS 16-230, 16-231, 16-246, 16-901, 18-1303) (2000 Code, § 4-205)
§ 51.20 COLLECTION; NOTICE; REMOVAL.
   Notice that removal of garbage or refuse is necessary shall be given to each
owner or owner’s duly authorized agent and to the tenant if any. Such notice
shall be provided by personal service or by certified mail. After providing
such notice, the municipality through its proper offices shall, in addition to
other proper remedies, remove the garbage or refuse, or cause to be removed,
from such lot or land and streets, roads or alleys.
(Neb. RS 16-230, 16-231, 16-246, 16-901, 18-1303) (2000 Code, § 4-206)
§ 51.21 COLLECTION; NUISANCE.
   If the Mayor declares that the accumulation of such garbage or refuse upon
any lot or land constitutes an immediate nuisance and hazard to public health
and safety, the municipality shall remove the garbage or refuse, or cause it to
be removed, from such lot or land within 48 hours after notice by personal
service or following receipt of a certified letter if such garbage or refuse
has not been removed.
(Neb. RS 16-230, 16-231, 16-246, 16-901, 18-1303) (2000 Code, § 4-207)
§ 51.22 COLLECTION; LIEN.
   Whenever a municipality removes any garbage or refuse, or causes it to be
removed, from any lot or land pursuant to this subchapter, it shall, after a
hearing conducted by the governing body, assess the cost of the removal against
such lot or land.
(Neb. RS 16-230, 16-231, 16-246, 16-901, 18-1303) (2000 Code, § 4-208)
CHAPTER 52: WATER REGULATIONS
Section
   
52.01   Municipal Water Department; operation and funding
   
52.02   Definitions
   
52.03   Consumer’s application
   
52.04   Water contract
   
52.05   Installation procedure
   
52.06   Installation expense
   
52.07   Construction of meter pits
   
52.08   Tapping between meter and water main
   
52.09   Fees and collections
   
52.10   Rates
   
52.11   Water bills
   
52.12   Lien
   
52.13   Single premises
   
52.14   Fire hydrants
   
52.15   Pollution
   
52.16   Water service contracts
   
52.17   Police reports
   
52.18   Destruction of property
   
52.19   Complaints
   
52.20   Service to nonresidents
   
52.21   Inspection
   
52.22   Repairs
   
52.23   Prohibition of lead pipes, solder and flux
   
52.24   Discontinuance of use
   
52.25   Cross-connections prohibited
   
52.26   Declaration of emergency
   
52.27   Restrictions on water usage
   
52.28   Notice
   
52.29   Turning off water for failure to observe restrictions
   
52.30   Wells; minimum distances
   
52.31   Well permit
   
52.32   Prohibition of water wells
   
52.33   Well permit for heat pumps
 
   
52.99   Penalty
§ 52.01 MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   The municipality owns and operates the Municipal Water Department. The
governing body for the purpose of defraying the cost of the care, management
and maintenance of the Municipal Water Department may each year levy a tax not
exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law on the actual valuation of
all real estate and personal property within the corporate limits that is
subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall be known as the Water
Fund and shall remain in the custody of the Municipal Treasurer. The governing
body shall set the rates to be charged for services rendered by ordinance and
shall file a copy of the rates in the office of the Municipal Clerk for public
inspection at any reasonable time.
(Neb. RS 17-531, 17-534, 19-1305) (2000 Code, § 3-101)
§ 52.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEEMED AVAILABLE. Any water main which passes through the premises or
through a street, alley or easement adjacent to or abutting such premises.
   MAIN. Any pipe other than a supply or service pipe that is used for the
purpose of carrying water to and dispersing the same in the municipality.
   SEPARATE PREMISES. More than one consumer procuring water from the same
service or supply pipe. The second premises may be a separate dwelling,
apartment, building or structure used for a separate purpose.
   SERVICE PIPE. Any pipe extending from the supply pipe to the location on the
premises where the water is to be dispersed.
   SUPPLY PIPE. Any pipe extending from the main to a point at or near the lot
line of the consumer’s premises where the shutoff, stop box or curb stop is
located.
(2000 Code, § 3-102)
§ 52.03 CONSUMER’S APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every person or persons desiring a supply of water must make
application therefor to the Clerk.
   (B)   The Clerk shall require each applicant to pay a tap fee of $250. The
fee is to be paid and the water line is to be installed and inspected prior to
turning on the water to the premises.
   (C)   Water shall not be supplied to any house or private service pipe
except upon the order of the Municipal Clerk.
(Neb. RS 17-537, 19-2701) (2000 Code, § 3-103)
§ 52.04 WATER CONTRACT.
   The municipality, through its Water Department, shall furnish water to
persons within its corporate limits whose premises abut a street, alley or
easement in which a commercial main now is or may hereafter be laid. The rules,
regulations and water rates hereinafter named in this chapter and on file in
the office of the Municipal Clerk shall be considered a part of every
application hereafter made for water service and shall be considered a part of
the contract between every consumer now or hereafter served. Without further
formality, the making of application on the part of any applicant or the use or
consumption of water service by present consumers thereof and the furnishing of
water service to said consumer shall constitute a contract between the consumer
and the municipality to which said contract both parties are bound. If the
consumer shall violate any of the provisions of said contract or any reasonable
rules and regulations that the governing body may hereafter adopt, the
Utilities Superintendent or his or her agent may cut off or disconnect the
water service from the building or premises or place of such violation. No
further connection for water service to said building, premises or place shall
again be made save or except by order of said Superintendent or his or her
agent.
(Neb. RS 17-537) (2000 Code, § 3-104) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.05 INSTALLATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Upon approval of the customer’s application, the municipality shall
tap the municipal main, install the water line to the property line and install
the curb stop. The customer shall be responsible for installation of service
from the curb stop to the premises served, installation of the meter,
installation of the meter pit, including pipe, trenching, corporation cock,
service clamp, tap fee and labor. The customer shall pay the cost of the meter
and meter pit.
   (B)   In making excavations in streets, alleys or sidewalks for the purpose
of installing pipe or making repairs, the paving, stones and earth must be
removed and deposited in a manner that will occasion the least inconvenience to
the public and provide for adequate drainage. No person shall leave an
excavation made in the street, alley or sidewalk open at any time without a
barricade and during the night, warning lights.
   (C)   After service pipes are laid, the streets, alleys and sidewalks shall
be restored to good condition.
   (D)   If the excavation in any street, alley or sidewalk is left open or
unfinished for a period of 24 hours or more, the Utilities Superintendent shall
have the duty to finish or correct the work, and all expenses so incurred shall
be charged to the consumer.
(Neb. RS 17-537) (2000 Code, § 3-105) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.06 INSTALLATION EXPENSE.
   The expense of providing water service from the curb stop to the premises
served shall be paid by the customer. In addition, the customer shall pay a tap
fee as required in §
52.05.
(Neb. RS 17-542) (2000 Code, § 3-106)
§ 52.07 CONSTRUCTION OF METER PITS.
   All meter pits shall be constructed by the customer at his or her own
expense, at a point near the property line and shall be of such design as
sanctioned and approved by the Utilities Superintendent; provided, that all
meters shall be set in a position so that the same may be easily read, and
serviced whether the same be set in a meter pit or in a basement or crawl
space. The Utilities Superintendent shall, whenever it is inconvenient to make
readings at any meter now set or hereafter to be set in a meter pit or in a
basement or crawl space, be empowered to give the property owner 20 days notice
in writing to reset such meter in a position so that the same may be easily
read, and if the property owner refuses or neglects to do so, then the
Utilities Superintendent shall set such meter and the cost thereof shall be
charged to and paid by such property owner. Meter pits shall be required for
all new services.
(2000 Code, § 3-107)
§ 52.08 TAPPING BETWEEN METER AND WATER MAIN.
   No person shall be permitted to have, make or have made, and taps or
connection with the service pipe between the meter and the mains. Any person
violating this provision shall have his or her water service disconnected, and
shall not have it reconnected until the improper tap has been removed and shall
pay all costs and expenses of having such improper tap removed.
(2000 Code, § 3-108) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.09 FEES AND COLLECTIONS.
   (A)   The governing body has the power and authority to fix the rates to be
paid by the water consumers for the use of water from the Water Department. All
such fees shall be on file for public inspection at the office of the Municipal
Clerk.
   (B)   The Municipal Clerk shall collect all money received by the
municipality on the account of the Water Department.
(Neb. RS 17-538) (2000 Code, § 3-109)
§ 52.10 RATES.
   For use of the municipal water system, each consumer shall pay a monthly
charge in accordance with the following schedule:
   (A)   Consumer with one-inch water meter: $34.50 per month plus $2.05 for
each 1,000 gallons of water, or a portion thereof.
   (B)   Consumer with second inch water meter at same premises: additional
$9.35 per month plus $2.05 for each 1,000 gallons of water, or a portion
thereof.
   (C)   Residential consumer with two-inch water meter: $67.00 per month plus
$2.05 for each 1,000 gallons of water, or a portion thereof.
   (D)   Consumer with two-inch water meters: $67.00 per month for the first
meter plus $2.05 for each additional 1,000 gallons of water, or a portion
thereof, measured by that meter, plus $27.00 per month for the second meter,
plus $2.05 for each 1,000 gallons of water, or portion thereof, measured by
such second meter.
   (E)   Consumer with three-inch water meter: $132.90 per month plus $2.05 for
each 1,000 gallons of water, or a portion thereof.
   (F)   Consumer with four-inch water meter: $250.20 per month plus $2.05 for
each 1,000 gallons of water, or a portion thereof.
   (G)   Consumer with water meter greater than four-inch: $5,530.00 per month
plus $2.05 for each 1,000 gallons of water, or a portion thereof.
(2000 Code, § 3-110) (Ord. 537, passed 9-17-2007; Ord. 594, passed 12-19-2016;
Ord. 596, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 622, passed 4-19-2021; Ord. 652, passed 4-18-
2022; Ord. 658, passed 4-17-2023; Ord. 677, passed 5-20-2024; Ord. 685, passed
4-21-2025)
§ 52.11 WATER BILLS.
   (A)   Water bills shall be due and payable monthly at the office of the
Municipal Clerk. The Municipal Clerk shall charge and collect from each
customer the amount due the Water Department.
   (B)   Bills shall be due monthly the first day of each month and shall be
payable by the twentieth day of the month. Bills not paid by the twentieth of
the month in which they are due shall be deemed to be delinquent. Upon being
deemed to be delinquent, as herein defined, the Municipal Clerk shall implement
procedural policies for utility disconnection. The Municipal Clerk may assess
an additional fee set by resolution of the governing body and on file at the
office of the Municipal Clerk in the event that service is shut off for
nonpayment to compensate the municipality for the additional hook-up necessary
to again provide service to the delinquent customer.
(Neb. RS 17-542, 70-1601 through 70-1615) (2000 Code, § 3-111)
§ 52.12 LIEN.
   In addition to all other remedies, if a customer shall for any reason remain
indebted to the municipality for water service furnished, such amount due,
together with any rents and charges in arrears, shall be considered a
delinquent water rent which is hereby declared to be a lien upon the real
estate for which the same was used. It shall be the duty of the Municipal Clerk
on June 1 of each year to report to the governing body a list of all unpaid
accounts due for water together with a description of the premises upon which
the same was used. The report shall be examined and, if approved by the
governing body, shall be certified by the Municipal Clerk to the County Clerk
to be collected as a special tax in the manner provided by law.
(Neb. RS 17-538) (2000 Code, § 3-112)
§ 52.13 SINGLE PREMISES.
   No consumer shall supply water to other families or allow them to take water
from his or her premises, nor after water is supplied into a building shall any
person make or employ a plumber or other person to make a tap or connection
with the pipe upon the premises for alteration, extension or attachment without
the written permission of the Utilities Superintendent. It shall further be
unlawful for any person to tamper with any water meter or by means of any
contrivance or device to divert the water from the service pipe so that the
water will not pass through the meter or while passing through said meter will
cause the meter to register inaccurately.
(Neb. RS 17-537) (2000 Code, § 3-113) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.14 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   All hydrants for the purpose of extinguishing fires are hereby declared to
be public hydrants and it shall be unlawful for any person other than members
of the Municipal Fire Department under the orders of the Fire Chief or members
of the Water Department to open or attempt to open any of the hydrants and draw
water from the same or in any manner to interfere with the hydrants.
(2000 Code, § 3-114) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.15 POLLUTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute or attempt to pollute any
stream or source of water for the supply of the Municipal Water Department.
(Neb. RS 17-536) (2000 Code, § 3-115) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.16 WATER SERVICE CONTRACTS.
   (A)   Contracts for water service are not transferable. Any person wishing
to change from one location to another shall make a new application and sign a
new contract. If any consumer shall move from the premises where service is
furnished or if the said premises is destroyed by fire or other casualty, he or
she shall at once inform the Utilities Superintendent who shall cause the water
service to be shut off at the said premises.
   (B)   If the consumer should fail to give such notice, he or she shall be
charged for all water used on the said premises until the Utilities
Superintendent is otherwise advised in such circumstances.
(Neb. RS 17-537) (2000 Code, § 3-116)
§ 52.17 POLICE REPORTS.
   It shall be the duty of the Marshal to report to the Utilities
Superintendent all cases of leakage and waste in the use of water and all
violations of the municipal code relating to the Water Department. They shall
have the additional duty of enforcing the observance of all such regulations.
(2000 Code, § 3-117)
§ 52.18 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break, injure
or deface any building, machinery, curb stop, water meter, apparatus, fixture,
attachment or appurtenance of the Municipal Water Department. No person may
deposit anything in a stop box or commit any act tending to obstruct or impair
the intended use of any of the above mentioned property without the written
permission of the Utilities Superintendent.
(Neb. RS 17-537) (2000 Code, § 3-118) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.19 COMPLAINTS.
   Any consumer feeling himself or herself aggrieved by reason of any
controversy with the Utilities Superintendent or Municipal Clerk may appear
before the governing body and present his or her grievance. Any consumer who
considers himself or herself aggrieved by being required to pay the charge
demanded for the use of water or for the resumption of water service after the
same shall have been shut off, shall pay such charge under protest in which
event, the Municipal Clerk shall write on the receipt given such customer the
words, “Paid Under Protest.” Such consumer may then present his or her verified
claim in the manner provided for presenting claims to the governing body for a
refund of the amount so paid under protest. Such claims shall then be
considered by the governing body in this same manner as other claims against
the municipality as set forth in §
35.30.
(2000 Code, § 3-119)
§ 52.20 SERVICE TO NONRESIDENTS.
   (A)   The municipality shall not supply water service to any person outside
the corporate limits without special permission from the governing body;
provided, the entire cost of laying mains, service pipe and supply pipe shall
be paid by the consumer.
   (B)   All mains, service pipe and supply lines shall meet the standards set
by the governing body in regard to size of lines, material used and workmanship
and further be subject to inspection by the Utility Superintendent prior to
being backfilled. Nothing herein shall be construed to obligate the
municipality to provide water service to nonresidents.
(Neb. RS 19-2701) (2000 Code, § 3-120)
§ 52.21 INSPECTION.
   The Utilities Superintendent or his or her duly authorized agents shall have
free access at any reasonable time to all parts of each premises and building
to or in which water is delivered for the purpose of examining the pipes,
meter, fixtures and other portions of the system to ascertain whether there is
any disrepair or unnecessary waste of water.
(Neb. RS 17-537) (2000 Code, § 3-121)
§ 52.22 REPAIRS.
   Repairs to the service pipe shall be made by and at the expense of the
customer. All other repairs to the property of the municipality including the
meter shall be made by the municipality. All water meters shall be kept in
repair by the municipality at the expense of the municipality. When meters are
worn out, they shall be replaced and reset by the municipality at the expense
of the municipality; provided, that if the customer permits or allows a water
meter to be damaged, injured or destroyed through his or her own recklessness,
carelessness or neglect so that the meter must be repaired or replaced, the
Utilities Superintendent shall bill and collect from the customer the cost of
such meter repair or replacement in the same manner as water rent is collected.
Permitting a water meter to be damaged or destroyed by freezing shall always be
considered negligence on the part of the customer. All meters shall be tested
at the customer’s request at the expense of the customer any reasonable number
of times; provided, that if the test shows the water meter to be running 2% or
more fast, the expense of such test shall be borne by the municipality. The
municipality reserves the right to test any water service meter at any time and
if said meter is found to be beyond repair, the municipality shall always have
the right to place a new meter on the customer’s water service fixtures at
municipal expense. Should a consumer’s meter fail to register properly, the
customer shall be charged for water during the time the meter is out of repair
on the basis of the bimonthly consumption during the same two months of the
preceding year; provided, that if no such basis for comparison exists, the
customer shall be charged such amount as may be reasonably fixed by the
governing body.
(Neb. RS 17-542) (2000 Code, § 3-122) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.23 PROHIBITION OF LEAD PIPES, SOLDER AND FLUX.
   (A)   Any pipe, solders or flux used in the installation or repair of any
residential or nonresidential facility which is connected to the public water
supply system shall be lead-free.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, LEAD-FREE shall mean:
      (1)   Solders and flux: not more than 0.2% lead; and
      (2)   Pipe and pipe fittings: not more than 8% lead.
(2000 Code, § 3-124)
§ 52.24 DISCONTINUANCE OF USE.
   Any consumer desiring to discontinue the use of water shall request the
municipality to effect such discontinuance by signing a written request to
discontinue service. If any period of discontinuance of such use is less than
six months, all water use charges, including minimum billings, shall apply.
(2000 Code, § 3-125)
§ 52.25 CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any
premises where actual or potential cross-connections to the public potable or
consumer’s water system may exist unless such actual or potential cross-
connections are abated or controlled to the satisfaction of the Municipal Water
Department and as required by the laws and regulations of the State Department
of Health.
   (B)   No connection shall be installed or maintained whereby an auxiliary
water supply may enter a public potable or consumer’s water system unless such
auxiliary water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply
shall have been approved by the Municipal Water Department and the State
Department of Health.
   (C)   No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any
premises in which the plumbing system, facilities and fixtures have not been
constructed and installed using acceptable plumbing practices considered by the
Municipal Water Department as necessary for the protection of health and
safety.
(2000 Code, § 3-126)
§ 52.26 DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY.
   The Council is hereby authorized to declare by resolution, and the Mayor,
and in his or her absence, the President of the Council, is hereby authorized
and empowered to declare by executive order the existence of an emergency
relating to the available water supply of the municipality and to impose
restrictions on the use of water during such emergency. Whenever the Council,
Mayor or President of the Council shall determine that the remaining available
water supply is not sufficient to meet the demands on the supply, the Council,
Mayor or President of the Council may declare the existence of an emergency and
impose reasonable restrictions on the use of such water. It shall be unlawful
for any person to fail to observe any such restrictions so imposed by the
Council, Mayor or President of the Council provided announcement of such
restriction has been made.
(2000 Code, § 3-127)
§ 52.27 RESTRICTIONS ON WATER USAGE.
   The Council, Mayor or President of the Council may impose any reasonable
restriction regarding the use of water by those persons or entities using the
municipal water supply, including, but not limited to, the following:
   (A)   Limiting the watering of lawns to even-numbered calendar days for
customers with even-numbered addresses and odd-numbered calendar days for
customers with odd-numbered addresses; and
   (B)   Prohibiting all watering of lawns and further prohibiting all
unnecessary use of water, including but not limited to, washing cars and
driveways and watering gardens.
(2000 Code, § 3-128)
§ 52.28 NOTICE.
   Notice of the declaration of an emergency shall be given by at least one of
the following methods:
   (A)   Mailing notice of such declaration of emergency to each water
customer;
   (B)   Announcements in a local newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality or by a local radio or television station;
   (C)   Personal notice to a water customer either in writing or orally; or
   (D)   Any other method which provides reasonable notice to a water customer.
(2000 Code, § 3-129)
§ 52.29 TURNING OFF WATER FOR FAILURE TO OBSERVE RESTRICTIONS.
   The municipality may turn off the water supply to the premises of any person
who, after having been notified of the imposition of such emergency
restrictions on the use of water, disregards such restrictions and such supply
of water shall not again be turned on until the cost of turning the water off
and turning the water on has been paid to the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 3-131)
§ 52.30 WELLS; MINIMUM DISTANCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig, construct, use or maintain a
water well within a distance of 1,000 feet of any production well belonging to
the municipality; provided, that any water well that was in existence and use
prior to February 15, 1999, and any water well that is in existence and use
prior to the digging of any future production well of the municipality that is
within 1,000 feet of such water well, may continue to be used, maintained and
repaired when necessary, although such use does not conform to the provisions
hereof.
(2000 Code, § 3-132) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.31 WELL PERMIT.
   The City Council may grant a permit to dig, construct, use and maintain a
water well within the area otherwise prohibited by the above section if the
City Council determines that such water well is a necessary replacement for an
existing irrigation well or stock well or if the City Council specifically
determines that such water well would not be a threat of contamination to the
municipal water supply nor affect the production of the municipality’s
production wells. The municipality may establish reasonable restrictions and
conditions on the digging, construction, use and maintenance of such water well
and require plans to be submitted prior to approval of a permit.
(2000 Code, § 3-133)
§ 52.32 PROHIBITION OF WATER WELLS.
   It shall be unlawful to dig, construct, use or maintain a water well within
the limits of the municipality; provided, that a water well existing
immediately prior to the effective date of this section may be continued
although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof. This section shall
not prohibit the municipality from granting a permit pursuant to §
52.31.
(2000 Code, § 3-134) (Ord. 491, passed 6-19-2000) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.33 WELL PERMIT FOR HEAT PUMPS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter to the contrary,
the City Council, with the concurrence of at least two-thirds of all members
elected to the City Council, may grant a permit to dig, construct, use and
maintain a water well to be used solely with a heat pump or similar heating/
cooling device. Such well shall not be used for any other purpose.
   (B)   The municipality may establish reasonable restrictions and conditions
on the digging, construction, use and maintenance of such water well and
require plans to be submitted prior to approval of a permit.
(2000 Code, § 3-135) (Ord. 495, passed 3-19-2001)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who uses water contrary to the terms of the emergency declaration
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined not less than $5 nor more than $100. Each day there is a violation of
this chapter, it shall be considered a separate offense.
(2000 Code, § 3-130)
CHAPTER 53: SEWER REGULATIONS
Section
   
53.01   Operation and funding
   
53.02   Definitions
   
53.03   Application for permit
   
53.04   Sewer contract
   
53.05   Mandatory hookup
   
53.06   Direct connections
   
53.07   Service contracts
   
53.08   Installation expense
   
53.09   Classification
   
53.10   Rate setting
   
53.11   Sewer rental bills
   
53.12   Repairs and replacement
   
53.13   Special equipment
   
53.14   Manholes
   
53.15   Inspections
   
53.16   Lien
   
53.17   Private sewage disposal; when applicable
   
53.18   Private sewage disposal system; permit required; fee
   
53.19   Private sewage disposal system; permit, when effective; inspections
   
53.20   Private sewage disposal system; specifications
   
53.21   Private sewage disposal system; maintenance
   
53.22   Private sewage disposal system; additional requirements
   
53.23   Building sewer installation; permit required
   
53.24   Building sewer installation; classification; permit application; fee
   
53.25   Building sewer installation; expense
   
53.26   Building sewer installation; single premises
   
53.27   Building sewer installation; use of existing sewers
   
53.28   Building sewer installation; construction codes
   
53.29   Building sewer installation; unlawful connection
   
53.30   Building sewer installation; inspections
   
53.31   Building sewer installation; excavations
   
53.32   Prohibited discharges; stormwater, surface water, groundwater, cooling
water and process water
   
53.33   Hazardous and prohibited discharges; flammable, toxic, corrosive and
obstructive substances; preliminary treatment
   
53.34   Hazardous and prohibited discharges; specific prohibitions as
determined by Superintendent
   
53.35   Discharge of hazardous and prohibited substances; rejection,
pretreatment, control of discharge rate or use fee surcharge
   
53.36   Grease, oil and sand interceptors; when required
   
53.37   Preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities; maintenance by
owner
   
53.38   Control manholes/sampling stations; when required; installation and
maintenance
   
53.39   Control manholes/sampling stations; method
   
53.40   Sanitary supply system; destruction of property
   
53.41   Hazardous and prohibited substances; special exceptions permitted; use
fee surcharge
   
53.41   Compliance with chapter; inspections generally
   
53.42   Compliance with chapter; inspections; injury liability
   
53.43   Compliance with chapter; inspections; easements
   
53.44   Violation; notice and liability
   
53.45   Municipal powers
   
53.46   Rates
§ 53.01 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   The municipality owns and operates the municipal sewer system through the
Utilities Superintendent. The governing body shall have the authority to adopt
rules and regulations for the sanitary and efficient management of the
Department.
(Neb. RS 17-149, 17-925.01) (2000 Code, § 3-201)
§ 53.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). Includes the quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN AND HOUSE DRAIN. Includes the part of the lowest horizontal
piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste or
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   CHLORINE REQUIREMENT. The amount of chlorine in parts per million by weight
which must be added to sewage to produce a specified residual chlorine content
or to meet the requirements of some other objective in accordance with
procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or groundwater.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
   pH. And include the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights and is controlled by public authority.
   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed.
   SANITARY SEWER. And include a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. The spent water of a community. The preferred term is WASTEWATER.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
   SEWAGE WORKS.  All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
   SEWER. The pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent editions of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage
and Industrial Waste, published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution
Control Federation.
   STORM DRAIN (SOMETIMES TERMED STORM SEWER). A drain or sewer for conveying
water, groundwater, sub-surface water or unpolluted water from any source.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Utilities Superintendent of the municipality, or his or
her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
   SURCHARGE. The assessment in addition to the service charge, which is levied
on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration
values established as representative of normal sewage.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Total suspended matter that either floats on the surface
of or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and that is
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, and referred to as NONFILTERABLE RESIDUE.
   TRAP. And include a fitting or device so constructed as to prevent the
passage of air or gas through a pipe without materially affecting the flow of
sewage or waste through it.
   TRAP SEAL. And include the vertical distance between the crown weir and the
dip of the trap.
   UNPOLLUTED WATERS. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently.
(2000 Code, § 3-202)
§ 53.03 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Any person wishing to connect with the sewer system shall make an
application therefor to the Municipal Clerk. The Department shall not supply
sewer service to any person outside the corporate limits without special
permission from the governing body; provided, that the entire cost of pipe and
other installation charges shall be paid by such consumers. Nothing herein
shall be construed to obligate the municipality to provide sewer service to
nonresidents.
(Neb. RS 17-149, 19-2701) (2000 Code, § 3-203) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.04 SEWER CONTRACT.
   (A)   The municipality, through the Municipal Sewer Department, shall
furnish sewer services to persons within its corporate limits whose premises
abut a street or alley in which a commercial main is now or may hereafter be
laid. The municipality may also furnish sewer service to persons whose premises
are situated outside the corporate limits of the municipality as and when,
according to law, the governing body may see fit to do so.
   (B)   The rules, regulations and sewer rental rates hereinafter named in
this chapter shall be considered a part of every application hereafter made for
sewer service and shall be considered a part of the contract between every
customer now or hereafter served.
   (C)   Without further formality, the making of the application on the part
of any applicant or the use of sewer service by present customers thereof shall
constitute a contract between the customer and the municipality to which said
contract both parties are bound.
(2000 Code, § 3-204)
§ 53.05 MANDATORY HOOKUP.
   Upon written notice by the Municipal Clerk, the property owner, occupant or
lessee of any premises that abuts a sewer main that is now or may hereafter be
laid shall without delay, cause the said building to be connected with the
sewer system and equipped with inside sewerage facilities. Every building
hereafter erected shall be connected with the sewer system at the time of its
construction. In the event that any property owner, occupant or lessee shall
neglect, fail or refuse within a period of ten days after notice has been given
to him or her to do so by registered mail or by publication in a newspaper in
or of general circulation in the municipality to make such connection, the
governing body shall have the power to cause the same to be done, to assess the
cost thereof against the property and to collect the assessment thus made in
the manner provided for collection of other special taxes and assessments.
(Neb. RS 17-149, 17-149.01) (2000 Code, § 3-205) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.06 DIRECT CONNECTIONS.
   Each and every building except buildings customarily incidental to the
primary building and trailers, must make a direct connection with the main
sewer line. Under no circumstances will two or more houses be allowed to make
such connections through one pipe.
(2000 Code, § 3-206) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.07 SERVICE CONTRACTS.
   Contracts for sewer service are not transferable. Any person wishing to
change from one location to another shall make a new application and sign a new
contract. If any customer shall move from the premises where service is
furnished or if the said premises is destroyed by fire or other casualty, he or
she shall at once inform the Municipal Clerk.
(2000 Code, § 3-207)
§ 53.08 INSTALLATION EXPENSE.
   The customer, upon approval of his or her application for sewer service,
shall pay to the Municipal Cashier a tap fee of $25. The customer shall then be
required to pay the expense of procuring the materials required as well as the
services of a licensed plumber and shall pay all other costs of installation
from the property line to the point(s) of collection.
(2000 Code, § 3-208)
§ 53.09 CLASSIFICATION.
   The governing body may classify for the purpose of rental fees, the
customers of the Municipal Sewer Department; provided, that such
classifications are reasonable and do not discriminate unlawfully against any
consumer or group of consumers.
(Neb. RS 17-925.01) (2000 Code, § 3-209)
§ 53.10 RATE SETTING.
   The governing body has the power and authority to fix the rates to be
charged for the usage of the municipal sewer line. The Municipal Clerk shall
bill the customers and collect all money received by the municipality on the
account of the Sewer Department. He or she shall fully account for and pay to
the Municipal Treasurer all revenue collected by him or her, taking as his or
her receipt therefore and duplicate, filing one with the Municipal Clerk and
keeping the other on file in the Sewer Department official’s records.
(2000 Code, § 3-210)
§ 53.11 SEWER RENTAL BILLS.
   Sewer rental bills shall be due and payable monthly at the office of the
Municipal Cashier. The Municipal Cashier shall charge and collect from each
customer the sewer rental bill which shall include all other charges, properly
itemized, due the Sewer Department. Bills shall be due on the first day of each
month and shall be payable by the twentieth day of each month. Bills not paid
by the twentieth day of each month shall be deemed to be delinquent. Upon being
deemed to be delinquent as herein defined, the Municipal Clerk shall implement
procedural policies for utility disconnection. The Municipal Clerk may assess
an additional fee set by resolution of the governing body and on file at the
office of the Municipal Clerk in the event that water service is shut off for
the nonpayment of any sewer rental bill to compensate the municipality for the
additional hook-up necessary to again provide water service to the delinquent
customer.
(Neb. RS 17-925.01, 18-503, 70-1601 through 70-1615) (2000 Code, § 3-211)
§ 53.12 REPAIRS AND REPLACEMENT.
   (A)   The Municipal Sewer Department may require the owner of any property
which is within the municipality and connected to the public sewers or drains
to repair or replace any connection line which serves the owner’s property and
is broken, clogged or otherwise in need of repair or replacement. The property
owner’s duty to repair or replace such a connection line shall include those
portions upon the owner’s property and those portions upon public property or
easements up to and including the point of junction with the public main.
   (B)   The Municipal Clerk shall give the property owner notice by registered
letter or certified mail, directed to the last known address of such owner or
the agent of such owner, directing the repair or replacement of such connection
line. If, within 30 days of mailing such notice, the property owner fails or
neglects to cause such repairs or replacements to be made, the Utilities
Superintendent may cause such work to be done and assess the cost upon the
property served by such connection.
(Neb. RS 18-1748) (2000 Code, § 3-212)
§ 53.13 SPECIAL EQUIPMENT.
   In the event a customer of the Municipal Sewer Department discharges an
unusually large amount of waste daily, an unusually large amount of grease or
oil or waste with an unusually high biochemical oxygen demand, the governing
body may require the said customer to install interceptors or other preliminary
treatment equipment to reduce the objectionable characteristics of the waste to
within such maximum limits as he or she shall prescribe subject to the review
of the governing body. All preliminary treatment facilities shall be purchased
and maintained continuously in satisfactory and efficient operation at the
customer’s expense. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit a special
agreement or arrangement between the governing body and an industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the municipality for treatment subject to additional rental fees or other
charges.
(2000 Code, § 3-213)
§ 53.14 MANHOLES.
   Entrance into a manhole or opening for any purpose except by authorized
persons is hereby prohibited. It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be
deposited in any receptacle connected with the sewer system any substance which
is not the usual and natural waste carried by the sewer system.
(2000 Code, § 3-214) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.15 INSPECTIONS.
   The Utilities Superintendent or his or her authorized agents shall have free
access at any reasonable time to all parts of each premises and building which
is connected with the sewer system to ascertain whether there is any disrepair
or violations of this chapter therein.
(2000 Code, § 3-215)
§ 53.16 LIEN.
   In addition to all other remedies, if a customer shall for any reason remain
indebted to the municipality for sewer service furnished, such amount due
together with any rents and charges in arrears shall be considered a delinquent
sewer rent which is hereby declared to be a lien upon the real estate for which
the same was furnished. The Municipal Clerk shall notify in writing or cause to
be notified in writing all owners of premises or their agents whenever their
tenants or lessees are 60 days or more delinquent in the payment of sewer rent.
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Clerk on June 1 of each year to report to
the governing body a list of all unpaid accounts due for sewer service together
with a description of the premises served. The report shall be examined and, if
approved by the governing body, shall be certified by the Municipal Clerk to
the County Clerk to be collected as a special tax in the manner provided by
law.
(Neb. RS 17-925.01) (2000 Code, § 3-216)
§ 53.17 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL; WHEN APPLICABLE.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of §
53.05, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in §
53.05, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days in
compliance with this chapter and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar
private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled
with clean bankrun gravel or dirt.
(2000 Code, § 3-217)
§ 53.18 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; PERMIT REQUIRED, FEE.
   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the
owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Superintendent. The
application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the
municipality which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications
and other information as are deemed necessary by the Superintendent. A permit
and inspection fee shall be paid to the municipality at the time the
application is filed.
(2000 Code, § 3-218)
§ 53.19 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; PERMIT, WHEN EFFECTIVE; INSPECTIONS.
   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
He or she shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction
and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Superintendent
when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions
are covered. The inspection shall be made within 24 hours of the receipt of
notice by the Superintendent.
(2000 Code, § 3-219)
§ 53.20 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; SPECIFICATIONS.
   The type capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system
shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Public Health of the
state. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities when the area of the lot is
less than 12,250 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet.
(2000 Code, § 3-220)
§ 53.21 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; MAINTENANCE.
   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 3-221)
§ 53.22 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   No statement contained in §§
53.17 through
53.21 shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may
be imposed by the Health Officer.
(2000 Code, § 3-222)
§ 53.23 BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
(2000 Code, § 3-223) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.24 BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; CLASSIFICATION; PERMIT APPLICATION, FEE.
   (A)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
      (1)   For residential and commercial service; and
      (2)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
   (B)   In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application
on a special form furnished by the municipality.
   (C)   The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgement of
the Superintendent. A permit and inspection fee for a residential or commercial
building sewer permit and for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid
to the municipality at the time the application is filed.
(2000 Code, § 3-224)
§ 53.25 BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; EXPENSE.
   The customer, upon approval of his or her application for sewer service,
shall pay to the Utilities Superintendent a tap fee as set by resolution of the
Board of Public Works for the expense of processing his or her application and
tapping the sewer main. The Utilities Superintendent, at his or her discretion,
may direct the customer to hire a licensed plumber to tap the main. The
customer shall then be required to pay the expense of procuring the materials
required as well as the services of a licensed plumber and shall pay all other
costs of installation.
(2000 Code, § 3-225)
§ 53.26 BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; SINGLE PREMISES.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot an no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the real
building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
(2000 Code, § 3-226) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.27 BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; USE OF EXISTING SEWERS.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 3-227) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.28 BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; CONSTRUCTION CODES.
   (A)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
municipality. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof,
the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
   (B)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (C)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the municipality or the procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of
Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and
verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the Superintendent before installation.
(2000 Code, § 3-228) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.29 BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; UNLAWFUL CONNECTION.
   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, interior and exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(2000 Code, § 3-229) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.30 BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; INSPECTIONS.
   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the
Superintendent or his or her representative.
(2000 Code, § 3-230)
§ 53.31 BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
   (B)   Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in
the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
municipality.
(2000 Code, § 3-231) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.32 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; STORMWATER, SURFACE WATER, GROUNDWATER, COOLING
WATER AND PROCESS WATER.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, including
interior and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water or
unpolluted industrial waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers
or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water
or unpolluted process water may be discharged on approval of the
Superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. The
contributor of any identifiable discharge of polluted water to the sanitary
sewer system shall be held responsible for reimbursing the municipality for
such costs. The costs shall be determined by the Superintendent with the
approval of the governing body.
(2000 Code, § 3-232) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.33 HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; FLAMMABLE, TOXIC, CORROSIVE AND
OBSTRUCTIVE SUBSTANCES; PRELIMINARY TREATMENT.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant including but not limited to
cyanides in the excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the
public sewer;
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower that 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works;
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage facilities such as but not limited to ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders; or
      (5)   Any waters or wastes having:
         (a)   A five-day BOD greater than 300 parts per million by weight;
         (b)   Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of
suspended solids;
         (c)   Having an average daily flow greater than 2% of the average
sewage flow of the municipality; or
         (d)   A chlorine requirement greater than demanded by normal sewage as
evaluated by the municipality’s consulting engineer shall be subject to the
review of the Superintendent.
   (B)   Where necessary, in the opinion of the Superintendent, the owner shall
provide at his or her expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary
to:
      (1)   Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million by
weight;
      (2)    Reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight;
      (3)   Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes; or
      (4)   Reduce the chlorine requirement to conform with normal sewage.
Plans, specifications and other pertinent information relating to proposed
preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the
Superintendent and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until
said approvals are obtained in writing.
(2000 Code, § 3-233) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.34 HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS AS
DETERMINED BY SUPERINTENDENT.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers,
sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a
nuisance. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the
quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors.
   (B)   The substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C);
      (2)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0°C and
65°C);
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 Hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Superintendent;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   Any water or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the Superintendent for such materials;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of state, federal or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Foremen in compliance
with applicable state of federal regulations;
      (8)    Any waters of wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;
      (9)    Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as but
not limited to, Fuller’s earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as but not limited to, sodium chloride or sodium
sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works; or
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
      (10)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment process employed or are amenable
to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent
cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
(2000 Code, § 3-234) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.35 DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES; REJECTION,
PRETREATMENT, CONTROL OF DISCHARGE RATE OR USE FEE SURCHARGE.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in §
53.32 and which, in the judgement of the Superintendent, may have a deleterious
effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life to constitute a public nuisance, the
Superintendent may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)    Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      (4)    Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions
of §
53.40.
   (B)   If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(2000 Code, § 3-235) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.36 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS; WHEN REQUIRED.
   (A)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes,
sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units.
   (B)   All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Superintendent and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.
(2000 Code, § 3-236) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.37 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT OR FLOW EQUALIZING FACILITIES; MAINTENANCE BY
OWNER.
   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.
(2000 Code, § 3-237)
§ 53.38 CONTROL MANHOLES/SAMPLING STATIONS; WHEN REQUIRED; INSTALLATION AND
MAINTENANCE.
   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and
shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent.
The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be
maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(2000 Code, § 3-238) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.39 CONTROL MANHOLES/SAMPLING STATIONS; METHOD.
   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from
24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined from periodic
grab samples.
(2000 Code, § 3-239)
§ 53.40 SANITARY SUPPLY SYSTEM; DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   No person or persons shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is part of the wastewater facilities. Any person or persons
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.
(2000 Code, § 3-240) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.41 HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES; SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS PERMITTED; USE
FEE SURCHARGE.
   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the municipality and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the municipality for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the
industrial concern.
(2000 Code, § 3-241)
§ 53.41 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER; INSPECTIONS GENERALLY.
   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the municipality
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling
and testing system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
Superintendent or his or her representatives shall have no authority to inquire
into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic,
paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind
and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
(2000 Code, § 3-242)
§ 53.42 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER; INSPECTIONS; INJURY LIABILITY.
   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in §
53.41, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the municipality
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the
company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the
municipal employees and the municipality shall indemnify the company against
loss or damage to its property by municipal employees and against liability
claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the
company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such
may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe
conditions as required by municipality.
(2000 Code, § 3-243)
§ 53.43 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER; INSPECTIONS; EASEMENTS.
   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the municipality
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the municipality holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage
works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on
said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(2000 Code, § 3-244)
§ 53.44 VIOLATION; NOTICE AND LIABILITY.
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except
§
53.38, shall be served by the municipality with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the municipality for any expense, loss or damage occasioned
the municipality by reason of such violation.
(2000 Code, § 3-245) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.45 MUNICIPAL POWERS.
   The municipality has the legal authority to enforce its system of user
charges and sewer use regulations on all existing or future users of the system
whether located inside or outside the municipal limits.
(2000 Code, § 3-246)
§ 53.46 RATES.
   For use of the municipal sewer system, each consumer shall pay a monthly
charge in accordance with the following schedule:
   (A)   Residential, except as otherwise provided herein: $40.50 per month for
each house, apartment, motel room or trailer house.
   (B)   Commercial property and churches, except as otherwise provided herein:
$52.25 per month.
   (C)   Gibbon Public Schools: $321.05 per month.
   (D)   Centennial Manor: $243.41 per month.
   (E)   Colony Acres (Gibbon Housing Authority, including all apartments):
$554.50 per month.
   (F)   Gibbon Packing: rates presently existing as provided in separate
ordinance.
(2000 Code, § 3-247) (Ord. 538, passed 9-17-2007; Ord. 540, passed 10-20-2008;
Ord. 623, passed 4-19-2021; Ord. 653, passed 4-18-2022; Ord. 659, passed 4-17-
2023; Ord. 678, passed 5-20-2024; Ord. 686, passed 4-21-2025)
CHAPTER 54: ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS
Section
   
54.01   Contract and terms
   
54.02   Ownership
   
54.03   Consumer’s application
   
54.04   Installation expense
   
54.05   Repairs
   
54.06   Electrical bills
   
54.07   Lien
   
54.08   Rate setting
   
54.09   Meter in disrepair
   
54.10   Minimum rates
   
54.11   Restricted use
   
54.12   Electrical service contracts
   
54.13   Building moving
   
54.14   Posting signs
   
54.15   Trimming trees
   
54.16   Inspections
   
54.17   Destruction of property
   
54.18   Complaints
   
54.19   Franchise
§ 54.01 CONTRACT AND TERMS.
   (A)   The municipality, through its Electrical Department, shall furnish
electric current for light and power purposes to persons whose premises abut on
any supply wire of the distribution system and may furnish electric current to
such other persons within or without its corporate limits as and when according
to law, its governing body may see fit to do so.
   (B)   For such purposes, the said governing body may enter into agreements
for the purchase of electric energy and power and energy or capacity or any
combination thereof upon such terms and conditions with such suppliers and for
such periods as it may deem are in the best interests of the municipality.
   (C)   The rules, regulations and the rates for electric service, hereinafter
named in this chapter shall be considered a part of every consumer application
hereafter made for electric service and shall be considered a part of a
contract with every consumer now served by the municipality.
   (D)   Without further formality, the making of application on the part of
any applicant for the use or consumption of electric energy by present
customers and the furnishing of electric service to said applicant or customer
shall constitute a contract or any reasonable rules and regulations that the
governing body may hereafter adopt, the Superintendent of Utilities or his or
her agent shall cut off or disconnect the electric service from the building or
place of such violation and no further connection of electric service for such
building or place shall again be made save or except by order of the
Superintendent or his or her agent.
(2000 Code, § 3-301)
§ 54.02 OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   The municipality owns and operates the municipal electrical system
through the Utilities Superintendent.
   (B)   The governing body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the care,
management and maintenance of the municipal electrical system may each year
levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law on the
actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the corporate
limits that is subject to taxation.
   (C)   The revenue from the said tax shall be known as the Electrical Fund
and shall remain in the custody of the Municipal Treasurer.
   (D)   The Utilities Superintendent or his or her agent shall have the direct
management and control of the municipal electrical system and shall faithfully
carry out the duties of his or her office. He or she shall have the authority
to adopt rules and regulations for the safe and efficient management of the
electrical system subject to the supervision and review of the governing body.
   (E)   The governing body shall by resolution set the rates to be charged for
services rendered and shall file the same in the office of the Municipal Clerk
for public inspection at any reasonable time.
(Neb. RS 17-902 through 17-904, 17-906, 17-909) (2000 Code, § 3-302)
§ 54.03 CONSUMER’S APPLICATION.
   Every person desiring electrical service must make application therefor to
the Utilities Superintendent. All applicants shall make a service deposit in
the sum set by resolution of the governing body. Electricity may not be
supplied to any house or building except upon the written order of the
Utilities Superintendent. The system shall not supply to any person outside the
corporate limits electrical service without special permission from the
governing body; provided, that the entire cost of wire, installation and other
expenses shall be paid by the consumer beyond the corporate limits. Nothing
herein shall be construed to obligate the municipality to supply electrical
service to nonresidents.
(2000 Code, § 3-303)
§ 54.04 INSTALLATION EXPENSE.
   The expense of installation and equipment up to and including the electrical
meter shall be paid by the municipality. The expense of installation and wiring
from the meter to the points of distribution shall be the responsibility of the
consumer. In the case of nonresident customers, the customer shall pay the
expense of bringing electrical service from the corporate limits to the place
of distribution. In the event that the customer, whether resident or
nonresident, desires underground installation, the customer shall contract with
the municipality for such installation, the customer contributing to the
expense of such installation in such sum as the governing body may in each case
set.
(Neb. RS 17-902) (2000 Code, § 3-304)
§ 54.05 REPAIRS.
   All repairs to the electrical system up to the customers lot line of the
customer shall be paid by the municipality. All repairs to the wire and other
appurtenances from the lot line to the points of distribution, including the
meter, shall be paid by the customers of the municipality. In the case of
nonresidents, the customer shall pay for all repair and replacement from the
corporate limits to the points of distribution on the customer’s premises.
(2000 Code, § 3-305)
§ 54.06 ELECTRICAL BILLS.
   Electrical bills shall be due and payable monthly at the office of the
Municipal Clerk. Meters shall be read one time each month on or about the
seventeenth day of each month. It shall be the duty of customers of the
Electrical System to pay their bill in net cash each month by mail or to appear
at the office of the Municipal Clerk. The Clerk shall charge and collect from
each customer for the amount of electricity used since the last examination,
together with any other charges properly itemized, due the electrical system.
Bills shall be sent out on or about the first day of the month and shall be due
immediately. Bills not paid by the tenth day of the month shall be deemed to be
delinquent. Procedures for discontinuance of municipal utility service to
domestic subscribers for non-payment of any due account are specified in §
54.02.
(2000 Code, § 3-306)
§ 54.07 LIEN.
   (A)   In addition to all other remedies if a customer shall for any reason
remain indebted to the municipality for electrical service furnished, the
amount due together with any other charged in arrears shall be considered a
delinquent electrical bill which is hereby declared to be a lien upon the real
estate for which the same was used. The delinquent electrical bill shall be
placed upon the assessment rolls for collection as a special tax. It shall be
the duty of the (Board of Public Works) to report to the governing body on June
1, of each year a list of all unpaid accounts due for electricity, together
with a description of the real estate upon which the same was used.
   (B)   The report shall be examined and, if approved by the governing body,
shall be certified by the Municipal Clerk to the County Clerk in the same
manner as for the collection of other special taxes to be collected by the
County Treasurer. The Clerk shall notify the property owners of any delinquency
that is 60 days or more overdue. The delinquent electrical bill shall be placed
upon the assessment rolls for collection as a special tax.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Municipal Clerk to report to the governing
body on June 1 of each year a list of all unpaid accounts due for electricity
together with a description of the real estate upon which the same was used.
The report shall be examined and if approved by the governing body, shall be
certified by the Municipal Clerk to the County Clerk in the same manner as for
the collection of other special taxes to be collected by the County Treasurer.
(2000 Code, § 3-307)
§ 54.08 RATE SETTING.
   The governing body shall set electrical rates by ordinance. All rates shall
be on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk for public inspection at any
reasonable time.
(2000 Code, § 3-308)
§ 54.09 METER IN DISREPAIR.
   (A)   In the event that any customer’s meter falls out of repair or fails to
register properly, the Clerk shall charge such customer the same amount billed
one year previous to such disrepair.
   (B)   In the event that there is no such basis for comparison, the Clerk
shall charge the customer such amount as he or she deems is fair both to the
customer and the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 3-309)
§ 54.10 MINIMUM RATES.
   All electrical consumers shall be liable for the minimum rate provided by
resolution unless and until the consumer shall by written order direct the
Utilities Superintendent to shut off the electricity in which case he or she
shall not be liable thereafter for electrical service until the electricity is
turned on again.
(Neb. RS 17-902) (2000 Code, § 3-310)
§ 54.11 RESTRICTED USE.
   (A)   The municipal electrical system does not guarantee the delivery of
electric current over the lines of the distribution system except when it has
sufficient power, current, equipment and machinery to do so. The Utilities
Superintendent has the power and authority to disconnect or discontinue such
service for any good and sufficient reason without liability.
   (B)   The municipality shall use due care and reasonable diligence to
provide and supply uninterrupted service to consumers but shall not be liable
for damages resulting from interruption of service due to causes over which the
municipality has no control and the municipality expressly reserves the right
to discontinue or disconnect any consumer’s service without preliminary notice.
(Neb. RS 17-902) (2000 Code, § 3-311)
§ 54.12 ELECTRICAL SERVICE CONTRACTS.
   Contracts for electrical service are not transferable. Any person wishing to
change from one location to another shall make a new application. If any
consumer shall sell, dispose or remove from the premises where service is
furnished in his or her name or if the said premises is destroyed by fire or
other casualty, he or she shall at once inform the Utilities Superintendent who
shall cause the electrical service to be shut off from the said premises. If
the consumer should fail to give such notice, he or she shall be charged for
all electricity used on the said premises until the Utilities Superintendent is
otherwise advised of such circumstances.
(Neb. RS 17-902) (2000 Code, § 3-312)
§ 54.13 BUILDING MOVING.
   (A)   Should any house or building moving occur or be necessary and it
becomes necessary in said work to remove or disturb any of the property or
wires of the municipal electrical system, the same should not be done except
upon written permission received from the Utilities Superintendent who shall
then order paid in advance the actual cost of moving the said wires and such
cost shall be paid by the applicant prior to the moving of the building or
house.
   (B)   All expense of removing, changing and replacing the said wires or
apparatus of the electrical system shall be paid out of the deposit made prior
to moving and any surplus remaining after all expenses are paid shall be
returned to the applicant; provided, that if in the course of moving the said
building or house it becomes apparent that additional expense will be incurred,
such additional deposit as deemed necessary may be demanded.
(2000 Code, § 3-313) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.14 POSTING SIGNS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to post, tack or fasten to the poles,
structures, fixtures or equipment of the municipal electrical system any sign,
poster, advertisement or banner without written permission from the Utilities
Superintendent.
(2000 Code, § 3-314) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.15 TRIMMING TREES.
   Any person desiring to cut or remove trees or branches thereof in close
proximity to the lines of the municipal electrical system shall before doing
the said work, give reasonable written notice to the Utilities Superintendent
and shall follow any and all rules and regulations which he or she may
prescribe for doing such work. It shall be unlawful for any person felling or
removing such trees or branches to disrupt or damage the lines without first
giving proper notice and receiving permission in writing to do so. Whenever it
becomes necessary to protect the lines or property of the electrical system,
the governing body shall have the power to order cut and removed any
overhanging branches or limbs of trees so that the lines will be free and safe.
(2000 Code, § 3-315) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.16 INSPECTIONS.
   The Utilities Superintendent or his or her duly authorized agents shall have
free access at any reasonable time to each premises and building to or in which
electricity is supplied; provided, that in the event of an emergency, such
inspections may take place at any time.
(Neb. RS 17-902) (2000 Code, § 3-316)
§ 54.17 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break, injure
or deface any building, machinery, apparatus, fixture, attachment or
appurtenance of the municipal electrical system.
(Neb. RS 28-512) (2000 Code, § 3-317) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.18 COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Any consumer feeling himself or herself aggrieved by reason of any
controversy with the Utilities Superintendent may appear before the governing
body and present his or her grievance.
   (B)   Any consumer who considers himself or herself aggrieved by being
required to pay the charge demanded for the use of electricity or for the
resumption of electric service after the same shall have been shut off, shall
pay such charge under protest in which event, the Municipal Clerk shall write
on the receipt given such customer the words, “Paid Under Protest.”
   (C)   Such consumer may then present his or her verified claim in the manner
provided for presenting claims to the governing body for a refund of the amount
so paid under protest.
   (D)   Such claims shall then be considered by the governing body in the same
manner as other claims against the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 3-318)
§ 54.19 FRANCHISE.
   In lieu of owning and operating the municipal electrical system, the
municipality may enter into a franchise agreement for the purpose of furnishing
electrical power to the residents of the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 3-319)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES AND ROLLER BLADES
      
74.   MOTORCYCLES
      
75.   MINIBIKES
      
76.   SNOWMOBILES
      
77.   MOPEDS
      
78.   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
      
79.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
80.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Traffic regulations; general authority
   
70.03   Regulation of highways; police powers
   
70.04   Prohibitions on operation of vehicles
   
70.05   Ordinances contrary to state law prohibited
   
70.06   Placement and maintenance of traffic control devices
   
70.07   Enforcement of rules and laws
   
70.08   Failure or refusal to obey order
   
70.09   Obedience to traffic control devices; exceptions
   
70.10   Authorized emergency vehicles; privileges
   
70.11   Traffic officers
 
   
70.99   Traffic infractions; penalty
Statutory reference:
   Nebraska Rules of the Road, see Neb. RS 60-601
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions and the other
definitions in Neb. RS 60-606 through 60-676 shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or
buildings and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic.
(Neb. RS 60-607)
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Such fire department vehicles, police
vehicles, rescue vehicles, and ambulances as are publicly owned, such other
publicly or privately owned vehicles as are designated by the Director of Motor
Vehicles, and such publicly owned military vehicles of the National Guard as
are designated by the Adjutant General pursuant to Neb. RS 55-133.
(Neb. RS 60-610)
   BUSINESS DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to and including a highway when
within any 600 feet along such highway there are buildings in use for business
or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks, office
buildings, railroad stations, or public buildings which occupy at least 300
feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of a
highway.
(Neb. RS 60-613)
   HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary limits of any street, road,
avenue, boulevard, or way which is publicly maintained when any part thereof is
open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
(Neb. RS 60-624)
   MANUAL.  The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the
Department of Transportation pursuant to Neb. RS 60-6,118.
(Neb. RS 60-631)
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every self-propelled land vehicle, not operated upon rails,
except bicycles, mopeds, self-propelled chairs used by persons who are
disabled, and electric personal assistive mobility devices.
(Neb. RS 60-638)
   PEACE OFFICER. The Police Chief or other chief law enforcement official, any
city police officer, or any other person authorized to enforce city ordinances.
With respect to directing traffic only, peace officer shall also include any
person authorized to direct or regulate traffic.
(Neb. RS 60-646)
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to and including a highway
not comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a
distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.
(Neb. RS 60-654)
   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes
two or more separate roadways, the term roadway shall refer to any such roadway
separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
(Neb. RS 60-656)
   SCHOOL CROSSING ZONE.  The area of a roadway designated to the public by the
state Department of Transportation or City Council as a school crossing zone
through the use of a sign or traffic control device as specified by the City
Council in conformity with the Manual but does not include any area of a
freeway. A school crossing zone starts at the location of the first sign or
traffic control device identifying the school crossing zone and continues until
a sign or traffic control device indicates that the school crossing zone has
ended.
(Neb. RS 60-658.01)
   SHOULDER.  That part of the highway contiguous to the roadway and designed
for the accommodation of stopped vehicles, for emergency use, and for lateral
support of the base and surface courses of the roadway.
(Neb. RS 60-661)
   TRAFFIC.  Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, and vehicles and other
conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for purposes of
travel.
(Neb. RS 60-669)
   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE.  Any sign, signal, marking, or other device not
inconsistent with the Nebraska Rules of the Road placed or erected by authority
of the City Council or any official having jurisdiction for the purpose of
regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
(Neb. RS 60-670)
   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL.  Any signal, whether manually, electrically, or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
permitted to proceed.
(Neb. RS 60-671)
   TRAFFIC INFRACTION.  The violation of any provision of the Nebraska Rules of
the Road or of any law, ordinance, order, rule, or regulation regulating
traffic which is not otherwise declared to be a misdemeanor or a felony or, in
this title, an offense.
(Neb. RS 60-672)
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway except devices moved solely by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Neb. RS 60-676)
§ 70.02 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS; GENERAL AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The City Council may, in its jurisdiction, enact regulations
permitting, prohibiting, and controlling the use of motor vehicles, minibikes,
motorcycles, off-road recreation vehicles of any and all types, other powered
vehicles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, and vehicles which are
not self-propelled. Any person who operates any of such vehicles without the
permission of the City Council or its designated representative or in a place,
time, or manner which has been prohibited by the City Council shall be guilty
of an offense.
   (B)   The City Council may further authorize the supervising official of any
area under its ownership or control to permit, control, or prohibit operation
of any motor vehicle, minibike, motorcycle, off-road recreational vehicle of
any or all types, other powered vehicle, electric personal assistive mobility
device, or vehicle which is not self-propelled on all or any portion of any
area under its ownership or control at any time by posting or, in case of an
emergency, by personal notice. Any person operating any such vehicle where
prohibited, where not permitted, or in a manner so as to endanger the peace and
safety of the public or as to harm or destroy the natural features or manmade
features of any such area shall be guilty of an offense.
(Neb. RS 60-678) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.03 REGULATION OF HIGHWAYS; POLICE POWERS.
   (A)   The City Council with respect to highways under its jurisdiction and
within the reasonable exercise of the police power may:
      (1)   Regulate or prohibit stopping, standing, or parking;
      (2)   Regulate traffic by means of peace officers or traffic control
devices;
      (3)   Regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways;
      (4)   Designate highways or roadways for use by traffic moving in one
direction;
      (5)   Establish speed limits for vehicles in public parks;
      (6)   Designate any highway as a through highway or designate any
intersection as a stop or yield intersection;
      (7)   Restrict the use of highways as authorized in §
70.04;
      (8)   Regulate operation of bicycles and require registration and
inspection of such, including requirement of a registration fee;
      (9)   Regulate operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices;
      (10)   Regulate or prohibit the turning of vehicles or specified types of
vehicles;
      (11)   Alter or establish speed limits authorized in the Nebraska Rules
of the Road;
      (12)   Designate no-passing zones;
      (13)   Prohibit or regulate use of controlled-access highways by any
class or kind of traffic except those highways which are a part of the state
highway system;
      (14)   Prohibit or regulate use of heavily traveled highways by any class
or kind of traffic it finds to be incompatible with the normal and safe
movement of traffic, except that such regulations shall not be effective on any
highway which is part of the state highway system unless authorized by the
Department of Transportation;
      (15)   Establish minimum speed limits as authorized in the Rules;
      (16)   Designate hazardous railroad grade crossings as authorized in the
Rules;
      (17)   Designate and regulate traffic on play streets;
      (18)   Prohibit pedestrians from crossing a roadway in a business
district or any designated highway except in a crosswalk as authorized in the
Rules;
      (19)   Restrict pedestrian crossings at unmarked crosswalks as authorized
in the Rules;
      (20)   Regulate persons propelling push carts;
      (21)   Regulate persons upon skates, coasters, sleds, and other toy
vehicles;
      (22)   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, adopt and
enforce an ordinance or resolution prohibiting the use of engine brakes on the
National System of Interstate and Defense Highways that has a grade of less
than five degrees within its jurisdiction.
         (b)   For the purpose of this division, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
            ENGINE BRAKE.  A device that converts a power producing engine into
a power-absorbing air compressor, resulting in a net energy loss;
      (23)   Adopt and enforce such temporary or experimental regulations as
may be necessary to cover emergencies or special conditions; and
      (24)   Adopt other traffic regulations except as prohibited by state law
or contrary to state law.
   (B)   The City Council shall not erect or maintain any traffic control
device at any location so as to require the traffic on any state highway or
state-maintained freeway to stop before entering or crossing any intersecting
highway unless approval in writing has first been obtained from the Department
of Transportation.
   (C)   No ordinance or regulation enacted under division (A)(4), (5), (6),
(7), (10), (11), (12), (13), (14), (16), (17), or (19) shall be effective until
traffic control devices giving notice of such local traffic regulations are
erected upon or at the entrances to such affected highway or part thereof
affected as may be most appropriate.
(Neb. RS 60-680)
§ 70.04 PROHIBITIONS ON OPERATION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   The City Council may by ordinance or resolution prohibit the operation
of vehicles upon any highway or impose restrictions as to the weight of
vehicles, for a total period not to exceed 180 days in any one calendar year,
when operated upon any highway under the jurisdiction of and for the
maintenance of which the City Council is responsible whenever any such highway
by reason of deterioration, rain, snow, or other climatic condition will be
seriously damaged or destroyed unless the use of vehicles thereon is prohibited
or the permissible weight thereof reduced. The City Council shall erect or
cause to be erected and maintained signs designating the provisions of the
ordinance or resolution at each end of that portion of any highway affected
thereby, and the ordinance or resolution shall not be effective until such
signs are erected and maintained.
   (B)   The City Council may also, by ordinance or resolution, prohibit the
operation of trucks or other commercial vehicles or impose limitations as to
the weight thereof on designated highways, which prohibitions and limitations
shall be designated by appropriate signs placed on such highways.
(Neb. RS 60-681)
§ 70.05 ORDINANCES CONTRARY TO STATE LAW PROHIBITED.
   The City Council shall not enact or enforce any ordinance directly contrary
to the Nebraska Rules of the Road unless expressly authorized by the
Legislature.
(Neb. RS 60-6,108)
§ 70.06 PLACEMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   The City Council shall place and maintain such traffic control devices upon
highways under its jurisdiction as it deems necessary to indicate and to carry
out the provisions of this title or to regulate, warn, or guide traffic. All
such traffic control devices erected pursuant to this title shall conform with
the Manual.
(Neb. RS 60-6,121)
§ 70.07 ENFORCEMENT OF RULES AND LAWS.
   (A)   All peace officers are hereby specifically directed and authorized and
it shall be deemed and considered a part of the official duties of each of such
officers to enforce the provisions of Nebraska Rules of the Road and this
title, including the specific enforcement of maximum speed limits, and any
other state or city law regulating the operation of vehicles or the use of the
highways.
   (B)   To perform the official duties imposed by this section, peace officers
shall have the power:
      (1)   To make arrests upon view and without warrant for any violation
committed in their presence of any of the provisions of the Motor Vehicle
Operator’s License Act or this title or of any other law regulating the
operation of vehicles or the use of the highways, if and when designated or
called upon to do so as provided by law;
      (2)   To make arrests upon view and without warrant for any violation
committed in their presence of any provision of the laws of this state relating
to misdemeanors or felonies or of similar city ordinances if and when
designated or called upon to do so as provided by law;
      (3)   At all times to direct all traffic in conformity with law or, in
the event of a fire or other emergency or in order to expedite traffic or
insure safety, to direct traffic as conditions may require;
      (4)   When in uniform, to require the driver of a vehicle to stop and
exhibit his or her operator’s license and registration certificate issued for
the vehicle and submit to an inspection of such vehicle and the license plates
and registration certificate for the vehicle and to require the driver of a
motor vehicle to present the vehicle within five days for correction of any
defects revealed by such motor vehicle inspection as may lead the inspecting
officer to reasonably believe that such motor vehicle is being operated in
violation of the statutes of Nebraska, the rules and regulations of the
Director of Motor Vehicles, or any city ordinance or regulation;
      (5)   To inspect any vehicle of a type required to be registered
according to law in any public garage or repair shop or in any place where such
a vehicle is held for sale or wrecking;
      (6)   To serve warrants relating to the enforcement of the laws
regulating the operation of vehicles or the use of the highways; and
      (7)   To investigate traffic accidents for the purpose of carrying on a
study of traffic accidents and enforcing motor vehicle and highway safety laws.
(Neb. RS 60-683)
Statutory reference:
   Motor Vehicle Operator's License Act, see Neb. RS 60-462
§ 70.08 FAILURE OR REFUSAL TO OBEY ORDER.
   (A)   Any person who knowingly fails or refuses to obey any lawful order of
any peace officer who is controlling or directing traffic shall be guilty of a
traffic infraction.
   (B)   Any person who knowingly fails to obey any lawful order of a peace
officer shall be guilty of an offense whenever such order is given in
furtherance of the apprehension of a person who has violated the Nebraska Rules
of the Road or this title or of a person whom such officer reasonably believes
has violated the Rules or this title.
(Neb. RS 60-6,110) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.09 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any traffic
control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the Nebraska Rules
of the Road or this title, unless otherwise directed by a peace officer,
subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle
in the Rules and this title.
   (B)   No provision of the Rules or this title for which traffic control
devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the
time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper
position and sufficiently legible to be seen by a reasonably observant person.
Whenever any provision of the Rules or this title does not state that traffic
control devices are required, such provision shall be effective even though no
devices are erected or in place.
   (C)   Whenever traffic control devices are placed in position approximately
conforming to the requirements of the Rules or this title, such devices shall
be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of lawful
authority unless the contrary is established by competent evidence.
   (D)   Any traffic control device placed pursuant to the Rules or this title
and purporting to conform with the lawful requirements pertaining to such
devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of the Rules or this
title unless the contrary is established by competent evidence.
(Neb. RS 60-6,119) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.10 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES; PRIVILEGES.
   (A)   Subject to the conditions stated in the Nebraska Rules of the Road and
this title, the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to
an emergency call, when pursuing an actual or suspected violator of the law, or
when responding to but not when returning from a fire alarm, may:
      (1)   Stop, park, or stand, irrespective of the provisions of the Rules
and this title, and disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specified directions; and
      (2)   Except for wreckers towing disabled vehicles and highway
maintenance vehicles and equipment:
         (a)   Proceed past a steady red indication, a flashing red indication,
or a stop sign but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe
operation; and
         (b)   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he or she does not
endanger life, limb, or property.
   (B)   Except when operated as a police vehicle, the exemptions granted in
division (A) shall apply only when the driver of such vehicle, while in motion,
sounds an audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may be
reasonably necessary and when such vehicle is equipped with at least one
lighted light displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle.
   (C)   The exemptions granted in division (A) shall not relieve the driver
from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall
such provisions protect such driver from the consequences of his or her
reckless disregard for the safety of others.
   (D)   Authorized emergency vehicles operated by police and fire departments
shall not be subject to the size and weight limitations of sections Neb. RS 60-
6,288 to 60-6,290 and 60-6,294.
(Neb. RS 60-6,114)
§ 70.11 TRAFFIC OFFICERS.
   The City Council or the city police may at any time detail officers, to be
known as “traffic officers,” at street intersections. All traffic officers
shall be vested with the authority to regulate and control traffic at the
intersections to which they are assigned. It shall be their duty to direct the
movement of traffic and prevent congestion and accidents. It shall be unlawful
for any person to violate any order or signal of any such traffic officer
notwithstanding the directive of a stop sign or signal device that may have
been placed at any such intersection.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 TRAFFIC INFRACTIONS; PENALTY.
   (A)   Unless otherwise declared in this title with respect to particular
offenses, a violation of any provision of this title shall constitute a traffic
infraction.
(Neb. RS 60-682)
   (B)   Any person who is found guilty of a traffic infraction in violation of
this title for which a penalty has not been specifically provided shall be
fined:
      (1)   Not more than $100 for the first offense;
      (2)   Not more than $200 for a second offense within a one-year period;
and
      (3)   Not more than $300 for a third and subsequent offense within a one-
year period.
(Neb. RS 60-689)
Statutory reference:
   Other provisions on traffic infractions, see Neb. RS 60-684 through 60-
694.01
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Restrictions on direction of travel
   
71.02   Right-of-way; stop and yield signs
   
71.03   Interference with traffic control devices or railroad signs or signals
   
71.04   Signs, markers, devices, or notices; prohibited acts
   
71.05   Tire requirements and prohibitions; permissive uses
   
71.06   Prohibiting truck traffic on River Street
   
71.07   Engine brakes
Speed Limits
   
71.20   Basic rule
   
71.21   Maximum limits
   
71.22   Bridges and other elevated structures
   
71.23   Alternative maximum limits
   
71.24   Near schools
 
   
71.99   Violations; fines
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01 RESTRICTIONS ON DIRECTION OF TRAVEL.
   (A)   The City Council with respect to highways under its jurisdiction may
designate any highway, roadway, part of a roadway, or specific lanes upon which
vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction at all times or at such times
as shall be indicated by traffic control devices.
   (B)   Except for emergency vehicles, no vehicle shall be operated, backed,
pushed, or otherwise caused to move in a direction which is opposite to the
direction designated by competent authority on any deceleration lane,
acceleration lane, access ramp, shoulder, or roadway.
   (C)   A vehicle which passes around a rotary traffic island shall be driven
only to the right of such island.
(Neb. RS 60-6,138)
§ 71.02 RIGHT-OF-WAY; STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.
   (A)   The City Council may provide for preferential right-of-way at an
intersection and indicate such by stop signs or yield signs erected by such
authorities.
   (B)   Except when directed to proceed by a peace officer or traffic control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection where a stop is
indicated by a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or shall
stop, if there is no such line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection or, if no crosswalk is indicated, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. After having stopped,
such driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the
intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on such
highway as to constitute an immediate hazard if such driver moved across or
into such intersection.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow to a speed
reasonable under the existing conditions and, if required for safety to stop,
shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or shall stop, if there is no such
line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if
no crosswalk is indicated, at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where
the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After
slowing or stopping, such driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in
the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute
an immediate hazard if such driver moved across or into such intersection.
(Neb. RS 60-6,148) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.03 INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES OR RAILROAD SIGNS OR SIGNALS.
   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down, or remove any traffic control device, any railroad
sign or signal, or any part of such a device, sign, or signal.
(Neb. RS 60-6,129) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.04 SIGNS, MARKERS, DEVICES, OR NOTICES; PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   Any person who willfully or maliciously shoots upon the public highway
and injures, defaces, damages, or destroys any signs, monuments, road markers,
traffic control devices, traffic surveillance devices, or other public notices
lawfully placed upon such highways shall be guilty of an offense.
   (B)   No person shall willfully or maliciously injure, deface, alter, or
knock down any sign, traffic control device, or traffic surveillance device.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized
representative of the Department of Transportation, the county, or the city, to
remove any sign, traffic control device, or traffic surveillance device placed
along a highway for traffic control, warning, or informational purposes by
official action of the department, county, or city. It shall be unlawful for
any person to possess a sign or device which has been removed in violation of
this division.
   (D)   Any person violating division (B) or (C) of this section shall be
guilty of an offense and shall be assessed liquidated damages in the amount of
the value of the sign, traffic control device, or traffic surveillance device
and the cost of replacing it.
(Neb. RS 60-6,130) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.05 TIRE REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITIONS; PERMISSIVE USES.
   (A)   Every solid rubber tire on a vehicle moved on any highway shall have
rubber on its entire traction surface at least one-inch thick above the edge of
the flange of the entire periphery.
   (B)   No tire on a vehicle moved on a highway shall have on its periphery
any clock, stud, flange, cleat, or spike or any other protuberance of any
material other than rubber which projects beyond the tread of the traction
surface of the tire, except that:
      (1)   This prohibition shall not apply to pneumatic tires with metal or
metal-type studs not exceeding 5/16 of an inch in diameter inclusive of the
stud-casing with an average protrusion beyond the tread surface of not more
than 7/64 of an inch between November 1 and April 1, except that school buses,
mail carrier vehicles, and emergency vehicles shall be permitted to use metal
or metal-type studs at any time during the year;
      (2)   It shall be permissible to use farm machinery with tires having
protuberances which will not injure the highway; and
      (3)   It shall be permissible to use tire chains of reasonable
proportions upon any vehicle when required for safety because of snow, ice, or
other condition tending to cause a vehicle to slide or skid.
   (C)   (1)   No person shall operate or move on any highway any motor
vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer:
         (a)   Having any metal tire in contact with the roadway; or
         (b)   Equipped with solid rubber tires.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) shall not apply to farm vehicles having a gross
weight of 10,000 pounds or less or to implements of husbandry.
   (D)   The city may, in its discretion, issue special permits authorizing the
operation upon a highway of traction engines or tractors having movable tracks
with transverse corrugations upon the periphery of such movable tracks or farm
tractors or other farm machinery.
(Neb. RS 60-6,250)
Statutory reference:
   Rubber tired cranes, see Neb. RS 60-6,288
§ 71.06 PROHIBITING TRUCK TRAFFIC ON RIVER STREET.
   It shall be unlawful for any truck, or other vehicle, licensed for more than
12 tons to travel upon River Street from Union Street to Center Street, except
for such trucks being used to service or install utilities, streets or sewers,
make delivery of household goods and building materials, pick up garbage, or
construct or repair buildings and other improvements in the immediate area.
(Ord. 606, passed 5-20-2019) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.07 ENGINE BRAKES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use engine brakes, commonly known as
“Jake Brakes,” on trucks within the municipality.
(Ord. 655, passed 10-17-2022) Penalty, see §
70.99
SPEED LIMITS
§ 71.20 BASIC RULE.
   No person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and
potential hazards then existing. A person shall drive at a safe and appropriate
speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or railroad grade crossing,
when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when
traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when special hazards exist
with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway
conditions.
(Neb. RS 60-6,185) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.21 MAXIMUM LIMITS.
   (A)   Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed for
compliance with §
71.20, the limits set forth in this section and Neb. RS 60-6,187, 60-6,188, 60-
6,305, and 60-6,313 shall be the maximum lawful speeds unless reduced pursuant
to division (B), and no person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed in
excess of such maximum limits:
      (1)   Twenty-five miles per hour in any residential district;
      (2)   Twenty miles per hour in any business district;
      (3)   Fifty miles per hour upon any highway that is gravel or not
dustless surfaced;
      (4)   Fifty-five miles per hour upon any dustless-surfaced highway not a
part of the state highway system;
      (5)   Sixty-five miles per hour upon any four-lane divided highway not a
part of the state highway system;
      (6)   Sixty-five miles per hour upon any part of the state highway system
other than an expressway, a super-two highway, or a freeway.
   (B)   The maximum speed limits established in division (A) may be reduced by
the Department of Transportation or the City Council pursuant to §
71.23 or Neb. RS 60-6,188.
   (C)   The City Council may erect and maintain suitable signs along highways
under its jurisdiction in such number and at such locations as it deems
necessary to give adequate notice of the speed limits established pursuant to
division (A) or (B) upon such highways.
(Neb. RS 60-6,186) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.22 BRIDGES AND OTHER ELEVATED STRUCTURES.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle over any public bridge, causeway,
viaduct, or other elevated structure at a speed which is greater than the
maximum speed which can be maintained with safety thereon when such structure
is posted with signs as provided in division (B).
   (B)   The Department of Transportation or the City Council may conduct an
investigation of any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of
a highway under its jurisdiction, and if it finds that the structure cannot
safely withstand vehicles traveling at the speed otherwise permissible, the
Department or the City Council shall determine and declare the maximum speed of
vehicles which the structure can safely withstand and shall cause suitable
signs stating the maximum speed to be erected and maintained before each end of
the structure.
   (C)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of division (A),
proof of the determination of the maximum speed by the Department or the City
Council and the existence of such signs shall constitute conclusive evidence of
the maximum speed which can be maintained with safety on the bridge or
structure.
(Neb. RS 60-6,189) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.23 ALTERNATIVE MAXIMUM LIMITS.
   (A)   Whenever the Department of Transportation determines, upon the basis
of an engineering and traffic investigation, that any maximum speed limit is
greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist
at any intersection, place, or part of the state highway system outside of the
corporate limits of cities and villages as well as inside the corporate limits
of cities and villages on freeways which are part of the state highway system,
it may determine and set a reasonable and safe maximum speed limit for such
intersection, place, or part of such highway which shall be the lawful speed
limit when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected at such
intersection, place, or part of the highway, except that the maximum rural and
freeway limits shall not be exceeded. Such a maximum speed limit may be set to
be effective at all times or at such times as are indicated upon such signs.
   (B)   On all highways within its corporate limits, except on state-
maintained freeways which are part of the state highway system, the City
Council shall have the same power and duty to alter the maximum speed limits as
the Department if the change is based on engineering and traffic investigation,
except that no imposition of speed limits on highways which are part of the
state highway system in the city shall be effective without the approval of the
Department.
   (C)   Not more than six such speed limits shall be set per mile along a
highway, except in the case of reduced limits at intersections, and the
difference between adjacent limits shall not be more than 20 miles per hour.
   (D)   When the Department or the City Council determines by an investigation
that certain vehicles in addition to those specified in Neb. RS 60-6,187, 60-
6,305, and 60-6,313 cannot with safety travel at the speeds provided in §§
71.21 and
71.22 and Neb. RS 60-6,187, 60-6,305, and 60-6,313 or set pursuant to this
section, §
71.22, or Neb. RS 60-6,188, the Department or the City Council may restrict the
speed limit for such vehicles on highways under its respective jurisdiction and
post proper and adequate signs.
(Neb. RS 60-6,190)
§ 71.24 NEAR SCHOOLS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, when passing
premises on which school buildings are located and which are used for school
purposes, during school recess or while children are going to or leaving school
during the opening or closing hours, to drive the vehicle at a rate of speed in
excess of 15 miles per hour past the premises.
Penalty, see §
71.99
   (B)   The driver shall stop at all stop signs located at or near such school
premises, and it shall be unlawful for the driver to make a U-turn at any
intersection where such stop signs are located at or near such school premises.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.99 VIOLATIONS; FINES.
   (A)   Any person who operates a vehicle in violation of any maximum speed
limit established for any highway or freeway is guilty of a traffic infraction
and upon conviction shall be fined:
      (1)   $10 for traveling one to five miles per hour over the authorized
speed limit;
      (2)   $25 for traveling over five miles per hour but not over ten miles
per hour over the authorized speed limit;
      (3)   $75 for traveling over ten miles per hour but not over 15 miles per
hour over the authorized speed limit;
      (4)   $125 for traveling over 15 miles per hour but not over 20 miles per
hour over the authorized speed limit;
      (5)   $200 for traveling over 20 miles per hour but not over 35 miles per
hour over the authorized speed limit; and
      (6)   $300 for traveling over 35 miles per hour over the authorized speed
limit.
   (B)   (1)   The fines prescribed in division (A) shall be doubled if the
violation occurs within a maintenance, repair, or construction zone established
pursuant to Neb. RS 60-6,188.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division (B), the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         MAINTENANCE, REPAIR, OR CONSTRUCTION ZONE.
         (a)   (i)   The portion of a highway identified by posted or moving
signs as being under maintenance, repair, or construction; or
            (ii)   The portion of a highway identified by maintenance, repair,
or construction zone speed limit signs displayed pursuant to Neb. RS 60-6,188;
and
            (iii)   Within such portion of a highway where road construction
workers are present.
         (b)   The maintenance, repair, or construction zone starts at the
location of the first sign identifying the maintenance, repair, or construction
zone and continues until a posted or moving sign indicates that the
maintenance, repair, or construction zone has ended.
   (C)   The fines prescribed in division (A) shall be doubled if the violation
occurs within a school crossing zone.
(Neb. RS 60-682.01)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Regulation or prohibition authorized
   
72.02   Roadway outside business or residential district
   
72.03   General prohibitions; exceptions
   
72.04   Obstructing street, intersection, or entrance
   
72.05   Intersections
   
72.06   Alleys
   
72.07   Truck parking, loading, and unloading
   
72.08   Display or repair of vehicle
   
72.09   Current registration
   
72.10   Time limits
   
72.11   Snow; weather emergencies; highway maintenance
   
72.12   Parallel, angle, and center parking
   
72.13   Backing freight vehicle to curb
   
72.14   Unattended motor vehicle
   
72.15   Painting of curbs
Administration and Enforcement
   
72.50   Tickets
   
72.51   Removal of illegally stopped vehicles; liability for costs
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 REGULATION OR PROHIBITION AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   The City Council with respect to highways under its jurisdiction and
within the reasonable exercise of the police power may regulate or prohibit
stopping, standing, or parking.
(Neb. RS 60-680)
   (B)   If the City Council regulates or prohibits stopping, standing, or
parking all vehicles or a particular kind or class of vehicles on a highway or
a portion of a highway, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle subject
to such regulation or prohibition on the highway or portion thereof longer than
a period of time necessary to load and unload freight or passengers.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.02 ROADWAY OUTSIDE BUSINESS OR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle, whether
attended or unattended, upon a roadway outside of a business or residential
district when it is practicable to stop, park, or leave such vehicle off such
part of a highway, but in any event an unobstructed width of the roadway
opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other
vehicles and a clear view of such stopped vehicle shall be available from a
distance of 200 feet in each direction upon such highway. Such parking,
stopping, or standing shall in no event exceed 24 hours.
   (B)   No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle on a freeway
except in areas designated or unless so directed by a peace officer, except
that when a vehicle is disabled or inoperable or the driver of the vehicle is
ill or incapacitated, such vehicle shall be permitted to park, stop, or stand
on the shoulder facing in the direction of travel with all wheels and
projecting parts of such vehicle completely clear of the traveled lanes, but in
no event shall such parking, standing, or stopping upon the shoulder of a
freeway exceed 12 hours.
   (C)   No person, except law enforcement, fire department, emergency
management, public or private ambulance, or authorized Department of
Transportation or local authority personnel, shall loiter or stand or park any
vehicle upon any bridge, highway, or structure which is located above or below
or crosses over or under the roadway of any highway or approach or exit road
thereto.
   (D)   Whenever a vehicle is disabled or inoperable in a roadway or for any
reason obstructs the regular flow of traffic for reasons other than an
accident, the driver shall move or cause the vehicle to be moved as soon as
practical so as to not obstruct the regular flow of traffic.
   (E)   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the roadway in such manner and to such extent that it is
impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in
such position until such time as it can be removed pursuant to division (D) of
this section.
(Neb. RS 60-6,164) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.03 GENERAL PROHIBITIONS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or when in
compliance with law or the directions of a peace officer or traffic control
device, no person shall:
      (1)   Stop, stand, or park any vehicle:
         (a)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
         (b)   On a sidewalk;
         (c)   Within an intersection;
         (d)   On a crosswalk;
         (e)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone unless the
City Council indicates a different length by signs or markings;
         (f)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
         (g)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure over a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
         (h)   On any railroad track; or
         (i)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
      (2)   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
         (a)   In front of a public or private driveway;
         (b)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
         (c)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
         (d)   Within 30 feet of any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign, or
other traffic control device located at the side of a roadway;
         (e)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and
on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75
feet of such entrance when properly signposted;
         (f)   At any place where official signs prohibit standing; or
      (3)   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or
passengers:
         (a)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; or
         (b)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as shall be
unlawful.
(Neb. RS 60-6,166) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.04 OBSTRUCTING STREET, INTERSECTION, OR ENTRANCE.
   No person shall, except in case of an accident or emergency, stop any
vehicle in any location where stopping will obstruct any street, intersection,
or entrance to an alley or public or private drive.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.05 INTERSECTIONS.
   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or when in
compliance with law or the directions of a peace officer or traffic control
device, no person shall park a vehicle or leave a vehicle standing for any
purpose, except momentarily to load or discharge passengers, within 25 feet of
the intersection of curb lines, or if none, then within 15 feet of the
intersection of property lines, or where the curb lines are painted red or
another color specified by the City Council to indicate such prohibition.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.06 ALLEYS.
   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle with any portion thereof projecting
into any alley entrance.
   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle in any alley, except for the purpose of
loading or unloading during the time necessary to load or unload, which shall
not exceed the maximum limit of one-half hour. Every vehicle while loading or
unloading in an alley shall be parked in such manner as will cause the least
obstruction possible to traffic in the alley.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.07 TRUCK PARKING, LOADING, AND UNLOADING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck with an overall
length of more than 20 feet to park or stop such vehicle on a street within the
business district except to load or unload when loading or unloading in an
alley is impossible and then only for the period of time reasonably necessary
to load or unload.
   (B)   If the City Council provides truck parking areas adjoining or adjacent
to the business district, all truck operators shall use such parking areas for
all parking purposes.
   (C)   Except in an area provided for by the City Council by resolution, it
shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck, including an oil tanker, to
park or stop for any period of time within the limits of any street outside the
business district except for the purpose of loading or unloading the cargo
thereof in the ordinary course of business.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.08 DISPLAY OR REPAIR OF VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon any highway or public place
within the city any vehicle displayed for sale. Except when necessary due to a
breakdown or other emergency, no person shall adjust or repair, or race the
motor of, any motor vehicle or motorcycle while standing on the highways of the
city. No person or employee connected with a garage or repair shop shall use
sidewalks or highways in the vicinity of the garage or shop for the purpose of
working on vehicles of any description.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.09 CURRENT REGISTRATION.
   It shall be unlawful to park or place on the highways or other public
property any vehicle required to be registered by the Motor Vehicle
Registration Act that is not registered in accordance with the Act.
Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Motor Vehicle Registration Act, see Neb. RS 60-301
§ 72.10 TIME LIMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle on a public street for over 24
consecutive hours except where a different maximum time limit is posted.
   (B)   If the City Council adopts a resolution entirely prohibiting, or
fixing a time limit for, the parking and stopping of vehicles on any highway,
it is unlawful to park or stop any vehicle in such highway for a period of time
longer than fixed in the resolution.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.11 SNOW; WEATHER EMERGENCIES; HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Unless the City Council provides otherwise, it is unlawful to park or
stand any vehicle on any highway in the city at any time within 12 hours after
a snowfall of three inches or more has occurred within a 24 hour period if the
snow has not been removed within that time.
   (B)   The Police Chief, the city police, or any other designated person may
order any highway or portion thereof vacated for weather emergencies or highway
maintenance. Notice shall be given by personally notifying the owner or
operator of a vehicle parked on such highway or by posting appropriate signs
along the highway not less than four hours prior to the time that the vacation
order is to be effective. It is unlawful to park a vehicle on a highway or
portion thereof vacated in accordance with this division (B).
   (C)   A vehicle parked in violation of this section may be removed and
parked, under the supervision of the city police, to a suitable nearby location
without further notice to the owner or operator of such vehicle.
   (D)   City Council shall have the authority to designate snow routes. It is
unlawful to park or stand any vehicle on any designated snow route after two
inches of snowfall until removal of the snow is completed.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.12 PARALLEL, ANGLE, AND CENTER PARKING.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, any vehicle stopped or
parked upon a two-way roadway where parking is permitted shall be so stopped or
parked with the right-hand wheels parallel to and within 12 inches of the
right-hand curb or edge of such roadway. No vehicle shall be parked upon a
roadway when there is a shoulder adjacent to the roadway which is available for
parking.
   (B)   Except when otherwise provided by the City Council, every vehicle
stopped or parked upon a 1-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel
to the curb or edge of such roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic
movement, with its right-hand wheels within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or
edge of the roadway or its left-hand wheels within 12 inches of the left-hand
curb or edge of such roadway.
   (C)   The City Council may permit angle or center parking on any roadway,
except that angle or center parking shall not be permitted on any federal-aid
highway or on any part of the state highway system unless the Director-State
Engineer has determined that such roadway is of sufficient width to permit
angle or center parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
   (D)   The City Council may prohibit or restrict stopping, standing, or
parking on highways under its jurisdiction and erect and maintain proper and
adequate signs thereon. No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle in
violation of the restrictions stated on such signs.
(Neb. RS 60-6,167)
   (E)   Where stalls are designated either on the curb or pavement, vehicles
shall be parked within those stalls.
   (F)   Vehicles must not be parked at any curb in such a position as to
prevent another vehicle already parked at the curb from moving away.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.13 BACKING FREIGHT VEHICLE TO CURB.
   The operator of a vehicle of an over-all length of less than 20 feet,
including load, while loading or unloading freight may back the vehicle to the
curb but shall occupy as little of the street as possible.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.14 UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE.
   No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such
vehicle to stand unattended on a highway without first doing the following:
   (A)   Stopping the motor of such vehicle;
   (B)   Except for vehicles equipped with motor starters that may be actuated
without a key, locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition;
   (C) Effectively setting the brakes thereon; and
    (D)   When standing upon any roadway, turning the front wheels of such
vehicle to the curb or side of such roadway.
(Neb. RS 60-6,168) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.15 PAINTING OF CURBS.
   (A)   The curb space within 15 feet in either direction of a fire hydrant
shall be painted red, or another color specified by the City Council, to
indicate that parking is prohibited in such area.
   (B)   If the City Council adopts a resolution regulating or prohibiting the
parking or stopping of vehicles at the curb on highways in front of certain
facilities or at certain locations, the curbs adjacent to any such facility or
location shall be painted in such manner as directed by the City Council to
indicate such regulation or prohibition.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the City Council or its agent to cause the
curb space to be painted and to keep the same painted as provided in this
chapter or as specified by the City Council. The marking or designating of
portions of highways where the parking of vehicles is prohibited or limited
shall be done only by the city through its proper officers, at the direction of
the City Council. No person shall paint the curb of any highway or in any
manner set aside, or attempt to prevent the parking of vehicles in, any highway
or part thereof, except at such places where the parking of vehicles is
prohibited by the provisions of this chapter or by a resolution adopted by the
City Council.
Penalty, see §
70.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 72.50 TICKETS.
   All tickets issued for violations of nonmoving traffic regulations contained
in this chapter shall, in addition to information normally stated on such
tickets, carry the following information:
   (A)   The amount of the fine if paid within 30 days;
   (B)   The amount of the fine if not paid within 30 days;
   (C)   The location where payment may be made; and
   (D)   The fact that a complaint will be filed after 30 days if the fine is
not paid in that time.
§ 72.51 REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY STOPPED VEHICLES; LIABILITY FOR COSTS.
   (A)   Whenever any peace officer, or any authorized employee of a law
enforcement agency who is employed by the city and specifically empowered by
ordinance to act, finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter, the individual may remove the vehicle, have
such vehicle removed, or require the driver or other person in charge of the
vehicle to move such vehicle to a position off the roadway of the highway or
from the highway.
   (B)   The owner or other person lawfully entitled to the possession of any
vehicle towed or stored shall be charged with the reasonable cost of towing and
storage fees. Any towing or storage fee shall be a lien upon the vehicle prior
to all other claims. Any person towing or storing a vehicle shall be entitled
to retain possession of the vehicle until the charges are paid. The lien
provided for in this section shall not apply to the contents of any vehicle.
(Neb. RS 60-6,165)
CHAPTER 73: BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES AND ROLLER BLADES
Section
   
73.01   Operation
   
73.02   Clinging to motor vehicles
   
73.03   Riding on sidewalks
§ 73.01 OPERATION.
   (A)   No person shall ride or propel a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates or
roller blades on a street or other public highway of this municipality with
another person on the handlebars or in any position in front of the operator.
   (B)   No bicycles, skateboards, roller skates or roller blades shall be
ridden faster than is reasonable and proper but every bicycle, skateboard,
roller skates or roller blades shall be operated with reasonable regard to the
safety of the operator and any other persons upon the streets and public
highways.
   (C)   Persons riding bicycles, skateboards, roller skates or roller blades
shall observe all traffic signs and stop at all stop signs.
   (D)   No bicycle shall be permitted on any street or other public highway
from one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise without a
headlight visible under normal atmospheric conditions from the front thereof
for not less than 500 feet indicating the approach or presence of the bicycle,
firmly attached to such bicycle and properly lighted or without a yellow or red
light reflector attached to and visible 500 feet from the rear thereof. The
said headlight shall give a clear, white light.
   (E)   No person shall ride or propel a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates or
roller blades upon any street or other public highway abreast of more than one
other person riding or propelling a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates or
roller blades.
   (F)   Every person riding or propelling a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates
or roller blades upon any street or other public highway shall observe all
traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto and shall turn only at
intersections, signal for all turns, ride at the right-hand side of the street
or highway, pass to the left when passing overtaken vehicles and individuals
that are slower moving and shall pass vehicles to the right when meeting.
(Neb. RS 60-6,314, 60-6,315) (2000 Code, § 5-401) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.02 CLINGING TO MOTOR VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, skateboard, roller skates or roller
blades shall attach the same or himself or herself to any moving vehicle upon
any roadway and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to suffer or
permit any person traveling upon any bicycle, skateboard, roller skates or
roller blades to cling to or attach himself or herself or his or her bicycle or
skateboard to such vehicle so driven and operated by him or her.
(Neb. RS 60-6,316) (2000 Code, § 5-402) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.03 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any bicycle or skateboard or use
or operate any roller skates or roller blades on any sidewalk in that part of
the municipality bounded by an area commencing at the intersection of Front
Street and Niles Street, thence west to Court Street, thence south to Second
Street, thence east to LaBarre Street, thence north to First Street, thence
east to Niles Street, thence north on First Street to the point of beginning.
This area shall include the sidewalks on both sides of the streets that are the
boundaries of such area.
(2000 Code, § 5-403) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 74: MOTORCYCLES
Section
   
74.01   Lights
§ 74.01 LIGHTS.
   No person shall ride a motorcycle upon the streets, alleys or highways from
one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise unless the same
shall be equipped with at least one and not more than two headlights plainly
visible from the front and with a light on the rear exhibiting a red light
visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of at least 500
feet to the rear thereof; provided, said lamps shall comply with the
requirements and limitations of the statutes of the state.
(2000 Code, § 5-501) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 75: MINIBIKES
Section
   
75.01   Unlawful operation
   
75.02   Emergencies and parades
   
75.03   Public lands
   
75.04   Traffic laws inapplicable
§ 75.01 UNLAWFUL OPERATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any reason for any person to operate a
minibike upon any street or highway within the corporate limits of the
municipality.
   (B)   For purposes of this chapter, MINIBIKE shall mean a two-wheel motor
vehicle which has a total wheel and tire diameter of less than 14 inches or an
engine rated capacity of less than 45 cubic centimeters displacement or a seat
height less than 25 inches from the ground or any other two-wheel motor vehicle
primarily designed by the manufacturer for off-road use only.
(Neb. RS 60-6,353) (2000 Code, § 5-601) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 75.02 EMERGENCIES AND PARADES.
   Minibikes shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter during any
public emergency or while being used in parades by regularly organized units of
any recognized charitable, social, educational or community service
organization.
(Neb. RS 60-6,348) (2000 Code, § 5-602)
§ 75.03 PUBLIC LANDS.
   Minibikes shall be prohibited upon the public lands owned by the
municipality, except where allowed by resolution of the governing body.
(Neb. RS 60-2,106) (2000 Code, § 5-603)
§ 75.04 TRAFFIC LAWS INAPPLICABLE.
   The provisions of Neb. RS Chapter 60, Articles 1, 3, 4 and 5 shall not be
applicable to the owners and operators of any minibike.
(Neb. RS 60-6,347) (2000 Code, § 5-604)
CHAPTER 76: SNOWMOBILES
Section
   
76.01   Equipment
   
76.02   Unlawful acts
   
76.03   Public lands
   
76.04   Regulations
   
76.05   Emergency operation
§ 76.01 EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Every snowmobile operated within the municipality shall be registered
with the state as required by law. No snowmobile shall be operated upon a
public street or highway unless it is equipped with at least one head lamp, one
tail lamp, reflector material of a minimum area of 16 square inches mounted on
each side forward of the handlebars and with brakes as prescribed by the
Director of Motor Vehicles.
   (B)   All laws applying to the operation of other motor vehicles shall apply
to snowmobiles except those relating to required equipment and those which by
their nature have no application.
(Neb. RS 60-6,335, 60-6,337) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 76.02 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It shall be deemed a misdemeanor for any person to allow a snowmobile either
owned or operated by him or her to be operated:
   (A)   Within the congested area of the municipality unless weather
conditions are such that it provides the only practicable method of safe
vehicular travel or said snowmobile is engaged in responding to an emergency;
   (B)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under the
surrounding circumstances;
   (C)   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger person
or property;
   (D)   Without a lighted headlight and tail light when such would be required
by conditions;
   (E)   In any tree nursery or planting in a manner which damages or destroys
growing stock; and
   (F)   Upon any private lands without first having obtained permission of the
owner, lessee or operator of such lands.
(Neb. RS 60-6,335, 60-6,337) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 76.03 PUBLIC LANDS.
   Snowmobiles shall be prohibited from operation on the public lands owned by
the municipality except where allowed by resolution of the governing body.
(2000 Code, § 5-703) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 76.04 REGULATIONS.
   A snowmobile may make a direct crossing of a street at any hour of the day
if:
   (A)   Crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing;
   (B)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the main
traveled way of the street;
   (C)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard; and
   (D)   If said crossing is made between the hours of one-half hour after
sunset and one-half hour before sunrise under the circumstances set forth in §
76.05 below or during conditions of reduced visibility, said snowmobile shall
be equipped with at least one tail lamp and both front and rear lights shall be
on.
(2000 Code, § 5-704) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 76.05 EMERGENCY OPERATION.
   A snowmobile may be operated upon a public street or highway other than as
provided herein in an emergency during a period of time when and at locations
where snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile impractical.
(2000 Code, § 5-705)
CHAPTER 77: MOPEDS
Section
   
77.01   Defined
   
77.02   Operator’s license required
   
77.03   Traffic regulations applicable
   
77.04   Operation
   
77.05   Use of traffic lanes
   
77.06   Equipment
§ 77.01 DEFINED.
   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, MOPED shall mean a bicycle with
fully operative pedals for propulsion by human power, an automatic transmission
and a motor with a cylinder capacity not exceeding 50 cubic centimeters which
produces no more than two brake horsepower and is capable of propelling the
bicycle at a maximum design speed of no more than 30 mph on level ground.
   (B)   Mopeds, their owners and their operators shall be subject to Neb. RS
Chapter 60, Article 4 and amendments thereto.
(2000 Code, § 5-801)
§ 77.02 OPERATOR’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a moped upon the streets, alleys or public highways
of the municipality unless such person has a valid motor vehicle operator’s
license or a valid school or learner’s permit.
(2000 Code, § 5-802) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 77.03 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS APPLICABLE.
   (A)   Any person who rides a moped upon a roadway shall have all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
motor vehicle under this title and Neb. RS Chapter 60, and amendments thereto
except for those provisions of such sections which by their nature can have no
application.
   (B)   Such regulations applicable to mopeds shall apply whenever a moped
shall be operated upon any street, alley or public highway within the
municipality or upon any path set aside by the Department of Roads or local
authority for the use of mopeds. Notwithstanding any established maximum speed
limits in excess of 25 mph, no person shall operate any moped at a speed in
excess of 30 mph.
(2000 Code, § 5-803) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 77.04 OPERATION.
   (A)   Any person who operates a moped shall ride only upon a permanent and
regular seat attached thereto and shall not carry any other person nor shall
any other person ride on a moped unless such moped is designed by the
manufacturer to carry more than one person.
   (B)   Any person shall ride a moped only while sitting astride the seat,
facing forward. Further, no person shall operate a moped while carrying any
package, bundle or other article which prevents him or her from keeping both
hands on the handlebars. No operator shall carry any person nor shall any
person ride in a position that will interfere with the operation or control of
the moped or the view of the operator. No person who rides upon a moped shall
attach himself or herself or the moped to any vehicle on a roadway.
(2000 Code, § 5-804) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 77.05 USE OF TRAFFIC LANES.
   A moped shall be entitled to full use of a traffic lane of any street or
highway with an authorized speed limit of 45 mph or less and no vehicle shall
be operated in such a manner as to deprive any moped of the full use of such
lane. This section shall not apply to mopeds or motorcycles operated two
abreast in a single lane. No person shall operate a moped between lanes of
traffic or between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles. Mopeds shall not be
operated more than two abreast in a single lane. A person who operates a moped
on a roadway with an authorized speed limit of more than 45 mph shall ride as
near to the right side of the roadway as practicable and shall not ride more
than single file.
(2000 Code, § 5-805) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 77.06 EQUIPMENT.
   Any moped which carries a passenger shall be equipped with footrests for
such passenger. No person shall operate any moped with handlebars more than 15
inches above the mounting point of the handlebars.
(2000 Code, § 5-806) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 78: ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
Section
   
78.01   Defined
   
78.02   Operation
   
78.03   Headlights
   
78.04   Equipment, requirement
   
78.05   Prohibitions
   
78.06   All-terrain vehicles; unlawful acts
   
78.07   Competition
   
78.08   Accident report
   
78.09   Enforcement
   
78.10   Liability insurance
 
   
78.99   Penalty
§ 78.01 DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, ALL-TERRAIN
VEHICLE (ATV) shall include but not be limited to any motorized off-highway
vehicle which:
   (A)   Is 65 inches or less in width;
   (B)   Has a dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less;
   (C)   Travels on four or more low pressure tires. All-terrain vehicles shall
include any side by side (e.g., Gator, Ranger, Mule etc.), four-wheeler or golf
cart;
   (D)   Is designed for operator use only with no passengers or is
specifically designed by the original manufacturer for the operator and one or
more passengers; and
   (E)   Has handlebars or any other steering assembly for steering control.
(2000 Code, § 5-901) (Ord. 539, passed 1-21-2008; Ord. 661, passed 6-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 60-6,335
§ 78.02 OPERATION.
   (A)   Operators must be at least 18 years old.
   (B)   Any person operating an all-terrain vehicle on a public street, road
or highway shall have a valid motor vehicle operator's license or a special
permit as provided in Neb. RS 60-484, Neb. RS 60- 4,126.
   (C)   Operators must obey state, local, and federal traffic laws.
   (D)   The crossing of a public street, road or highway shall be permitted
only if:
      (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the street, road or highway and at a place where no obstruction
prevents a quick and safe crossing;
      (2)   The vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main- traveled way of the street, road or highway;
      (3)   The operator yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic that
constitutes an immediate potential hazard; and
      (4)   In crossing a divided street, road or highway, the crossing is made
only at an intersection of such street, road or highway with another public
street, road or highway.
   (E)   All-terrain vehicles may be operated on a public street, road, or
highway and shall not operate such vehicles at a speed in excess of 25 mph.
   (F)   All-terrain vehicles may be operated on public streets, roads and
highways in parades which have been authorized by the state or any department,
board, commission, or political subdivision of the state.
   (G)   All-terrain vehicles may be operated by employees of the municipality
while on duty.
   (H)   Any owner or operator of an all-terrain vehicle who desires to operate
such all-terrain vehicle upon the streets of the city as provided by this
chapter, must first register such all-terrain vehicle with the City of Gibbon
by making application for registration of the all-terrain vehicle, accompanied
by proof of liability insurance covering the all-terrain vehicle and its
operators for personal injury and property damage, and by payment or a
registration fee of $50 that is valid for one year. Any renewal or replacement
sticker that is part of the registration shall be an additional fee of $25 for
that sticker. Each new registration application shall contain, in addition to
other information as may be required by the City Administrator, the name and
address of the applicant, a complete description of the all-terrain vehicle and
its identification number. The city shall prescribe the initial and renewal
application forms and shall issue tags or permits which shall be placed upon or
within the all-terrain vehicle at all times. The city may establish other
reasonable rules and regulations for registration and renewal of registration
of all-terrain vehicles. If a citation is issued to an owner or operator of an
all-terrain vehicle for violation of not having the vehicle registered and the
owner properly registers and licenses such all-terrain vehicle and pays all
fees due and provides proof of insurance within five days of issuance of the
citation, no prosecution for the offense shall occur.
      (1)   All registrations shall expire on December 31 of each year.
      (2)   The City Administrator shall review each permit application prior
to giving approval.
      (3)   The city reserves the right to revoke permits at any time. The City
Administrator will contact the permittee via certified mail and/or deliver
written notice in person.
      (4)   Permittees may appeal to the City Council by contacting the City
Clerk and requesting it to be added to the agenda of the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the City Council.
      (5)   Registration sticker must be prominently displayed upon the rear of
said vehicle at all times while such vehicle is in operation on the streets of
the City of Gibbon, Nebraska.
(2000 Code, § 5-902) (Ord. 539, passed 1-21-2008; Ord. 661, passed 6-19-2023)
Penalty, see §
78.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 60-6,356
§ 78.03 HEADLIGHTS.
    Every all-terrain vehicle shall display a lighted headlight and taillight.
(2000 Code, § 5-903) (Ord. 661, passed 6-19-2023) Penalty, see §
78.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 60-6,357
§ 78.04 EQUIPMENT, REQUIREMENT.
    Every all-terrain vehicle shall be equipped with:
   (A)   A brake system maintained in good operating condition;
   (B)   An adequate muffler system in good working condition;
   (C)   A United States Forest Service qualified spark arrestor; and
   (D)   A bicycle safety flag which extends not less than five feet above
ground attached to the rear of such vehicle. The bicycle safety flag shall be
triangular in shape with an area not less than 30 square inches and be DayGlo
in color.
(2000 Code, § 5-904) (Ord. 661, passed 6-19-2023) Penalty, see §
78.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 60-6,358
§ 78.05 PROHIBITIONS.
    No person shall:
   (A)   Equip the exhaust system of an all-terrain vehicle with a cutout,
bypass or similar device;
   (B)   Operate an all-terrain vehicle with an exhaust system so modified; or
   (C)   Operate an all-terrain vehicle with the spark arrestor removed or
modified except for use in closed-course competition events.
(2000 Code, § 5-905) (Ord. 661, passed 6-19-2023) Penalty, see §
78.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 60-6,359
§ 78.06 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES; UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It shall be deemed a misdemeanor for any person to allow an all-terrain
vehicle, either owned or operated by him/her, to be operated:
   (A)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under the
surrounding circumstances.
   (B)   In a careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to endanger person
or property.
   (C)   Without a lighted headlight and taillight.
   (D)   Upon any private lands or city parks without first having obtained
permission of the owner, lessee, or operator of such lands.
(Ord. 661, passed 6-19-2023)
§ 78.07 COMPETITION.
   All-terrain vehicles participating in competitive events may be exempted
from sections of this chapter at the discretion of the Director of Motor
Vehicles.
(2000 Code, § 5-906) (Ord. 661, passed 6-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 60-6,360
§ 78.08 ACCIDENT REPORT.
   If an accident results in the death of any person or in the injury of any
person which requires the treatment of the person by a physician, the operator
of each all-terrain vehicle involved in the accident shall give notice of the
accident in the same manner as provided in Neb. RS 60-699.
(2000 Code, § 5-907) (Ord. 661, passed 6-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 60-6,361
§ 78.09  ENFORCEMENT.
   Any peace officer of the state or of any political subdivision, including
conservation officers of the Game and Parks Commission shall be charged with
the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 5-909) (Ord. 661, passed 6-19-2023)
§ 78.10 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   Any person operating an all-terrain vehicle shall have liability insurance
coverage for the all- terrain vehicle while operating the all-terrain vehicle
on any street or highway. The person operating the all-terrain vehicle shall
provide proof of such insurance coverage to any peace officer requesting such
proof within five days of such request.
(2000 Code, § 5-910) (Ord. 539, passed 1-21-2008; Ord. 661, passed 6-19-2023)
Penalty, see §
78.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 60-533
§ 78.99 PENALTY.
    Any violation of this chapter which is also a violation under Neb. RS
Chapter 39 or Chapter 60 may be punished under the penalty provisions of such
chapter.
(2000 Code, § 5-908) (Ord. 661, passed 6-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 60-6,362
CHAPTER 79: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Speed limits
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any of the following streets or
portions of streets in excess of the indicated speed limit:
Street Extent Speed (mph)
Street        Extent                                              Speed (mph)
Gibbon Road   From Seventh Street to Highway US-30                35
Highway L-10C From 350 feet south of 10th to 7th Street           35
Highway L-10C From 7th Street to Highway US-30                    25
Highway US-30 From 1,400 feet west of Center Street to Road 63    35
              (east corporate limits)
Highway US-30 From 1,400 feet west of Center Street to 2,200 feet 50
              west of Center Street
Second Street From Court Street to May Avenue                     15
Third Street  From Court Street to West Avenue                    15
West Avenue   From 300 feet south of Third Street to First Street 15
 
(2000 Code, § 5-203) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 80: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Parking prohibited
SCHEDULE I. PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Parking prohibited; generally. It shall be unlawful for the owner or
driver of any vehicle to park or to permit any vehicles to stand at any time on
all of Court Street, all of Scout Street, or on the north side of River Street
west of Center Street.
(2000 Code, § 5-322)
   (B)   Parking prohibited on Second Street. It shall be unlawful for any
person to park any motor vehicle on the north side of Second Street from
LaBarre Street to Court Street.
   (C)   Residential parking. It shall be unlawful for a person to park any
motor vehicle, camper, trailer, boat or similar objects on front yards or side
yards of residential use property, except upon an established driveway
connected directly to the street at an approved curb cut or a prepared surface.
      (1)   A front yard is defined as a yard extending from the front lot line
adjoining a public street to the front of the building between the side lot
lines.
      (2)   A side yard shall be defined as a yard between a building and the
side lot line measured horizontally at right angles to the side lot line from
the side lot line to the nearest point of the main building.
      (3)   When parked parallel to any adjacent street side of a property, a
motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or camper may not be greater in length than 60%
of the structure's side which faces the same adjacent street.
      (4)   Prepared surface shall consist of any half-inch or greater
aggregate, any solid concrete or solid asphalt surface.
   (D)   Recreational and farm machinery. It shall be unlawful for any person
to park recreational, tractors, farm vehicles and vehicles such as boats, boat
trailers, camping trailers and the like, on a public street for a period in
excess of 24 hours or for any other specific length of time as specified by a
sign stating such prohibition.
   (E)   Trucks in residential districts. It shall be unlawful for any person
to park a truck, trailer or semitrailer, except a truck, trailer or semitrailer
being used for the purpose of delivering or collecting goods, wares,
merchandise or materials, on any street adjacent to property classified by the
ordinances of the municipality for residence purposes for a period of time
longer than is necessary for the expeditious delivery or collection of goods,
wares, merchandise or materials, and in no event for a period of time exceeding
two hours; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not
apply to trucks or trailers being used in connection with building repair,
service or moving operations, and pickup trucks of one-ton capacity or smaller.
(2000 Code, § 5-328) (Ord. 584, passed 2-17-2015; Ord. 624, passed 3-15-2021;
Ord. 636, passed 3-21-2022)
Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   HEALTH AND SAFETY
      
92.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
94.   PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
      
95.   LIBRARY
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Running at large; tethering
   
90.03   Wild animals
   
90.04   Killing, poisoning, and injuring
   
90.05   Enclosures
   
90.06   Abandonment, neglect, and mistreatment
   
90.07   Equine; bovine; prohibited acts
   
90.08   Impoundment
   
90.09   Officer's compensation
   
90.10   Interference with police
   
90.11   Livestock prohibited
Rabies
   
90.20   Definitions
   
90.21   Vaccination required; cost; exemptions
   
90.22   Seizure by authority; confinement by owner; testing
   
90.23   Domestic animal bitten by rabid animal
   
90.24   Animal pound; impoundment; release; fees
   
90.25   Proclamation of danger
   
90.26   Enforcement
Dogs
   
90.40   Liability of owner
   
90.41   Barking and chasing; complaints
   
90.42   Dangerous dogs
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any vertebrate member of the animal kingdom other than an uncaptured
wild creature.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.  Any person authorized by law or employed or
appointed for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement of this chapter or any
other law or ordinance relating to the licensing, control, seizure, or
impoundment of animals.
   OWNER. Any person who owns, possesses, keeps, harbors, or has charge,
custody, or control of an animal or permits an animal to habitually remain or
be lodged or fed within his or her house, store, building, enclosure, yard,
lot, grounds, or premises. OWNER does not include any veterinarian or kennel
operator temporarily maintaining on his or her premises an animal owned by
another person for not more than 30 days.
   RUN AT LARGE.  Not being under the actual control of the owner by means of:
      (a)   A leash, cord, chain, or other suitable means of physical restraint
which is securely fastened or tethered in a manner sufficient to keep the
animal on the premises where tethered;
      (b)   A leash, cord, chain, or other suitable means of physical restraint
of six feet or less in length physically held by the owner;
      (c)   Being confined within a cage, receptacle, enclosed vehicle, fenced
enclosure, or shelter; or
      (d)   Being within the real property limits of the owner and in the
owner’s presence and under direct and effective voice or other control.
§ 90.02 RUNNING AT LARGE; TETHERING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any cow, hog, horse, mule,
sheep, goat, dog, chicken, turkey, goose, or other animal except a cat to
permit the animal to run at large at any time on any of the public ways and
property or the property of another in the city or to be tethered or staked out
in such a manner so as to allow the animal to reach or pass into any public way
or property or any property of another.
   (B)   The owner of a cat may permit the cat to run at large within the
corporate limits subject to any restrictions or prohibitions otherwise imposed
by the City Council.
   (C)   Any animal found running at large or tethered or staked out in
violation of this section is a public nuisance and may be impounded or
destroyed as provided in this chapter.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit anyone to own an
animal in the corporate limits of the city that is prohibited by the City
Council.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 17-526 and 17-547
   Fine for permitting collarless dog to run at large, see Neb. RS 54-607
§ 90.03 WILD ANIMALS.
   No wild animals may be kept within the corporate limits except wild animals
kept for exhibition purposes by circuses and educational institutions.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.04 KILLING, POISONING, AND INJURING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to kill, administer or cause to be
administered poison of any sort to, or in any manner injure, maim, or destroy
or attempt to injure, maim, or destroy any animal or to place any poison or
poisoned food where it is accessible to an animal, except that:
   (A)   This section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer or animal
control officer acting within his or her power and duty;
   (B)   This section shall not apply if the animal is vicious, dangerous, or
showing characteristics of rabies and cannot be captured without danger to the
persons attempting to effect a capture of the animal; and
   (C)   Any owner of a dog that he or she wishes to be destroyed may place the
dog in an animal pound or shelter or with a licensed veterinarian to be
humanely destroyed and disposed of according to the provisions in this chapter
or other provisions of law.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.05 ENCLOSURES.
   All pens, cages, sheds, yards, or any other area or enclosure for the
confinement or animals not specifically barred within the corporate limits
shall be kept in a clean and orderly manner so as not to become a menace or
nuisance to the neighborhood in which the enclosure is located.
Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 90.06 ABANDONMENT, NEGLECT, AND MISTREATMENT.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ABANDON. To leave any animal in one's care, whether as owner or
custodian, for any length of time without making effective provision for its
food, water, or other care as is reasonably necessary for the animal's health.
      ANIMAL. Any vertebrate member of the animal kingdom. ANIMAL does not
include an uncaptured wild creature or a livestock animal as defined in this
section.
      BOVINE. A cow, an ox, or a bison.
      CRUELLY MISTREAT. To knowingly and intentionally kill, maim, disfigure,
torture, beat, mutilate, burn, scald, or otherwise inflict harm upon any
animal.
      CRUELLY NEGLECT. To fail to provide any animal in one's care, whether as
owner or custodian, with food, water, or other care as is reasonably necessary
for the animal's health.
      HUMANE KILLING. The destruction of an animal by a method which causes the
animal a minimum of pain and suffering.
      LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any member of the Nebraska State Patrol, any
county or deputy sheriff, any member of the police force of the city or any
other city or village, or any other public official authorized by the city or
any other city or village to enforce state or local animal control laws, rules,
regulations, or ordinances. LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER also includes a special
investigator appointed as a deputy state sheriff as authorized pursuant to Neb.
RS 81-201 while acting within the authority of the Director of Agriculture.
      LIVESTOCK ANIMAL. Any bovine, equine, swine, sheep, goats, domesticated
cervine animals, ratite birds, or poultry.
      OWNER OR CUSTODIAN. Any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring, or
knowingly permitting an animal to remain on or about any premises owned or
occupied by such person.
      POLICE ANIMAL. A horse or dog owned or controlled by the state or any
county, city, or village for the purpose of assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of his or her official enforcement duties.
   (B)   Enforcement powers; immunity.
      (1)   A law enforcement officer who has reason to believe that an animal
has been abandoned or is being cruelly neglected or cruelly mistreated may seek
a warrant authorizing entry upon private property to inspect, care for, or
impound the animal.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of a law enforcement officer who has reason to
believe that an animal has been abandoned or is being cruelly neglected or
cruelly mistreated to make prompt investigation of such violation. A law
enforcement officer may, in lieu of making an arrest, issue a citation to the
owner or custodian as prescribed in Neb. RS 29-422 to 29-429.
      (3)   Any law enforcement officer acting under this section shall not be
liable for damage to property if such damage is not the result of the officer's
negligence.
   (C)   Violation.
      (1)   A person who intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly abandons,
cruelly neglects, or cruelly mistreats an animal is guilty of an offense.
      (2)   A person commits harassment of a police animal if he or she
knowingly and intentionally teases or harasses a police animal in order to
distract, agitate, or harm the police animal for the purpose of preventing such
animal from performing its legitimate official duties.
(Ord. 674, passed 11-20-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to prohibit cruelty to animals, see Neb. RS 17-138
   Serious illness or injury to animal; death of animal; felony, see Neb. RS
28-1008 and 28-1009
   Exemptions, see Neb. RS 28-1013
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 28-1008, Neb. RS 28-1009 and Neb. RS 28-1012
§ 90.07 EQUINE; BOVINE; PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall intentionally trip or cause to fall, or lasso or
rope the legs of, any equine by any means for the purpose of entertainment,
sport, practice, or contest.
      (2)   The intentional tripping or causing to fall, or lassoing or roping
the legs of, any equine by any means for the purpose of entertainment, sport,
practice, or contest shall not be considered a commonly accepted practice
occurring in conjunction with sanctioned rodeos, animal racing, or pulling
contests.
(Neb. RS 54-911)
   (B)   (1)   No person shall intentionally trip, cause to fall, or drag any
bovine by its tail by any means for the purpose of entertainment, sport,
practice, or contest.
      (2)   The intentional tripping, causing to fall, or dragging of any
bovine by its tail by any means for the purpose of entertainment, sport,
practice, or contest shall not be considered a commonly accepted practice
occurring in conjunction with sanctioned rodeos, animal racing, or pulling
contests.
(Neb. RS 54-912) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Livestock Animal Welfare Act, see Neb. RS 54-907 through 54-912
§ 90.08 IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   This section shall apply to the impoundment of animals to which §
90.24 does not apply.
   (B)   Any animal found in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
be impounded. All impounded domestic animals shall be given proper care,
treatment, and maintenance.
   (C)   Notice of impoundment of all animals, including any significant marks
of identification, shall be posted at the pound and at the office of the City
Clerk within 24 hours after impoundment as public notification of impoundment.
Notice of the impoundment of any licensed dog shall also be mailed to the owner
listed on the license application by regular U.S. mail to the address listed on
the application.
   (D)   Each impounded domestic animal shall be kept and maintained at the
pound for a period of not less than five days after public notice has been
given unless reclaimed earlier by the owner. The owner may reclaim the animal
during the period of impoundment by payment of any general impoundment and
daily board fees set by resolution of the City Council and on file in the
office of the City Clerk, except that in addition, an unusual or other
nondomesticated or wild animal shall only be released upon condition that the
owner shall immediately remove the animal from the city or destroy it. A
diseased animal may be released upon a determination that the health and safely
of the public is no longer threatened. The owner of any released animal shall
be required to comply with any licensing and rabies vaccination requirements
applicable to such animal within 72 hours after release.
   (E)   If the animal is unclaimed at the end of required waiting period after
public notice has been given, the animal control officer may destroy and
dispose of the animal in a humane manner in accordance with applicable rules
and regulations, except that if in the judgment of the officer a suitable home
can be found for the animal, the animal shall be turned over to the person who
can provide such home and the new owner shall be required to pay all fees and
meet all applicable licensing and vaccinating requirements. The city shall
acquire legal title to any unlicensed dog or any other animal impounded in the
animal shelter for a period longer than the required waiting period after
giving notice. The owner of the animal shall remain liable for payment of the
fees established by the City Council.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to establish pens and pounds, see Neb. RS 17-548 and 71-4408
   Authority to impound and sell animals, see Neb. RS 17-526 and 17-547
§ 90.09 OFFICER'S COMPENSATION.
   If the City Council so provides, any official appointed or designated to
destroy and dispose of animals under the provisions of this chapter shall be
paid, in addition to his or her regular salary or other compensation, the sum
set by the Council for each animal so destroyed and disposed of.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to compensate keeper of pound, see Neb. RS 17-548
§ 90.10 INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, delay, or interfere with any
police officer or animal control officer who is performing any duty enjoined
upon that person by the provisions of this chapter or to break open, or in any
manner directly or indirectly aid, counsel, or advise the breaking open, of the
animal shelter, any ambulance wagon, or any other vehicle used for the
collecting or conveying of animals to the shelter.
Cross reference:
   Obstructing a peace officer prohibited, see §
132.05
§ 90.11 LIVESTOCK PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to keep or maintain within the
corporate limits of the city any livestock, including, but not limited to,
cattle, horses, mules, donkeys, swine, sheep, goats, llamas, alpacas, ostriches
and emus. This restriction shall not apply to commercial establishments killing
and processing animals under federal inspection. A person or entity may apply
to the City Council for a temporary use permit that shall not exceed a period
of one year, but may be renewed, and shall contain such restrictions as the
City Council deems appropriate.
(2000 Code, § 6-209) (Ord. 541, passed 11-16-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
RABIES
§ 90.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAT. A cat which is a household pet.
   DEPARTMENT. The state Department of Health and Human Services.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any dog or cat.
   HYBRID ANIMAL. Any animal which is the product of the breeding of a domestic
dog with a nondomestic canine species.
   OWN. To possess, keep, harbor, or have control of, charge of, or custody of
a domestic or hybrid animal. This term does not apply to domestic or hybrid
animals owned by other persons which are temporarily maintained on the premises
of a veterinarian or kennel operator for a period of not more than 30 days.
   OWNER. Any person possessing, keeping, harboring, or having charge or
control of any domestic or hybrid animal or permitting any domestic animal to
habitually be or remain on or be lodged or fed within the person's house, yard,
or premises. This term does not apply to veterinarians or kennel operators
temporarily maintaining on their premises domestic or hybrid animals owned by
other persons for a period of not more than 30 days.
   RABIES CONTROL AUTHORITY. City health and law enforcement officials who
shall enforce the provisions of this subchapter relating to the vaccination and
impoundment of domestic or hybrid animals. Such public officials shall not be
responsible for any accident or disease of a domestic or hybrid animal
resulting from the enforcement of such sections.
   VACCINATION AGAINST RABIES. The inoculation of a domestic or hybrid animal
with a rabies vaccine as approved by the rules and regulations adopted and
promulgated by the department. The vaccination shall be performed by a
veterinarian duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state.
(Neb. RS 71-4401)
§ 90.21 VACCINATION REQUIRED; COST; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Every domestic animal in the city shall be vaccinated against rabies
with a licensed vaccine and revaccinated at intervals specified by rules and
regulations adopted and promulgated by the department. Young domestic animals
shall be initially vaccinated at the age specified in the rules and
regulations. Unvaccinated domestic animals acquired or moved into the city
shall be vaccinated within 30 days after purchase or arrival unless under the
age for initial vaccination.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, every
hybrid animal in the city shall be vaccinated against rabies and shall be
revaccinated at intervals specified by rules and regulations adopted and
promulgated by the department. A young hybrid animal shall be initially
vaccinated at the age specified in such rules and regulations. An unvaccinated
hybrid animal acquired or moved into the city shall be vaccinated within 30
after purchase or arrival unless under the age for initial vaccination.
      (2)   The rabies vaccine used to vaccinate a hybrid animal pursuant to
this section shall be sold only to licensed veterinarians.
      (3)   An owner of a hybrid animal in the city prior to the date of
development of a licensed vaccine determined scientifically to be reliable in
preventing rabies in a hybrid animal shall have one year after such date to
comply with this section.
(Neb. RS 71-4402)
   (C)   The cost of rabies vaccination shall be borne by the owner of the
domestic or hybrid animal.
(Neb. RS 71-4404)
   (D)   (1)   The provisions of this subchapter with respect to vaccination
shall not apply to any domestic or hybrid animal owned by a person temporarily
remaining within the city for less than 30 days, to any domestic or hybrid
animal brought into the city for field trial or show purposes, or to any
domestic or hybrid animal brought into the city for hunting purposes for a
period of less than 30 days. Such domestic or hybrid animals shall be kept
under strict supervision of the owner. It shall be unlawful to bring any
domestic or hybrid animal into the city which does not comply with the animal
health laws and import rules and regulations of the state which are applicable
to domestic or hybrid animals.
      (2)   Domestic or hybrid animals assigned to a research institution or a
similar facility shall be exempt from this subchapter.
(Neb. RS 71-4405) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.22 SEIZURE BY AUTHORITY; CONFINEMENT BY OWNER; TESTING.
   (A)   (1)   Any animal which is owned by a person and has bitten any person
or caused an abrasion of the skin of any person shall be seized by the rabies
control authority for a period of not less than ten days if:
         (a)   The animal is suspected of having rabies, regardless of the
species and whether or not the animal has been vaccinated;
         (b)   The animal is not vaccinated and is a dog, cat, or another
animal of a species determined by the department to be a rabid species; or
         (c)   The animal is of a species which has been determined by the
department to be a rabid species not amenable to rabies protection by
immunization, whether or not the animal has been vaccinated.
      (2)   If, after observation and examination by a veterinarian, at the end
of the 10-day period the animal shows no clinical signs of rabies, the animal
may be released to its owner.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, whenever
any person has been bitten or has an abrasion of the skin caused by an animal
owned by another person, which animal has been vaccinated in accordance with §
90.21, or if such an injury to a person is caused by an owned dog, cat, or
other animal determined by the department to be a rabid species amenable to
rabies protection by immunization which has been vaccinated, the animal shall
be confined by the owner or other responsible person as required by the rabies
control authority for a period of at least ten days and shall be observed and
examined by a veterinarian at the end of the ten-day period. If no clinical
signs of rabies are found by the veterinarian, the animal may be released from
confinement.
      (2)   A vaccinated animal owned by a law enforcement or governmental
military agency which bites or causes an abrasion of the skin of any person
during training or the performance of the animal's duties may be confined as
provided in division (B)(1) of this section. The agency shall maintain
ownership of and shall control and supervise the actions of the animal for a
period of 15 days following the injury. If during such period the death of the
animal occurs for any reason, a veterinarian shall within 24 hours of the death
examine the tissues of the animal for clinical signs of rabies.
   (C)   Any dog, cat, or other animal of a rabid species which has bitten a
person or caused an abrasion of the skin of a person and which is unowned or
the ownership of which cannot be determined within 72 hours of the time of the
bite or abrasion shall be immediately subject to any tests which the department
believes are necessary to determine whether the animal is afflicted with
rabies. The 72-hour period shall include holidays and weekends and shall not be
extended for any reason. The tests required by this subsection may include
tests which require the animal to be destroyed.
(Neb. RS 71-4406) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.23 DOMESTIC ANIMAL BITTEN BY RABID ANIMAL.
   In the case of domestic or hybrid animals known to have been bitten by a
rabid animal, the following rules shall apply:
   (A)   If the bitten or exposed domestic or hybrid animal has not been
vaccinated in accordance with §
90.21, the bitten or exposed domestic or hybrid animal shall be immediately
destroyed unless the owner is willing to place the domestic or hybrid animal in
strict isolation in a kennel under veterinary supervision for a period of not
less than six months; and
   (B)   If the bitten or exposed domestic or hybrid animal has been vaccinated
in accordance with §
90.21, the domestic or hybrid animal shall be subject to the following
procedure:
      (1)   The domestic or hybrid animal shall be immediately revaccinated and
confined for a period of not less than 30 days following vaccination;
      (2)   If the domestic or hybrid animal is not immediately revaccinated,
the domestic or hybrid animal shall be confined in strict isolation in a kennel
for a period of not less than six months under the supervision of a
veterinarian; or
      (3)   The domestic or hybrid animal shall be destroyed if the owner does
not comply with either division (B)(1) or (2) of this section.
(Neb. RS 71-4407) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.24 ANIMAL POUND; IMPOUNDMENT; RELEASE; FEES.
   (A)   (1)   The rabies control authority may authorize an animal pound or
pounds or may enter into a cooperative agreement with a licensed veterinarian
for the establishment and operation of a pound.
      (2)   Any dog or hybrid of the family Canidae found outside the owner's
premises whose owner does not possess a valid certificate of rabies vaccination
and valid rabies vaccination tag for the dog or hybrid of the family Canidae
shall be impounded. The rabies control authority may require the impoundment of
domestic or hybrid animals other than dogs or hybrid of the family Canidae. All
impounded domestic or hybrid animals shall be given proper care, treatment, and
maintenance. Each impounded domestic or hybrid animal shall be kept and
maintained at the pound for a period of not less than 72 hours unless reclaimed
earlier by the owner.
      (3)   Notice of impoundment of all animals, including any significant
marks of identification, shall be posted at the pound as public notification of
impoundment. Any unvaccinated domestic or hybrid animal may be reclaimed by its
owner during the period of impoundment by payment of prescribed pound fees and
by complying with the rabies vaccination requirement of this subchapter within
72 hours of release. Any vaccinated domestic or hybrid animal impounded because
its owner has not presented a valid certificate of rabies vaccination and a
valid rabies vaccination tag for the domestic or hybrid animal may be reclaimed
by its owner by furnishing proof of rabies vaccination and payment of all
impoundment fees prior to release.
      (4)   At the expiration of impoundment a domestic or hybrid animal may be
claimed by payment of established pound fees and by compliance with the rabies
vaccination requirement of this subchapter within 72 hours of release. If the
domestic or hybrid animal is unclaimed at the end of five days, the authorities
may dispose of the domestic or hybrid animal in accordance with applicable laws
or rules and regulations.
(Neb. RS 71-4408)
   (B)   Impoundment fees shall be paid by the owner. Fees for impoundment at
public facilities shall be established by the rabies control authority.
(Neb. RS 71-4411)
§ 90.25 PROCLAMATION OF DANGER.
   Whenever in its opinion the danger to the public safety from a species of
rabid animals is great or imminent, the City Council shall issue a proclamation
ordering all owners of any such species to muzzle the animal or to confine it
for a period of not less than 30 days or more than 90 days from the date of the
proclamation or until the danger is passed. The animal may be harbored by any
good and sufficient means in a house, garage, or yard on the premises on which
the owner may reside. Upon issuance of a proclamation, all owners of any such
species shall muzzle or confine the animal as provided in this section.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.26 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   When the owner of any domestic or hybrid animal or other animal fails
or refuses to comply with §
90.22 or
90.23, the rabies control authority shall obtain an order for seizure of the
animal pursuant to Neb. RS Chapter 29, article 8.
(Neb. RS 71-4410)
   (B)   In the city, all ordinances, codes, or rules and regulations
concerning the control of rabies or the vaccination of domestic or hybrid
animals against rabies shall be enforced by the city health and law enforcement
officials or those other officers with regulatory authority as specified by the
City Council.
(Neb. RS 71-4412)
DOGS
§ 90.40 LIABILITY OF OWNER.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner to allow a dog to injure or destroy any
real or personal property of any description belonging to another person. The
owner of the dog, in addition to the usual judgment upon conviction, may be
made to be liable to the person injured in an amount equal to the value of the
damage sustained.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to guard against injuries or annoyances, see Neb. RS 17-526
   Statutory liability for damages, see Neb. RS 54-601, 56-602, and 54-606
§ 90.41 BARKING AND CHASING; COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner to allow a dog to annoy or disturb
any neighborhood or person by loud, continued, or frequent barking, howling, or
yelping or to habitually bark at or chase pedestrians, drivers, or owners of
horses or vehicles while they are on any public sidewalks, streets, or alleys
in the city.
   (B)   Upon the written complaint of two or more affected persons from
different households, filed within any 30-day period with the City Clerk or
animal control officer, that any dog owned by the person named in the complaint
is an annoyance or disturbance, or otherwise violates the provisions of this
section, the city police or animal control officer shall investigate the
complaint and, if in his or her opinion the situation warrants, notify the
owner to silence and restrain the dog.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not be construed to apply to any
city animal shelter.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to guard against annoyances, see Neb. RS 17-526
§ 90.42 DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY. An entity authorized to enforce the animal
control laws of the city, and includes any local law enforcement agency or
other agency designated by the city to enforce the animal control laws of the
city.
      ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.  Any individual employed, appointed, or
authorized by an animal control authority for the purpose of aiding in the
enforcement of this section or any other law or ordinance relating to the
licensing of animals, control of animals, or seizure and impoundment of animals
and includes any state or local law enforcement or other employee whose duties
in whole or in part include assignments that involve the seizure and
impoundment of any animal.
      DANGEROUS DOG.
         (a)   Any dog that, according to the records of the animal control
authority:
            (i)   Has killed a human being;
            (ii)   Has inflicted injury on a human being that requires medical
treatment;
            (iii)   Has killed a domestic animal without provocation; or
            (iv)   Has been previously determined to be a potentially dangerous
dog by an animal control authority, the owner has received notice of such
determination from an animal control authority or an animal control officer,
and the dog inflicts an injury on a human being that does not require medical
treatment, injures a domestic animal, or threatens the safety of humans or
domestic animals.
         (b)   A dog shall not be defined as a DANGEROUS DOG if the individual
was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog at the time of the injury or
has, in the past, been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or
assaulted the dog.
         (c)   A dog shall not be defined as a DANGEROUS DOG if the injury,
damage, or threat was sustained by an individual who, at the time, was
committing a willful trespass as defined in Neb. RS 20-203, 28-520, or 28-521,
was committing any other tort upon the property of the owner of the dog, was
tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog, or has, in the past, been observed
or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog, or was committing
or attempting to commit a crime.
         (d)   A dog shall not be defined as a DANGEROUS DOG if the dog is a
police animal as defined in Neb. RS 28-1008.
      DOMESTIC ANIMAL.  A cat, a dog, or livestock. Livestock includes buffalo,
deer, antelope, fowl, and any other animal in any zoo, wildlife park, refuge,
wildlife area, or nature center intended to be on exhibit.
      MEDICAL TREATMENT. Treatment administered by a physician or other
licensed health care professional that results in sutures or surgery or
treatment for one or more broken bones.
      OWNER.  Any person, firm, corporation, organization, political
subdivision, or department possessing, harboring, keeping, or having control or
custody of a dog.
      POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG.
         (a)   Any dog that when unprovoked:
            (i)    Inflicts an injury on a human being that does not require
medical treatment; or
            (ii)   Injures a domestic animal; or
            (iii)   Chases or approaches a person upon streets, sidewalks, or
any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack.
         (b)   Any specific dog with a known propensity, tendency, or
disposition to attack when unprovoked, to cause injury, or to threaten the
safety of humans or domestic animals.
(Neb. RS 54-617)
   (B)   (1)   A dangerous dog that has been declared as such shall be spayed
or neutered and implanted with a microchip identification number by a licensed
veterinarian within 30 days after such declaration. The cost of both procedures
is the responsibility of the owner of the dangerous dog. Written proof of both
procedures and the microchip identification number shall be provided to the
animal control authority after the procedures are completed.
      (2)   No owner of a dangerous dog shall permit the dog to go beyond the
property of the owner unless the dog is restrained securely by a chain or
leash.
      (3)   Except as provided in division (B)(4) of this section or for a
reasonable veterinary purpose, no owner of a dangerous dog shall transport such
dog or permit such dog to be transported to another county, city, or village in
this state.
      (4)   An owner of a dangerous dog may transport such dog or permit such
dog to be transported to another county, city, or village in this state for the
purpose of permanent relocation of the owner if the owner has obtained written
permission prior to such relocation from the animal control authority of the
county, city, or village in which the owner resides and from the county, city,
or village in which the owner will reside. Each animal control authority may
grant such permission based upon a reasonable evaluation of both the owner and
the dog, including if the owner has complied with the laws of this state and of
the county, city, or village in which he or she resides with regard to
dangerous dogs after the dog was declared dangerous. An animal control
authority shall not grant permission under this section if the county, city, or
village has an ordinance or resolution prohibiting the relocation of dangerous
dogs. After the permanent relocation, the animal control authority of the
county, city, or village in which the owner resides shall monitor the owner and
such dog for a period of at least 30 days but not to exceed 90 days to ensure
the owner’s compliance with the laws of this state and of such county, city, or
village with regard to dangerous dogs. Nothing in this division shall permit
the rescindment of the declaration of dangerous dog.
(Neb. RS 54-618)
   (C)   (1)   No person, firm, partnership, limited liability company, or
corporation shall own, keep, or harbor or allow to be in or on any premises
occupied by him, her, or it or under his, her, or its charge or control any
dangerous dog without such dog being confined so as to protect the public from
injury.
      (2)   While unattended on the owner's property, a dangerous dog shall be
securely confined, in a humane manner, indoors or in a securely enclosed and
locked pen or structure suitably designed to prevent the entry of young
children and to prevent the dog from escaping. The pen or structure shall have
secure sides and a secure top. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to
the sides, the sides shall be embedded into the ground at least one foot. The
pen or structure shall also protect the dog from the elements. The pen or
structure shall be at least ten feet from any property line of the owner. The
owner of a dangerous dog shall post warning signs on the property where the dog
is kept that are clearly visible from all areas of public access and that
inform persons that a dangerous dog is on the property. Each warning sign shall
be no less than ten inches by twelve inches and shall contain the words warning
and dangerous animal in high-contrast lettering at least three inches high on a
black background.
(Neb. RS 54-619)
   (D)   Failure to comply.
      (1) Any dangerous dog may be immediately confiscated by an animal control
officer if the owner is in violation of this section. The owner shall be
responsible for the reasonable costs incurred by the animal control authority
for the care of a dangerous dog confiscated by an animal control officer or for
the destruction of any dangerous dog if the action by the animal control
authority is pursuant to law and if the owner violated this section.
(Neb. RS 54-620)
      (2) In addition to any other penalty, a court may order the animal
control authority to dispose of a dangerous dog in an expeditious and humane
manner.
(Neb. RS 54-621)
   (E)   (1)   Any owner whose dangerous dog inflicts on a human being a
serious bodily injury as defined in Neb. RS 28-109 is guilty of a Class I
misdemeanor for the first offense, whether or not the same dangerous dog is
involved.
      (2)   It is a defense to a violation of division (E)(1) of this section
that the dangerous dog was, at the time of the infliction of the serious bodily
injury, in the custody of or under the direct control of a person other than
the owner or the owner’s immediate family.
(Neb. RS 54-622.01)
   (F)   Effect of prior conviction. If a dangerous dog of an owner with a
prior conviction under this section attacks or bites a human being or domestic
animal, in addition to any other penalty, the dangerous dog shall be
immediately confiscated by an animal control authority, placed in quarantine
for the proper length of time, and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and
humane manner.
(Neb. RS 54-623) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Owner felony liability; serious bodily injury second offense, see Neb. RS
54-622.01
   Prior conviction; ownership of dangerous dog prohibited for ten years after,
see Neb. RS 54-623
CHAPTER 91: HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Health regulations
   
91.02   Enforcement official
   
91.03   County Board of Health
Nuisances
   
91.20   Definition
   
91.21   Abatement procedure
   
91.22   Adjoining land owners; intervention before trial
   
91.23   Dead or diseased trees
   
91.24   Weeds; litter; stagnant water
   
91.25   Garbage and refuse
Abandoned Vehicles
   
91.35   Unlicensed motor vehicles; storage
   
91.36   Unlicensed motor vehicles; nuisance
   
91.37   Unlicensed motor vehicles; exception
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 HEALTH REGULATIONS.
   For the purpose of promoting the health and safety of the residents of the
city, the Board of Health shall, from time to time, adopt such rules and
regulations relative thereto and shall make such inspections, prescribe such
penalties, and make such reports as may be necessary toward that purpose.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 17-121
§ 91.02 ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.
   The Police Chief or other official designated by the City Council, as the
quarantine officer, shall be the chief health officer of the city. It shall be
his or her duty to notify the City Council and the Board of Health of health
nuisances within the city and its zoning jurisdiction.
Statutory reference:
   Quarantine officer, see Neb. RS 17-121
§ 91.03 COUNTY BOARD OF HEALTH.
   It shall be the duty of the Board of Health to work closely with the County
Health Board in protecting the health and welfare of the residents of the city.
NUISANCES
§ 91.20 DEFINITION.
   (A)   General definition. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      NUISANCE. Consists in doing any unlawful act, or omitting to perform a
duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which
act, omission, condition or thing either:
         (a)   Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or safety of
others;
         (b)   Offends decency;
         (c)   Is offensive to the senses;
         (d)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, tends to obstruct, or
renders dangerous for passage any stream, public park, parkway, square, street,
or highway in the city;
         (e)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of
property; or
         (f)   Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life
and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.
   (B)   Specific definition. The maintaining, using, placing, depositing,
leaving, or permitting of any of the following specific acts, omissions,
places, conditions, and things are hereby declared to be NUISANCES:
      (1)   Any odorous, putrid, unsound, or unwholesome grain, meat, hides,
skins, feathers, vegetable matter, or the whole or any part of any dead animal,
fish, or fowl;
      (2)   Privies, vaults, cesspools, dumps, pits, or like places which are
not securely protected from flies or rats, or which are foul or malodorous;
      (3)   Filthy, littered, or trash-covered cellars, houseyards, barnyards,
stableyards, factory yards, mill yards, vacant areas in rear of stores,
granaries, vacant lots, houses, buildings, or premises;
      (4)   Animal manure in any quantity which is not securely protected from
flies and the elements, or which is kept or handled in violation of any
ordinance of the city;
      (5)   Liquid household waste, human excreta, garbage, butcher’s trimmings
and offal, parts of fish, or any waste vegetable or animal matter in any
quantity; provided, that nothing herein contained shall prevent the temporary
retention of waste in receptacles in a manner provided by the health officer of
the city, nor the dumping of non-putrefying waste in a place and manner
approved by the health officer;
      (6)   Tin cans, bottles, glass, cans, ashes, small pieces of scrap iron,
wire metal articles, bric-a-brac, broken stone or cement, broken crockery,
broken glass, broken plaster, and all trash or abandoned material, unless the
same be kept in covered bins or galvanized iron receptacles;
      (7)   Trash, litter, rags, accumulations of barrels, boxes, crates,
packing crates, mattresses, bedding, excelsior, packing hay, straw, or other
packing material, lumber not neatly piled, scrap iron, tin, or other metal not
neatly piled, old automobiles or parts thereof, or any other waste materials
when any of the articles or materials create a condition in which flies or rats
may breed or multiply, or which may be a fire danger, or which are so unsightly
as to depreciate property values in the vicinity thereof;
      (8)   Any unsightly building, billboard, or other structure, or any old,
abandoned, or partially destroyed building or structure or any building or
structure commenced and left unfinished, which buildings, billboards, or other
structures are either a fire hazard, a menace to the public health or safety,
or are so unsightly as to depreciate the value of property in the vicinity
thereof;
      (9)   All places used or maintained as junk yards, or dumping grounds, or
for the wrecking and disassembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors, or
machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn-out, wrecked, or
abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any kind, or of any of
the parts thereof, or for the storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment
used by contractors or builders or by other persons, which places are kept or
maintained so as to essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of
life or property by others, or which are so unsightly as to tend to depreciate
property values in the vicinity thereof;
      (10)   Stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of
ground;
      (11)   Stockyards, granaries, mills, pig pens, cattle pens, chicken pens,
or any other place, building, or enclosure, in which animals or fowl of any
kind are confined or on which is stored tankage or any other animal or
vegetable matter, or on which any animal or vegetable matter including grain is
being processed, when the places in which the animals are confined, or the
premises on which the vegetable or animal matter is located, are maintained and
kept in such a manner that foul and noxious odors are permitted to emanate
therefrom to the annoyance of inhabitants of the city or are maintained and
kept in such a manner as to be injurious to the public health; or
      (12)   All other things specifically designated as nuisances elsewhere in
this code.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.21 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The owner or occupant of any real estate within the corporate limits
or zoning jurisdiction of the city shall keep such real estate free of
nuisances. Except to the extent that conflicting procedures are otherwise
provided, the procedures in this section shall apply to abatement of nuisances.
   (B)   Upon determination by the Board of Health or designated official that
the owner or occupant of any such real estate has failed to keep the real
estate free of nuisances, notice to abate and remove such nuisance and notice
of the right to a hearing before the City Council and the manner in which it
may be requested shall be given to each owner or owner's duly authorized agent
and to the occupant, if any, by personal service or by certified mail. If
notice by personal service or certified mail is unsuccessful, notice shall be
given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or by
conspicuously posting the notice on the real estate upon which the nuisance is
to be abated and removed. The notice shall describe the condition as found by
the Board of Health or designated official and state that the condition has
been declared a nuisance and must be remedied at once.
   (C)   If within five days after receipt of such notice or publication or
posting, whichever is applicable, the owner or occupant of the real estate does
not request a hearing with the city or fails to comply with the order to abate
and remove the nuisance, the city may have such work done.
   (D)   If within five days after receipt of such notice or publication or
posting, whichever is applicable, the owner or occupant requests in writing a
hearing with the City Council, the Council shall fix a time and place at which
a hearing will be held. Notice of the hearing shall be given by personal
service or certified mail and require the owner or occupant to appear before
the Council to show cause why such condition should not be found to be a
nuisance and remedied. The notice shall be given not less than seven nor more
than 14 days before the time of the hearing. Upon the date fixed for the
hearing and pursuant to the notice, the Council shall hear all objections made
by the owner or occupant and shall hear evidence submitted by the Board of
Health or designated official. If after consideration of all the evidence, the
City Council finds that the condition is a nuisance, it shall, by resolution,
order and direct the owner or occupant to remedy the nuisance at once. If the
owner or occupant refuses or neglects to promptly comply with the order to
abate and remove the nuisance, the Council may have such work done.
   (E)   The costs and expenses of any such work shall be paid by the owner. If
unpaid for two months after such work is done, the city may either:
      (1)   Levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work upon the real
estate so benefitted as a special assessment in the same manner as other
special assessments for improvements are levied and assessed; or
      (2)   Recover in a civil action the costs and expenses of the work upon
the real estate and the adjoining streets and alleys.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate and abate nuisances, see Neb. RS 18-1720
   Nuisances prohibited, see Neb. RS 28-1321
   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-563
   Zoning jurisdiction, Neb. RS 17-1001
Cross reference:
   Authority to obtain injunction against nuisance, see §
10.99
§ 91.22 ADJOINING LAND OWNERS; INTERVENTION BEFORE TRIAL.
   In cases of appeal from an action of the City Council condemning real
property as a nuisance or as dangerous under the police powers of the city, the
owners of the adjoining property may intervene in the action at any time before
trial.
(Neb. RS 19-710)
§ 91.23 DEAD OR DISEASED TREES.
   (A)   (1)   It is hereby declared a nuisance for a property owner to permit,
allow, or maintain any dead or diseased trees within the right-of-way of
streets within the corporate limits of the city or within its extraterritorial
zoning jurisdiction.
      (2)   Notice to abate and remove such nuisance and notice of the right to
a hearing and the manner in which it may be requested shall be given to each
owner or owner’s duly authorized agent and to the occupant, if any. The city
shall establish the method of notice by ordinance. If notice is given by first-
class mail, such mail shall be conspicuously marked as to its importance.
Within five days after receipt of such notice, the owner or occupant of the lot
or piece of ground may request a hearing with the city to appeal the decision
to abate or remove the nuisance by filing a written appeal with the office of
the City Clerk. A hearing on the appeal shall be held within 14 days after the
filing of the appeal and shall be conducted by an elected or appointed officer
as designated in the ordinance. The hearing officer shall render a decision on
the appeal within five business days after the conclusion of the hearing. If
the appeal fails, the city may have the work done to abate and remove the dead
or diseased trees. If the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground does
not request a hearing with the city within five days after receipt of such
notice or fails to comply with the order to abate and remove the nuisance, the
city may have such work done. The city may levy and assess all or any portion
of the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground so
benefitted as a special assessment.
(Neb. RS 17-555)
   (B)   It is hereby declared a nuisance for a property owner to permit,
allow, or maintain any dead or diseased trees on private property within the
corporate limits of the city or within its extraterritorial zoning
jurisdiction. The provisions in division (A)(2) shall apply to such nuisances.
For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this section, the city police
shall have the authority to enter upon private property to inspect the trees
thereon.
§ 91.24 WEEDS; LITTER; STAGNANT WATER.
   (A)   Lots or pieces of ground within the city or within its
extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction shall be drained or filled so as to
prevent stagnant water or any other nuisance accumulating thereon.
   (B)   The owner or occupant of any lot or piece of ground within the city or
within its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction shall keep the lot or piece of
ground and the adjoining streets and alleys free of any growth of eight inches
or more in height of weeds, grasses, or worthless vegetation.
   (C)   The throwing, depositing, or accumulation of litter on any lot or
piece of ground within the city or within its extraterritorial zoning
jurisdiction is prohibited.
   (D)   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance to permit or maintain any
growth of eight inches or more in height of weeds, grasses, or worthless
vegetation on any lot or piece of ground within the city or within its
extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction or on the adjoining streets or alleys or
to litter or cause litter to be deposited or remain thereon except in proper
receptacles.
(Neb. RS 17-563) (Ord. 684, passed 4-21-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.25 GARBAGE AND REFUSE.
   (A)   The owner, duly authorized agent, or tenant of any lot or land within
the corporate limits or extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of the city shall
remove garbage or refuse found upon the lot, land, streets, roads, or alleys
abutting the lot or land which constitutes a public nuisance.
   (B)   Notice that removal of garbage or refuse is necessary shall be given
to each owner or owner's duly authorized agent and to the tenant if any. The
notice shall be provided by personal service or by certified mail. After
providing the notice, the city shall, in addition to other proper remedies,
remove the garbage or refuse, or cause it to be removed, from the lot, land,
streets, roads, or alleys.
   (C)   If the Mayor declares that the accumulation of garbage or refuse upon
any lot or land constitutes an immediate nuisance and hazard to public health
and safety, the city shall remove the garbage or refuse, or cause it to be
removed, from the lot or land within 48 hours after notice by personal service
or following receipt of a certified letter in accordance with division (B) of
this section if the garbage or refuse has not been removed.
   (D)   Whenever the city removes any garbage or refuse, or causes it to be
removed, from any lot or land pursuant to this section, it shall, after a
hearing conducted by the City Council, assess the cost of the removal against
the lot or land.
(Ord. 648, passed 3-21-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 18-1752
ABANDONED VEHICLES
§ 91.35 UNLICENSED MOTOR VEHICLES; STORAGE.
   No person in charge or control of any property within the municipality or
within one-half mile thereof, other than municipal property, whether as owner,
tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall store, retain or keep on, or
permit to be stored, retained or kept on any private premises any motor vehicle
that has been unlicensed for a period in excess of four months under the laws
of the state or allow any partially dismantled, inoperable, wrecked, junked or
discarded vehicle to remain on such property; provided, this section shall not
apply to such motor vehicle, motor vehicle body or motor vehicle chassis or
parts therefrom that is kept in a completely enclosed building.
(2000 Code, § 4-306) (Ord. 523, passed 10-18-2004)
§ 91.36 UNLICENSED MOTOR VEHICLES; NUISANCE.
   Any vehicle or parts thereof allowed to remain on such property in violation
of the preceding section shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated. The
Municipal Clerk or his or her duly designated officer of the municipality shall
given written notice to the owner or occupant of the real property upon which
such nuisance exists to abate the nuisance within ten days. The notice to abate
shall be served either in person, by mailing notice by certified mail or
registered mail or by publication, or by affixing notice on such vehicle. Any
publication notice shall be in a newspaper, of general circulation in the
municipality which is published at least weekly; such notice shall be published
once; and the time period shall run from the date of publication. Upon failure
to abate the nuisance within the time provided, the municipality may remove
such vehicle or parts of any vehicle and sell the same at public sale. Notice
of the sale shall be given in the same manner as notice to abate. Any proceeds
from such sale shall be first applied to any expenses incurred by the
municipality in removing, storing and selling the vehicle or vehicle parts and
the balance shall be held without interest for the benefit of the owner of such
vehicle or vehicle parts for a period of two years. If not claimed within such
period of time, the proceeds shall then be paid to the General Fund of the
municipality.
(2000 Code, § 4-307)
§ 91.37 UNLICENSED MOTOR VEHICLES; EXCEPTION.
   This subchapter shall not apply to the premises for which permit has been
granted to a junk dealer; nor shall it apply to the premises where a licensed
motor vehicle dealer, farm implement dealer or an automotive repair or
restoration business conducts a business. This section also prohibits any
private premises zoned as R-1, R-2 or R-3 from operating any of the above-
mentioned businesses thereon.
(2000 Code, § 4-309)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
Fires
   
92.01   Preservation of property
   
92.02   Disorderly spectator
   
92.03   Equipment
   
92.04   Interference
   
92.05   Obstruction
   
92.06   Assistance
   
92.07   Driving over hose
   
92.08   False alarm
Fire Prevention
   
92.20   Fire Prevention Code
   
92.21   Fire Code enforcement
   
92.22   Fire prohibited
   
92.23   Open burning ban; waiver
   
92.24   Fire limits; re-building and remodeling
   
92.25   Homemade oil burning devices
Poisonous and Flammable Gases
   
92.40   Generally
Explosives
   
92.55   Storage and registration
   
92.56   Bullets
   
92.57   Blasting permits
Cross-references:
   Nuisances, see
Chapter 91
FIRES
§ 92.01 PRESERVATION OF PROPERTY.
   The Fire Chief or any officer in charge of the Fire Department shall have
the authority and power to cause the removal of property whenever it shall
become necessary for the preservation of more valuable property, the protection
of human life or to prevent the spreading of fire to adjoining property. The
Fire Chief may direct the municipal firefighters to remove any building,
structure or fence for the purpose of checking the progress of any fire. The
Fire Chief shall have the authority to blow up, or cause to be blown up, with
explosives any building or structure during the progress of the same.
(2000 Code, § 7-101)
§ 92.02 DISORDERLY SPECTATOR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person during the time of a fire and for a
period of 36 hours after its being extinguished to hinder, resist or refuse to
obey the Municipal Fire Chief, or to act in a noisy or disorderly manner. The
Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chief shall have the power and authority during
such time to arrest or command any such person to assist them in the
performance of their official duties.
(Neb. RS 29-908) (2000 Code, § 7-102) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.03 EQUIPMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person except the Fire Chief and the members of
the Municipal Fire Department to molest, destroy, handle or in any other way to
interfere with the use and storage of any of the fire trucks and other
apparatus belonging to the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 7-103) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.04 INTERFERENCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or obstruct the municipal Fire
Chief or the members of the Fire Department in the performance of their duty.
(Neb. RS 29-908) (2000 Code, § 7-104) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.05 OBSTRUCTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the use of a fire hydrant or
have or place any material within 15 feet of the said hydrant. Any vehicle or
material found as an obstruction may be immediately removed by the Fire Chief
or any member of the Fire Department at the risk, cost and expense of the owner
or claimant.
(Neb. RS 39-672) (2000 Code, § 7-105) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.06 ASSISTANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, after the command of the Fire
Chief or Assistant Fire Chief, to aid in extinguishing a fire or to assist in
the removal and protection of property.
(2000 Code, § 7-106) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.07 DRIVING OVER HOSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the Fire Chief
or Assistant Fire Chief, to drive any vehicle over unprotected hose of the Fire
Department.
(Neb. RS 39-682) (2000 Code, § 7-107) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.08 FALSE ALARM.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and without good and
reasonable cause raise any false alarm of fire.
(Neb. RS 28-907) (2000 Code, § 7-108) Penalty, see §
10.99
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 92.20 FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
   The rules and regulations promulgated by the office of the State Fire
Marshal relating to fire prevention are incorporated by reference into this
code and made a part of this chapter as though spread at large herein together
with all subsequent amendments thereto. Three copies of the Fire Prevention
Code shall be on file with the Municipal Clerk and shall be available for
public inspection at any reasonable time.
(Neb. RS 18-132, 19-902, 81-502) (2000 Code, § 7-201)
§ 92.21 FIRE CODE ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of all municipal officials to enforce the incorporated
fire code provisions and all infractions shall be immediately brought to the
attention of the Fire Chief.
(2000 Code, § 7-202)
§ 92.22 FIRE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to set out a fire on the pavement or
near any curb now built or hereafter to be built within the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 7-203) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.23 OPEN BURNING BAN; WAIVER.
   (A)   There shall be an open burning ban on all bonfires, outdoor rubbish
fires, and fires for the purpose of clearing land.
   (B)   (1)   The Fire Chief may waive an open burning ban under division (A)
of this section for an area under the city Fire Department’s jurisdiction by
issuing an open burning permit to a person requesting permission to conduct
open burning. The permit issued by the Fire Chief to a person desiring to
conduct open burning shall at a minimum contain:
         (a)   The name and telephone number of the landowner;
         (b)   The burn location;
         (c)   The date and beginning and ending time of the burn;
         (d)   A description of the material to be burned; and
         (e)   The name and telephone number of the person responsible for the
burn.
      (2)   The local Fire Department may have additional requirements for a
burn to be permitted. The permit shall contain the signature, written or
electronic, of the local Fire Chief. The State Fire Marshal shall provide a
sample form with the minimum requirements on the website of the State Fire
Marshal.
   (C)   The Fire Chief may waive the open burning ban in the city Fire
Department’s jurisdiction when conditions are acceptable to the Chief. Anyone
intending to burn in that jurisdiction when the open burning ban has been
waived shall notify the Fire Chief of his or her intention to burn prior to
starting the burn.
   (D)   The Fire Chief may adopt standards listing the conditions acceptable
for issuing a permit to conduct open burning under division (B) of this
section.
   (E)   The Fire Department may charge a fee not to exceed $10 for each such
permit issued. This fee shall be remitted to the City Council for inclusion in
the general funds allocated to the Fire Department. These funds shall not
reduce the tax requirements for the Fire Department. No such fee shall be
collected from any state or political subdivision to which such a permit is
issued to conduct open burning under division (B) of this section in the course
of that state’s or political subdivision’s official duties.
(Neb. RS 81-520.01) (Ord. 702, passed 4-21-2025)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.24 FIRE LIMITS; RE-BUILDING AND REMODELING.
   (A)   The Municipal Clerk shall keep on file, and provide to those
requesting, the boundaries of the municipal fire limits, if any such fire
limits have been created.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, re-build or remodel,
upon any lot within the fire limits of the municipality, a building or
buildings except the same shall be constructed of fire proof material, i.e.,
brick, stone, cement, steel or a material approved by the State Fire Marshal.
No building shall be erected within the fire limits of the municipality until
an application for a permit has been made to the governing body and the permit
granted.
   (C)   Wooden buildings shall not be repaired to the extent of a new roof,
foundation or undersills and no repairs of any kind shall be made on any such
building without the consent of the governing body. No wooden building shall be
moved into the fire limits or moved from one lot to another within the fire
limits.
(Neb. RS 17-550) (2000 Code, § 7-205) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.25 HOMEMADE OIL BURNING DEVICES.
   No homemade oil burning stoves or devices that burn crank case drainings
shall be permitted within the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 7-206) Penalty, see §
10.99
POISONOUS AND FLAMMABLE GASES
§ 92.40 GENERALLY.
   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to store or keep in the
municipality for any period of time any form of poisonous or flammable gas or
liquefied petroleum gas in excess of five gallons or add to, enlarge or replace
any facility used for the storage of such gases, must register that fact with
the Municipal Clerk. The Clerk shall require the name of the gas, the place of
storage and the amount of gas stored. Any present use that is discontinued for
a period of 60 days shall not be reviewed without re-registering. Any change in
location or ownership of the stored gas shall also necessitate re-registration.
(Neb. RS 17-549) (2000 Code, § 7-301) Penalty, see §
10.99
EXPLOSIVES
§ 92.55 STORAGE AND REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation storing or keeping dynamite,
gunpowder, nitroglycerine or other high explosives within the municipality
shall comply with Neb. RS 28-1213 through 28-1239 and shall register such
information with the Municipal Clerk within ten days after such explosives are
brought into the municipality. The Clerk shall provide such information to the
Municipal Fire Chief and to the governing body. Transfer of explosives to
another individual within the municipality shall require the individual
receiving the explosives to register the transfer and the new location of the
explosives with the Municipal Clerk. Also, moving explosives to a new location
by the owner shall require registration of that fact to the Municipal Clerk.
   (B)   All high explosives including dynamite, gunpowder and nitroglycerine
shall be stored in a proper receptacle which shall be closed at all times
except when actually in use. Such cement, metal or stone receptacle shall not
be located in any room where there is a flame or flammable materials. The area
surrounding storage facilities shall be kept clear of rubbish, brush, dry grass
or trees for not less than 25 feet in all directions. Any other combustible
materials shall be kept a distance of not less than 50 feet from outdoor
storage facilities.
(Neb. RS 28-1237) (2000 Code, § 7-401) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.56 BULLETS.
   Cartridge, shells and percussion caps shall be kept in their original
containers away from flame, flammable materials and high explosives.
(2000 Code, § 7-402) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.57 BLASTING PERMITS.
   Any person wishing to discharge high explosives within the municipality must
secure a permit from the governing body and shall discharge such explosives in
conformance with their direction and under their supervision and in no case
shall any person perform blasting operations unless operating under the direct
supervision of a person in possession of a valid user’s permit issued by the
State Fire Marshal.
(2000 Code, § 7-403) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
93.01   Operation and funding
   
93.02   Regulation
   
93.03   Injury to property
§ 93.01 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   The municipality owns and operates the municipal parks and other
recreational areas through the governing body. The governing body, for the
purpose of defraying the cost of the care, management and maintenance of the
municipal park may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit
prescribed by state law on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal
property within the corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue
from the said tax shall be known as the Park Fund and shall remain in the
custody of the Municipal Treasurer. The Board shall have the authority to adopt
rules and regulations for the efficient management of the municipal parks and
other recreational areas of the municipality.
(Neb. RS 17-948 through 17-952) (2000 Code, § 3-601)
§ 93.02 REGULATION.
   The following regulations for park operation are hereby prescribed in order
to promote orderly and safe use of the municipal parks and to prevent needless
injury and destruction to park property.
   (A)   Public restrooms. Restrooms will be open during special occasions. The
manager of organized ball teams will be permitted to open rest rooms during
games and will be responsible for locking doors before departing the area.
Restrooms will be open 24 hours per day except they may be closed on a
seasonable basis as determined by the city. For other occasions, contact the
Park Commissioner.
   (B)   Picnic areas. Use of picnic areas and facilities is on a first come,
first served basis.
   (C)   Ball fields. Organized regulation games and practices must be cleared
through the City Administrator or Municipal Clerk.
   (D)   Tennis courts. The Park Department will operate and maintain tennis
courts. Rules will be posted for all participants.
   (E)   Swimming pool. The Park Department, through the authority of the
governing body, shall have the power and authority to enact by-laws, rules and
regulations for the protection of those using the swimming pool and for the
efficient management thereof. They may provide suitable penalties for the
violation of such by-laws, rules and regulations.
(Neb. RS 17-949) (2000 Code, § 3-602)
§ 93.03 INJURY TO PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or willfully cut down,
injure or destroy any sodden or planted area or injure or destroy any building,
structure, equipment, fence, bench, table or any other property of the
municipal parks and recreational areas. No person shall commit any waste on or
litter the municipal parks or other public grounds.
(2000 Code, § 3-603) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 94: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Section
City Property
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Streets, alleys, walks, malls, and other improvements
   
94.03   Maintenance and control
   
94.04   Regulation of obstructions
   
94.05   Regulation of snow, ice, and other encroachments
   
94.06   Permitted use of public street space
   
94.07   Poles, wires, and pipe lines
   
94.08   Dangerous stairways and entrances
   
94.09   Excavations and exposures; barricades and lights
   
94.10   Guttering and eave spouts
   
94.11   Prohibited obstructions
   
94.12   Trees in sidewalk space
   
94.13   Overhanging branches
   
94.14   Signs and canopies
   
94.15   Cutting into paving, curb, or sidewalk
   
94.16   Heavy equipment
Sale and Acquisition of Property; Public Works
   
94.30   Sale and conveyance; real property
   
94.31   Sale and conveyance; personal property
   
94.32   Acquisition or construction of public buildings; election requirements
   
94.33   Acquisition of real property; appraisal
   
94.34   Acquisition of real property; public meeting; access for recreational
use
   
94.35   Public works involving architecture or engineering; requirements
   
94.36   Special assessments for public works or improvements; notice to
nonresident property owners
Sidewalks
   
94.50   Requirement to keep clean
   
94.51   Use of space beneath
   
94.52   Construction at owner’ initiative
   
94.53   Construction and repair at village direction
Streets and Alleys
   
94.65   Dedication to public use
   
94.66   Grading, paving, and other improvements
   
94.67   Improvements without petition or creation of district
   
94.68   Opening, widening, improving, or vacating
   
94.69   Vacating public ways; procedure
   
94.70   Crossings
   
94.71   Names and numbers
   
94.72   Driveway approaches
   
94.73   Excavation
   
94.74   Driving stakes
   
94.75   Mixing concrete
   
94.76   Harmful liquids
   
94.77   Snow, debris, and the like on street prohibited
CITY PROPERTY
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OVERSEER OF STREETS.  The city official with general charge, direction, and
control of streets and sidewalks. If one official is responsible for streets
and another official is responsible for sidewalks, OVERSEER OF STREETS shall
mean whichever one is appropriate in the context the term is used.
   SIDEWALK SPACE.  The portion of a street between curb lines and adjacent
property lines.
§ 94.02 STREETS, ALLEYS, WALKS, MALLS, AND OTHER IMPROVEMENTS.
   The City Council may grade, partially or to an established grade, change
grade, curb, recurb, gutter, regutter, pave, gravel, regravel, macadamize,
remacadamize, widen, or narrow streets or roadways, resurface or re-lay
existing pavement, or otherwise improve any streets, alleys, public grounds,
public ways, entirely or partially, and streets which divide the city corporate
area and the area adjoining the city; construct or reconstruct pedestrian
walks, plazas, malls, landscaping, outdoor sprinkler systems, fountains,
decorative water ponds, lighting systems, and permanent facilities; and
construct sidewalks and improve the sidewalk space. These projects may be
funded at public cost or by the levy of special assessments on the property
especially benefitted in proportion to such benefits, except as provided in
Neb. RS 19-2428 through 19-2431. The City Council may by ordinance create
improvement districts, to be consecutively numbered, which may include two or
more connecting or intersecting streets, alleys, or public ways, and may
include two or more types of the improvements authorized under this section in
a single district in one proceeding. All of the improvements which are to be
funded by a levy of special assessment on the property especially benefitted
shall be ordered as provided in Neb. RS 17-510 to 17-512, except as otherwise
provided in Neb. RS 17-509.
(Neb. RS 17-509)
Statutory reference:
   Other provisions on improvements, assessments, and bonds, see Neb. RS 17-513
to 17-524, 18-1751, 19-2401, and 19-2408 to 19-2415
§ 94.03 MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL.
   The City Council shall have the care, supervision, and control of all public
highways, bridges, streets, alleys, public squares, and commons within the city
and shall cause the same to be kept open and in repair and free from nuisances.
(Neb. RS 17-567)
§ 94.04 REGULATION OF OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (A)   The city may remove all obstructions from the sidewalks, curbstones,
gutters, and crosswalks at the expense of the person placing them there or at
the expense of the city and require and regulate the planting and protection of
shade trees in and along the streets and the trimming and removing of such
trees.
   (B)   The city may regulate the building of bulkheads, cellar and basement
ways, stairways, railways, windows, doorways, awnings, hitching posts and
rails, lampposts, awning posts, all other structures projecting upon or over
and adjoining, and all other excavations through and under the sidewalks in the
city.
(Neb. RS 17-555)
§ 94.05 REGULATION OF SNOW, ICE, AND OTHER ENCROACHMENTS.
   (A)   The city shall have power to prevent and remove all encroachments,
including snow, ice, mud or other obstructions, into and upon all sidewalks,
streets, avenues, alleys, and other city property.
(Neb. RS 17-557)
   (B)   If the abutting property owner refuses or neglects, after five days’
notice by publication or, in place thereof, personal service of such notice, to
remove all encroachments from sidewalks, as provided in division (A), the city
through the proper officers may cause such encroachments to be removed, and the
cost of removal shall be paid out of the street fund. The City Council shall
assess the cost of the notice and removal of the encroachment against the
abutting property as a special assessment. The special assessment shall be
known as a special sidewalk assessment and, together with the cost of notice,
shall be levied and collected as a special assessment in addition to the
general revenue taxes and shall be subject to the same penalties as other
special assessments and shall draw interest from the date of the assessment.
Upon payment of the assessment, the assessment shall be credited to the street
fund.
(Neb. RS 17-557.01)
§ 94.06 PERMITTED USE OF PUBLIC STREET SPACE.
   Any person engaged in the erection, construction, reconstruction, wrecking,
or repairing of any building, or the construction or repair of a sidewalk along
any street, may occupy the public street space with the building material and
equipment as long as is necessary if such person makes application to and
receives a permit to do so in writing from the Overseer of Streets. No permit
shall authorize the occupancy of more than one-third of the roadway of the
public space adjacent to the real estate on which the building or sidewalk is
to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, wrecked, or repaired. A suitable
passageway for pedestrians shall be maintained within the public space included
in the permit, which passageway shall be protected and lighted in the manner
required by the Overseer of Streets.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.07 POLES, WIRES, AND PIPE LINES.
   (A)   Poles, wires, conduits, gas mains, pipe lines, and other appurtenances
of public service companies shall be located or erected over, upon, or under
the streets, alleys, and common grounds of the city. Application for location
of such appurtenances shall be made to the City Council in writing. Approval by
the Council shall be issued in writing. Any public service company granted a
right-of-way for the erection and maintenance of poles, wires, conduits, gas
mains, pipe lines, or other appurtenances shall at all times erect and locate
their appurtenances at such places and in such manner as shall be designated by
the Council.
   (B)   All poles, wires, conduits, gas mains, pipe lines, and other
appurtenances shall be removed or relocated by the companies at their own
expense when requested to do so by the Council. Any such removal or relocation
shall be ordered by resolution of the Council and the City Clerk shall notify
any and all companies affected. The companies shall, within 24 hours after
receiving notice, at their own expense, cause the poles, wires, conduits, gas
mains, pipe lines, or other appurtenances to be removed or relocated. The
Council shall designate another location as closely as possible where the
appurtenances may be reset or placed.
   (C)   All poles, wires, conduits, gas mains, pipe lines, or other
appurtenances shall be reset, placed, or erected in such a manner that they
will not interfere with the water system; the sewerage system; any poles,
wires, conduits, mains, lines, or other appurtenances of any public utility;
any adjacent buildings; or travel on the public ways and property. Whenever
possible, all poles, wires, conduits, gas mains, pipe lines, and appurtenances
shall be confined to the alleys of the city.
§ 94.08 DANGEROUS STAIRWAYS AND ENTRANCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any stairway,
open cellarway, open basement way, or open entrance thereto in or adjacent to
any sidewalk, pavement, or street, and any such entrance is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance, except that all existing stairways, open cellarways, open
basement ways, or open entrances thereto in or adjacent to sidewalks,
pavements, or streets may be permitted to remain from and after the adoption of
this prohibition if the person owning or using the opening in the sidewalk,
pavement, or street satisfies the Overseer of Streets that the opening is
properly protected by a balustrade, or coping of durable material, and
furnishes the city with a bond in the amount set by the City Council for the
benefit of any person who might suffer an injury or damage by reason of the use
of the stairway, cellarway, basement way, or entrance.
§ 94.09 EXCAVATIONS AND EXPOSURES; BARRICADES AND LIGHTS.
   Any owner or occupant engaged in construction or demolition of any building
or improvement upon or near the public ways and property shall protect all
excavations or exposures of any kind by suitable barricades or guards by day
and by warning lights at night. The failure, neglect, or refusal of the owner
or occupant to erect and maintain such protections shall constitute a violation
of this section, and the city may stop all work upon the buildings and
improvements until suitable protections are erected and maintained in the
required manner.
§ 94.10 GUTTERING AND EAVE SPOUTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any dwelling house
or business building within the limits of the city where the dwelling or
building abuts on any sidewalk or street without providing proper guttering and
eave spouts to receive the waste waters that collect on the sidewalks and
streets. All eave spouts erected on any dwelling house or business building
shall be constructed to drain into the alleys or shall be buried beneath the
sidewalks and drain into the streets where it is found to be impossible to
drain the eave spouts into the alley.
§ 94.11 PROHIBITED OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, or encumber, by
fences, gates, buildings, structures, or otherwise, any of the streets, alleys,
or sidewalks.
   (B)   The public ways and property shall be considered to be obstructed when
the owner or occupant of the adjacent property permits or suffers to remain on
any premises owned or controlled by him or her any hedge, shrubbery, bush, or
similar growth within two feet adjacent to the lot line, whether there is a
sidewalk abutting or adjoining the premises or not. It shall be the duty of
owners and occupants to at all times keep trimmed and pruned all such similar
growth.
   (C)   Trees and shrubs growing upon the lot line partially on public ground
and partially upon the abutting property, or wholly upon the abutting property,
and interfering with the use, making, or construction of any public improvement
or so that the roots thereof interfere with any utility wire or pipe shall be
deemed an obstruction. Such trees and shrubs and their roots may be removed by
the city at the expense of the owner of the property upon which the trees or
shrubs are partially or wholly located if the owner fails or neglects, after
notice, to do so.
   (D)   When any obstruction described in this section is determined to exist,
the city may proceed against the owner or occupant of the property adjacent to
the sidewalk space as provided in §
91.21.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.12 TREES IN SIDEWALK SPACE.
   (A)   No person shall plant any tree or allow any tree to grow within the
sidewalk space without first making a written or verbal application to and
receiving a written permit from the Overseer of Streets upon payment of the
fee, if any, established by the City Council.
   (B)   Any tree planted within the sidewalk space after the adoption of this
prohibition shall be deemed to be unlawfully planted and growing and may be
determined to be a nuisance. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
apply to any trees growing within the sidewalk space prior to the adoption of
this prohibition.
   (C)   When any such tree is determined to be a nuisance, the city may
proceed against the owner or occupant of the property adjacent to the sidewalk
space as provided in §
91.21.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.13 OVERHANGING BRANCHES.
   (A)   The owner or occupant of any lot, piece, or parcel of ground abutting
or adjacent to any street or sidewalk over which there extend the branches of
trees shall at all times keep the branches or limbs thereof trimmed to the
height of at least eight feet above the surface of the walk and at least 14
feet above the surface of the street or to the heights otherwise specified by
the City Council.
   (B)   Whenever the branches or limbs of any tree extend over streets or
sidewalks contrary to such provisions so as to interfere with the lighting of
the street from street lights or with the convenience of the public using the
street or sidewalk, the city may proceed against the owner or occupant of the
property abutting or adjacent to the street or sidewalk as provided in §
91.21.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.14 SIGNS AND CANOPIES.
   (A)   No person shall erect or maintain any sign, signboard, poster, or
rigid canopy over any street, sidewalk, or alley or on other public property
without having first obtained a permit therefor. Permits for signs, signboards,
posters, and canopies shall be issued by the City Clerk, subject to the
approval of the Overseer of Streets, upon the payment of the fee, if any,
established by the City Council.
   (B)   All signs, signboards, posters, and canopies extending over any public
sidewalk, street, alley, or other public place must be securely fastened and
constructed so that there will be no danger of the them being dislodged by
ordinary winds or falling from other causes.
   (C)   No sign, signboard, poster, or canopy shall be erected or maintained
which extends over any public sidewalk, street, alley, or other public place in
such a location as to obstruct the view of any traffic light, sign, or signal.
   (D)   Upon a determination that a sign, signboard, poster, or canopy is in
violation of this section, the city may proceed against the owner or occupant
of the premises where such the sign, signboard, poster, or canopy is located as
provided in §
91.21.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.15 CUTTING INTO PAVING, CURB, OR SIDEWALK.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut into any paving, curb, or
sidewalk for the purpose of constructing a driveway or any other purpose
whatsoever without first having obtained a written permit from the City
Council. Before any person obtains a permit, he or she shall inform the City
Clerk of the place where such cutting is to be done and it shall be the duty of
the Overseer of Streets to inspect the proposed place of entry into the paving,
sidewalk, or curb.
   (B)   When cutting into any paving, curb, or sidewalk, it shall be the duty
of the party to comply with such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by
the Council or the City Engineer. When the applicant is ready to close the
opening made, he or she shall inform the Overseer of Streets, who shall
supervise and inspect the materials used and the work done in closing the
opening.
   (C)   It shall be discretionary with the Council to order the Overseer of
Streets, under the supervision and inspection of the City Engineer or the
committee of the Council on the streets and alleys, to do the cutting and
closing of the paving, curb, or sidewalk and charge the costs thereof to the
party who obtained the permit. The Council may consent to the cutting and
closing of the paving, curb, or sidewalk by the party holding the permit.
   (D)   Before any permit is issued by the Council, the applicant for the
permit shall deposit with the City Treasurer a sum set by resolution of the
Council for all paving, curb, or sidewalk to be cut. Such sum shall be set on a
per square foot cost of construction basis. The deposit shall be retained by
the city for the purpose of replacing the paving, curb, or sidewalk in the
event the work is done by the city. If the Board elects to require the
applicant to replace the paving, curb, or sidewalk, the deposit shall be
retained by the city until the work is completed to the satisfaction of the
Overseer of Streets or of the committee of the Council on streets and alleys.
   (E)   In addition to making the deposit, the applicant shall, before any
permit is issued, execute a bond to the city with a good and sufficient surety
to be approved by the Council in a sum set by resolution.
§ 94.16 HEAVY EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to move or operate heavy equipment
across any curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, or crossing on
any unpaved street without first having protected such curb, gutter, bridge,
culvert, sidewalks, crosswalk, or crossing with heavy plank sufficient in
strength to warrant against the breaking or damaging of such curb, gutter,
bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, or crossing.
   (B)   Except as provided in §
71.05, it shall be unlawful to run, drive, move, operate, or convey over or
across any paved street a vehicle, machine, or implement with sharp discs or
sharp wheels that bear upon the pavement; with wheels having cutting edges;
with wheels having lugs, any protruding parts, or bolts thereon that extend
beyond a plain tire so as to cut, mark, mar, indent, or otherwise injure or
damage any pavement, gutter, or curb, except that where heavy vehicles,
structures, and machines move along paved or unpaved streets the city police
are hereby authorized and empowered to choose the route over which the moving
of such vehicles, structures, or machines will be permitted and allowed.
SALE AND ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY; PUBLIC WORKS
§ 94.30 SALE AND CONVEYANCE; REAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (G) of this section, the power of the
city to convey any real property owned by it, including land used for park
purposes and public squares, except real property used in the operation of
public utilities, shall be exercised by resolution, directing the sale at
public auction or by sealed bid of that property and the manner and terms of
such sales, except that the property shall not be sold at public auction or by
sealed bid when:
      (1)   The property is being sold in compliance with the requirements of
federal or state grants or programs;
      (2)   The property is being conveyed to another public agency; or
      (3)   The property consists of streets and alleys.
   (B)   The City Council may establish a minimum price for real property at
which bidding shall begin or shall serve as a minimum for a sealed bid.
   (C)   After the passage of the resolution directing the sale, notice of all
proposed sales of property described in division (A) of this section and the
terms of such sales shall be published once each week for three consecutive
weeks in a legal newspaper published in or of general circulation in the city.
   (D)   (1)   If within 30 days after the third publication of the notice a
remonstrance petition against the sale:
         (a)   Conforms to Neb. RS 32-628,
         (b)   Is signed by registered voters of the city equal in number to
30% of the registered voters of the city voting at the last regular city
election held therein, and
         (c)   Is filed with the City Council, that property shall not then,
nor within one year thereafter, be sold. If the date for filing the petition
falls upon a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the signatures shall be
collected within the 30-day period, but the filing shall be considered timely
if filed or postmarked on or before the next business day.
      (2)   Upon the receipt of the remonstrance, the City Council, with the
aid and assistance of the Election Commissioner or County Clerk, shall
determine the validity and sufficiency of signatures on the petition. The City
Council shall deliver the petition to the Election Commissioner or County Clerk
by hand carrier, by use of law enforcement officials, or by certified mail,
return receipt requested.
      (3)   Upon receipt of the petition, the Election Commissioner or County
Clerk shall issue to the City Council a written receipt that the petition is in
the custody of the Election Commissioner or County Clerk. The Election
Commissioner or County Clerk shall compare the signature of each person signing
the petition with the voter registration records to determine if each signer
was a registered voter on or before the date on which the petition was filed
with the City Council. The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall also
compare the signer's printed name, street and number or voting precinct, and
city or post office address with the voter registration records to determine
whether the signer was a registered voter. The signature and address shall be
presumed to be valid only if the Election Commissioner or County Clerk
determines that the printed name, street and number or voting precinct, and
city or post office address match the registration records and that the
registration was received on or before the date on which the petition was filed
with the City Council. The determinations of the Election Commissioner or
County Clerk may be rebutted by any credible evidence which the City Council
finds sufficient. The express purpose of the comparison of names and addresses
with the voter registration records, in addition to helping to determine the
validity of the petition, the sufficiency of the petition, and the
qualifications of the signer, shall be to prevent fraud, deception, and
misrepresentation in the petition process.
      (4)   Upon completion of the comparison of names and addresses with the
voter registration records, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall
prepare in writing a certification under seal setting forth the name and
address of each signer found not to be a registered voter and the signature
page number and line number where the name is found, and if the reason for the
invalidity of the signature or address is other than the nonregistration of the
signer, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall set forth the reason
for the invalidity of the signature. If the Election Commissioner or County
Clerk determines that a signer has affixed his or her signature more than once
to the remonstrance and that only one person is registered by that name, the
Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall prepare in writing a certification
under seal setting forth the name of the duplicate signature and shall count
only the earliest dated signature.
      (5)   The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall certify to the City
Council the number of valid signatures necessary to constitute a valid
remonstrance. The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall deliver the
remonstrance and the certifications to the City Council within 40 days after
the receipt of the remonstrance from the City Council. The delivery shall be by
hand carrier, by use of law enforcement officials, or by certified mail, return
receipt requested. Not more than 20 signatures on one signature page shall be
counted.
      (6)   The City Council shall, within 30 days after the receipt of the
remonstrance and certifications from the Election Commissioner or County Clerk,
hold a public hearing to review the remonstrance and certifications and receive
testimony regarding them. The City Council shall, following the hearing, vote
on whether or not the remonstrance is valid and shall uphold the remonstrance
if sufficient valid signatures have been received.
   (E)   Real estate now owned or hereafter owned by the city may be conveyed
without consideration to the state for state armory sites or, if acquired for
state armory sites, shall be conveyed strictly in accordance with the
conditions of Neb. RS 18-1001 through 18-1006.
   (F)   Following passage of the resolution directing a sale, publishing of
the notice of the proposed sale, and passing of the 30-day right-of-
remonstrance period, the property shall then be sold. The sale shall be
confirmed by passage of an ordinance stating the name of the purchaser and
terms of the sale.
   (G)   Divisions (A) through (F) of this section shall not apply to the sale
of real property if the authorizing resolution directs the sale of real
property, the total fair market value of which is less than $5,000. Following
passage of the resolution directing the sale of the property, notice of the
sale shall be posted in three prominent places within the city for a period of
not less than seven days prior to the sale of the property. The notice shall
give a general description of the property offered for sale and state the terms
and conditions of sale. Confirmation of the sale by passage of an ordinance may
be required. (Ord. 673, passed 11-20-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 17-503 and Neb. RS 17-503.01
§ 94.31 SALE AND CONVEYANCE; PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   The power of the city to convey any personal property owned by it
shall be exercised by resolution directing the sale and the manner and terms of
the sale. Following passage of the resolution directing the sale of the
property, notice of the sale shall be posted in three prominent places within
the city for a period of not less than seven days prior to the sale of the
property. If the fair market value of the property is greater than $5,000,
notice of the sale shall also be published once in a legal newspaper in or of
general circulation in the city at least seven days prior to the sale of the
property. The notice shall give a general description of the property offered
for sale and state the terms and conditions of sale.
   (B)   Personal property may be conveyed notwithstanding the procedure in
division (A) of this section when:
      (1)   Such property is being sold in compliance with the requirements of
federal or state grants or programs; or
      (2)   Such property is being conveyed to another public agency.
(Neb. RS 17-503.02)
§ 94.32 ACQUISITION OR CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC BUILDINGS; ELECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The city is authorized and empowered to purchase, accept by gift or
devise, purchase real estate upon which to erect, and erect a building or
buildings for an auditorium, fire station, city building, or community house
for housing city enterprises and social and recreation purposes, and other
public buildings, including the construction of buildings authorized to be
constructed by Neb. RS Chapter 72, article 14, and including construction of
buildings to be leased in whole or in part by the city to any other political
or governmental subdivision of the state authorized by law to lease such
buildings, and maintain, manage, and operate the same for the benefit of the
inhabitants of the city.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, before any such
purchase can be made or building erected, the question shall be submitted to
the electors of the city at a general city election or at an election duly
called for that purpose, or as set forth in division (D) of this section, and
be adopted by a majority of the electors voting on such question.
(Neb. RS 17-953)
   (C)   If the funds to be used to finance the purchase or construction of a
building pursuant to this section are available other than through a bond
issue, then either:
      (1)   Notice of the proposed purchase or construction shall be published
in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and no election shall be
required to approve the purchase or construction unless within 30 days after
the publication of the notice, a remonstrance petition against the purchase or
construction is signed by registered voters of the city equal in number to 15%
of the registered voters of the city voting at the last regular city election
held therein and is filed with the City Council. If the date for filing the
petition falls upon a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the signatures shall
be collected within the 30-day period, but the filing shall be considered
timely if filed or postmarked on or before the next business day. If a petition
with the necessary number of qualified signatures is timely filed, the question
shall be submitted to the voters of the city at a general city election or a
special election duly called for that purpose. If the purchase or construction
is not approved, the property involved shall not then, nor within one year
following the election, be purchased or constructed; or
      (2)   The City Council may proceed without providing the notice and right
of remonstrance required in division (C)(1) of this section if the property can
be purchased below the fair market value as determined by an appraisal, there
is a willing seller, and the purchase price is less than $25,000. The purchase
shall be approved by the City Council after notice and public hearing as
provided in §
94.34.
(Neb. RS 17-953.01)
   (D)   (1)   The Mayor and City Council adopting the proposition to make such
purchase or erect such building or buildings for the purposes set forth in
division (A) of this section shall have the power to borrow money and pledge
the property and credit of the city upon its negotiable bonds. No such bonds
shall be issued until after the same have been authorized by a majority vote of
the electors voting on the proposition of their issuance, at a general city
election or at a special election called for the submission of such
proposition. The question of such purchase or erection of such a building or
buildings, as set forth in division (A) of this section, and the question of
the issuance of the negotiable bonds referred to in this division may be
submitted as one question at a general city or special election if so ordered
by resolution or ordinance.
      (2)   Notice of the time and place of the election shall be given by
publication in some legal newspaper printed in or of general circulation in the
city three successive weeks immediately prior thereto.
      (3)   No such election for the issuance of such bonds shall be called
until a petition therefor signed by at least 10% of the legal voters of the
city has been presented to the City Council. The number of voters voting at the
last regular city election prior to the presenting of the petition shall be
deemed the number of votes in the city for the purpose of determining the
sufficiency of the petition.
      (4)   The question of bond issues for such purpose in the city when
defeated shall not be resubmitted for six months from and after the date of
such election.
      (5)   When the building to be constructed is to be used by the state or
its agency or agencies under a lease authorized by Neb. RS Chapter 72, article
14, or the building is to be leased by any other political or governmental
subdivision of the state, when the combined area of the building to be leased
by the state or its agency or agencies and the political or governmental
subdivision of the state is more than 50% of the area of the building, and when
such sum does not exceed $2,000,000, then no such vote of the electors will be
required.
(Neb. RS 17-954)
§ 94.33 ACQUISITION OF REAL PROPERTY; APPRAISAL.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the city shall not purchase,
lease-purchase, or acquire for consideration real property having an estimated
value of $100,000 or more unless an appraisal of such property has been
performed by a certified real property appraiser.
(Neb. RS 13-403)
§ 94.34 ACQUISITION OF REAL PROPERTY; PUBLIC MEETING; ACCESS FOR RECREATIONAL
USE.
   (A)   The city shall acquire an interest in real property by purchase or
eminent domain only after the City Council has authorized the acquisition by
action taken in a public meeting after notice and public hearing.
   (B)   The city shall provide to the public a right of access for
recreational use to real property acquired for public recreational purposes.
Such access shall be at designated access points and shall be equal to the
right of access for recreational use held by adjacent landowners. The right of
access granted to the public for recreational use shall meet or exceed such
right held by a private landowner adjacent to the real property.
(Neb. RS 18-1755)
§ 94.35 PUBLIC WORKS INVOLVING ARCHITECTURE OR ENGINEERING; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section and Neb. RS 81-3449
and 81-3453, the city shall not engage in the construction of any public works
involving architecture or engineering unless the plans, specifications, and
estimates have been prepared and the construction has been observed by an
architect, a professional engineer, or a person under the direct supervision of
an architect, professional engineer, or those under the direct supervision of
an architect or professional engineer.
      (2)   This division (A) shall not apply to any public work in which the
contemplated expenditure for the complete project does not exceed $100,000 or
the adjusted dollar amount set by the Board of Engineers and Architects.
(Neb. RS 81-3445)
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) of this section regulating the practice
of architecture do not apply to the following activities or the other
activities specified in Neb. RS 81-3449:
      (1)   Any alteration, renovation, or remodeling of a building if the
alteration, renovation, or remodeling does not affect architectural or
engineering safety features of the building;
      (2)   A public service provider who employs a design professional
performing professional services for itself;
      (3)   The practice of any other certified trade or legally recognized
profession;
      (4)   Earthmoving and related work associated with soil and water
conservation practices performed any land owned by the city that is not subject
to a permit from the Department of Natural Resources; and
      (5)   The work of employees and agents of the city performing, in
accordance with other requirements of law, their customary duties in the
administration and enforcement of codes, permit programs, and land-use
regulations and their customary duties in utility and public works
construction, operation, and maintenance.
(Neb. RS 81-3449)
   (C)   The provisions of division (A) of this section regulating the practice
of engineering do not apply to the following activities, the activities
specified in division (B) of this section, or the other activities specified in
Neb. RS 81-3453:
      (1)   Those services ordinarily performed by subordinates under direct
supervision of a professional engineer or those commonly designated as
locomotive, stationary, marine operating engineers, power plant operating
engineers, or manufacturers who supervise the operation of or operate machinery
or equipment or who supervise construction within their own plant; and
      (2)   The construction of water wells as defined in Neb. RS 46-1212, the
installation of pumps and pumping equipment into water wells, and the
decommissioning of water wells, unless such construction, installation, or
decommissioning is required by the city to be designed or supervised by an
engineer or unless legal requirements are imposed upon the city as a part of a
public water supply;
(Neb. RS 81-3453)
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the city is considered a public
service provider if it employs or appoints an architect or a professional
engineer to be in responsible charge of the city’s architectural or engineering
work.
(Neb. RS 81-3423)
§ 94.36 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR PUBLIC WORKS OR IMPROVEMENTS; NOTICE TO
NONRESIDENT PROPERTY OWNERS.
   (A)   Before any political subdivision or special taxing district for public
works or public improvements shall be formed, and before the city or any
political subdivision or special taxing district may impose any special
assessment for public works or public improvements, a copy of any notice
required to be published by law shall be mailed to the last-known address of
all nonresident property owners as shown on the current tax rolls at the time
such notice is first published.
(Neb. RS 13-310)
   (B)   The City Clerk or any other person upon whom the duty is imposed by
law to publish notice required by law in regard to the formation of a special
taxing district for public works or public improvements shall mail by certified
mail with return receipt requested a copy of the published notice in regard to
the formation of any special taxing district within the city to the last-known
address as shown on the current tax rolls of each nonresident property owner.
(Neb. RS 13-311)
   (C)   The City Clerk or any other person upon whom the duty is imposed by
law to publish notice required by law in regard to any special assessment by a
special taxing district shall mail by certified mail with return receipt
requested a copy of such notice to be published to the last-known address as
shown on the current tax rolls of each nonresident property owner.
(Neb. RS 13-312)
   (D)   The failure of the City Clerk any other person upon whom the duty is
imposed by law to mail a copy of a published notice as provided in this section
shall invalidate the assessment against the property involved while permitting
all other assessments and procedures to be lawful.
(Neb. RS 13-313)
   (E)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      NONRESIDENT PROPERTY OWNER. Any person or corporation whose residence and
mailing address as shown on the current tax rolls is outside the boundaries of
the county and who is a record owner of property within the boundaries of the
city, special assessment district, or taxing district involved.
(Neb. RS 13-314)
SIDEWALKS
§ 94.50 REQUIREMENT TO KEEP CLEAN.
   It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any lot or lots or the owner of any
vacant lot or lots within the corporate limits to allow snow, sleet, mud, ice,
or other substance to accumulate on the sidewalks or to permit any snow, sleet,
ice, mud, or other substance to remain upon the sidewalk. Unless the City
Council has provided otherwise, all sidewalks within the business district
shall be cleaned within five hours after the cessation of a storm, unless the
storm or fall of snow shall have taken place during the night, in which case
the sidewalk shall be cleaned before 9:00 a.m. the following day, and sidewalks
within the residential areas of the city shall be cleaned within 24 hours after
the cessation of the storm.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.51 USE OF SPACE BENEATH.
   No person shall be allowed to keep or use the space beneath the sidewalk
lying between lot line and curb line unless a permit has been obtained from the
City Council. Before any permit is granted, the applicant shall submit plans
and specifications of any present or proposed construction to the City
Engineer. If the plans or specifications are disapproved by the Engineer, no
permit shall be granted. All permits hereafter granted shall continue only upon
the condition that the party receiving them builds, maintains, and keeps in
repair a sidewalk over the space used or constructed to be used and pays all
damages that may be sustained by any person by reason of such use or by reason
of the sidewalk being defective or in a dangerous condition. As a condition
precedent to the issuance or continuance of any permit for the use of any space
underneath the city sidewalks as contemplated in this section, the City Council
may require the applicant to furnish a bond to the city as obligee for the
benefit of any person who may suffer an injury or damage by reason of such use.
The bond shall be in such sum as the City Council, in its discretion, may
designate.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.52 CONSTRUCTION AT OWNER'S INITIATIVE.
   (A)   Any person desiring to construct, or cause to be constructed, any
sidewalk shall do so only as provided in this section. It shall be unlawful for
any person to construct any sidewalk without first having obtained a permit.
   (B)   The owner shall make application in writing for a permit and file such
application in the office of the City Clerk. The permit shall give a
description of the lot or piece of land along which the sidewalk is to be
constructed. The Overseer of Streets shall issue the desired permit unless good
cause appears why the permit should be denied, except that if it is desired to
construct the sidewalk at any other than the regularly prescribed location,
grade, or elevation, the Overseer of Streets shall submit the application to
the City Council for determination as to whether the permit should be granted
or denied. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, or cause to be
constructed, such sidewalk at any other location, grade, or elevation than so
designated by the city. All sidewalks shall be built and constructed on the
established grade or elevation, and if there is no established grade, then on
the grade or elevation indicated by the Overseer of Streets.
§ 94.53 CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR AT CITY DIRECTION.
   (A)   (1)   The Mayor and City Council may construct and repair sidewalks or
cause the construction and repair of sidewalks in such manner as the Mayor and
City Council deem necessary and assess the expense of such construction or
repairs on the property in front of which such construction or repairs are
made, after having given notice:
         (a)   By publication in one issue of a legal newspaper of general
circulation in the city; and
         (b)   By either causing a written notice to be served upon the
occupant in possession of the property involved or to be posted upon such
premises ten days prior to the commencement of such construction or repair.
      (2)   The powers conferred under this section are in addition to those
provided in Neb. RS 17-509 to 17-521 and may be exercised without creating an
improvement district.
      (3)   If the owner of any property abutting any street or avenue or part
thereof fails to construct or repair any sidewalk in front of the owner's
property within the time and in the manner as directed and requested by the
Mayor and City Council, after having received due notice to do so, the Mayor
and City Council may cause the sidewalk to be constructed or repaired and may
assess the cost of such construction or repairs against the property.
(Neb. RS 17-522)
   (B)   All sidewalks shall be constructed and repaired in conformity with
such plans and specifications as may be approved by the City Council.
   (C)   Assessments made under the provisions of this section shall be made
and assessed in the following manner:
      (1)   Such assessment shall be made by the City Council at a special
meeting, by a resolution, taking into account the benefits derived or injuries
sustained in consequence of such improvements, and the amount charged against
the same, which, with the vote, shall be recorded in the minutes. Notice of the
time of holding such meeting and the purpose for which it is to be held shall
be published in a legal newspaper in or of general circulation in the in the
city at least four weeks before the same shall be held or, in lieu thereof,
personal service may be made upon persons owning or occupying property to be
assessed; and
      (2)   All such assessments shall be known as special assessments for
improvements and shall be levied and collected as a separate tax, in addition
to the taxes for general revenue purposes, and shall be placed on the tax roll
for collection, subject to the same penalties and collected in like manner as
other city taxes.
(Neb. RS 17-524)
Statutory reference:
    Authority to improve through sidewalk district, see Neb. RS 19-2417 through
19-2419
STREETS AND ALLEYS
§ 94.65 DEDICATION TO PUBLIC USE.
   No street or alley which shall hereafter be dedicated to public use, by the
proprietor of ground in the city, shall be deemed a public street or alley, or
be under the use or control of the City Council, unless the dedication shall be
accepted and confirmed by an ordinance especially passed for such purpose.
(Neb. RS 17-567)
§ 94.66 GRADING, PAVING, AND OTHER IMPROVEMENTS.
   The city has the power to provide for the grading and repair of any street,
avenue, or alley and the construction of bridges, culverts, and sewers. No
street, avenue, or alley shall be graded unless the grading is ordered to be
done by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the City Council.
(Neb. RS 17-508)
Cross reference:
   Other provisions on grading and paving, see §
94.02
Statutory reference:
   Acquisition of additional land or easement, see Neb. RS 18-1705
   Boundary street with county or another municipality, see Neb. RS 18-2005
   Limited street improvement districts, see Neb. RS 19-2416
§ 94.67 IMPROVEMENTS WITHOUT PETITION OR CREATION OF DISTRICT.
   (A)   The city may, without petition or creating a street improvement
district, grade, curb, gutter, and pave:
      (1)   Any portion of a street otherwise paved so as to make one
continuous paved street, but the portion to be so improved shall not exceed two
blocks, including intersections, or 1,325 feet, whichever is the lesser;
      (2)   Any unpaved street or alley which intersects a paved street for a
distance of not to exceed one block on either side of that paved street; and
      (3)   Any side street or alley within its corporate limits connecting
with a major traffic street for a distance not to exceed one block from that
major traffic street.
   (B)   Those improvements may be performed upon any portion of a street or
alley or any unpaved street or alley not previously improved to meet or exceed
the minimum standards for pavement set by the city for its paved streets.
   (C)   In order to defray the costs and expenses of these improvements, the
Mayor and City Council may levy and collect special taxes and assessments or
issue paving bonds as provided in Neb. RS 18-2003.
(Neb. RS 18-2001 through 18-2004)
§ 94.68 OPENING, WIDENING, IMPROVING, OR VACATING.
   (A)   (1)   The city shall have power to open, widen, or otherwise improve
or vacate any street, avenue, alley, or lane within the limits of the city and
also to create, open, and improve any new street, avenue, alley, or lane. All
damages sustained by the citizens of the city, or by the owners of the property
therein, shall be ascertained in that manner as shall be provided by ordinance.
      (2)   Whenever any street, avenue, alley, or lane is vacated, the same
shall revert to the owners of the abutting real estate, one-half on each side
thereof, and become a part of that property, unless the city reserves title in
the ordinance vacating such street or alley. If title is retained by the city,
such property may be sold, conveyed, exchanged, or leased upon such terms and
conditions as shall be deemed in the best interests of the city.
      (3)   When a portion of a street, avenue, alley, or lane is vacated only
on one side of the center thereof, the title to the land shall vest in the
owner of the abutting property and become a part of that property, unless the
city reserves title in the ordinance vacating a portion of such street or
alley. If title is retained by the city, such property may be sold, conveyed,
exchanged, or leased upon such terms and conditions as shall be deemed in the
best interests of the city.
      (4)   When the city vacates all or any portion of a street, avenue,
alley, or lane, the city shall, within 30 days after the effective date of the
vacation, file a certified copy of the vacating ordinance with the Register of
Deeds for the county in which the vacated property is located to be indexed
against all affected lots.
      (5)   The title to property vacated pursuant to this section shall be
subject to the following:
         (a)   There is reserved to the city the right to maintain, operate,
repair, and renew public utilities existing at the time title to the property
is vacated there; and
         (b)   There is reserved to the city, any public utilities, and any
cable television systems the right to maintain, repair, renew, and operate
water mains, gas mains, pole lines, conduits, electrical transmission lines,
sound and signal transmission lines, and other similar services and equipment
and appurtenances, including lateral connections or branch lines, above, on, or
below the surface of the ground that are existing as valid easements at the
time title to the property is vacated for the purposes of serving the general
public or the abutting properties and to enter upon the premises to accomplish
such purposes at any and all reasonable times.
(Neb. RS 17-558)
   (B)   The city shall have power to create, open, widen, or extend any
street, avenue, alley, off-street parking area, or other public way, or annul,
vacate, or discontinue the same.
(Neb. RS 17-559)
§ 94.69 VACATING PUBLIC WAYS; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      SPECIAL DAMAGES. Only those losses or damages or injuries which a
property owner suffers that are peculiar or special or unique to his or her
property and which result from the City Council vacating a street, avenue,
alley, lane, or similar public way. SPECIAL DAMAGES shall not mean those losses
or damages or injuries that a property owner suffers that are in common with
the rest of the city or public at large, even though those losses or damages or
injuries suffered by the property owner are greater in degree than the rest of
the city or public at large.
   (B)   Whenever the City Council decides that it would be in the best
interests of the city to vacate a street, avenue, alley, lane, or similar
public way, the City Council shall comply with the following procedure.
      (1)   Notice. Notice shall be given to all abutting property owners
either by first class mail to their last known address or if there is no known
address then by publishing the notice in a newspaper that is of general
circulation in the city. The content of the notice shall advise the abutting
property owners that the City Council will consider vacating that street,
avenue, alley, lane, or similar public way at its next regular meeting, or, if
a special meeting is scheduled for the discussion, then the date, time, and
place of that meeting.
      (2)   Consent; waiver. The City Council may have all the abutting
property owners sign a form stating that they consent to the action being taken
by the City Council and waive their right of access. The signing of this form
shall have no effect on claims for special damages by the abutting property
owners but shall create the presumption that the City Council’s action was
proper. If the abutting property owners do not sign the consent/waiver form,
the City Council may still proceed with vacating the street, avenue, alley,
lane, or similar public way under the authority granted by Neb. RS 17-558 and
17-559.
      (3)   Ordinance. The City Council shall pass an ordinance that includes
essentially the following provisions:
         (a)   A declaration that the action is expedient for the public good
or in the best interests of the city;
         (b)   A statement that the city will have an easement for maintaining
all utilities; and
         (c)   A method or procedure for ascertaining special damages to
abutting property owners.
   (C)   The Mayor shall appoint three, five or seven disinterested residents
of the city to a special commission to ascertain the amount of special damages
that the abutting property owners are entitled to receive and which resulted
from the City Council vacating the street, avenue, alley, lane, or similar
public way. The appointees of the special commission shall be approved by the
City Council. Only special damages shall be awarded to the abutting property
owners.
   (D)   In determining the amount of compensation to award the abutting
property owners as special damages, the commission shall use the following
rule:
An abutting property owner is entitled to recover as compensation the
difference between the value of the property immediately before and immediately
after the vacating of the street, avenue, alley, lane, or similar public way.
If no difference in value exists, the abutting property owner is entitled to no
compensation.
§ 94.70 CROSSINGS.
   The City Council may order and cause to be constructed, under the
supervision of the Overseer of Streets, those street, avenue, and alley
crossings as the City Council deems necessary. When a petition for the
construction of any such crossings is filed by an interested resident in the
office of the City Clerk, the City Clerk shall refer the application to the
Overseer of Streets, who shall investigate and make a recommendation to the
City Council. Action by the City Council on the application, whether the
application is approved or rejected, shall be considered final.
§ 94.71 NAMES AND NUMBERS.
   The City Council may at any time, by ordinance, rename any street or provide
a name for any new street. Buildings used for residence or business purposes
and located along those streets shall retain those numbers as the City Council
may require. It shall be the duty of the Overseer of Streets, upon the erection
of any new building, to assign the proper numbers to the building and give
notice to the owner and occupant of the same.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.72 DRIVEWAY APPROACHES.
   (A)   The Overseer of Streets may require the owner of property served by a
driveway approach constructed or maintained upon the street right-of-way to
repair or replace any such driveway approach which is cracked, broken, or
otherwise deteriorated to the extent that it is causing or is likely to cause
damage to or interfere with any street structure, including pavement or
sidewalks.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall give the property owner notice by registered
letter or certified mail, directed to the last known address of the owner or
the agent of the owner, directing the repair or replacement of the driveway
approach. If within 30 days of mailing the notice the property owner fails or
neglects to cause the repairs or replacements to be made, the Overseer of
Streets may cause the work to be done and assess the cost upon the property
served by the approach.
(Neb. RS 18-1748) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.73 EXCAVATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make an excavation in any street or
streets for any purpose whatsoever unless a written permit is issued by the
Overseer of Streets authorizing those excavations.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.74 DRIVING STAKES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any peg or stake of any kind
into the pavement in any street or alley without first procuring the written
consent of the Overseer of Streets.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.75 MIXING CONCRETE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to mix any concrete or plastering
material directly on the street pavement for any reason whatsoever.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.76 HARMFUL LIQUIDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to leak in the gutter
of any street any waste gasoline, kerosene, or high lubricating oils, which
damage or act as a solvent upon the streets.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.77 SNOW, DEBRIS, AND THE LIKE ON STREET PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to place, push, or deposit snow, sleet, ice, or mud, or
any debris, including leaves, grass, and branches, from private property onto
the streets of the city.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 17-557 
CHAPTER 95: LIBRARY
Section
   
95.01   Operation and funding
   
95.02   Rules and regulations
   
95.03   Money collected
§ 95.01 OPERATION AND FUNDING.
   The municipality owns and manages the municipal library through the Library
Board. The governing body for the purpose of defraying the cost of the
management, purchases, improvements and maintenance of the library may each
year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law on the
actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the
municipality that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall
be known as the Library Fund and shall include all gifts, grants, deeds of
conveyance, bequests or other valuable income-producing personal property and
real estate from any source for the purpose of endowing the municipal library.
The Library Fund shall at all times be in the custody of the Municipal
Treasurer. The Board shall have the power and authority to appoint the
librarian and to hire such other employees as it may deem necessary and may
pass such other rules and regulations for the operation of the library as may
be proper for its efficient operation. All actions by the Board shall be under
the supervision and control of the governing body.
(Neb. RS 51-201, 51-202, 51-211) (2000 Code, § 3-701)
§ 95.02 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Library Board shall establish rules and regulations for the governing of
the municipal library for the preservation and efficient management thereof.
They shall fix and impose by general rules, penalties and forfeitures for
injury to the library grounds, rooms, books or other property, or for failure
to return a book. All fees, penalties and forfeitures shall be collected in
civil action in the event of failure, neglect of refusal to pay the said
assessments.
(Neb. RS 51-205, 51-214) (2000 Code, § 3-702)
§ 95.03 MONEY COLLECTED.
   Any money collected by the library shall be turned over monthly by the
Library Board to the Municipal Treasurer along with a report of the sources of
the revenue.
(Neb. RS 51-209) (2000 Code, § 3-703)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
111.   TOBACCO LICENSES
      
112.   SALES AND ADVERTISING
      
113.   BUSINESS ENTERPRISE
      
114.   LOTTERY
CHAPTER 110: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Sale or gift to minor or mentally incompetent person prohibited
   
110.03   Consumption in public places or places open to the public;
restrictions
   
110.04   Removal of intoxicated persons from public or quasi-public property
Licenses Required
   
110.20   Manufacture, sale, delivery, and possession; general prohibitions;
exceptions
   
110.21   Acquisition and possession; restrictions
   
110.22   Licensee requirements
   
110.23   Licenses; city powers and duties
   
110.24   Licensed premises; inspections
   
110.25   License renewal; city powers and duties
   
110.26   Catering licenses
   
110.27   Display of license
   
110.28   Owner of premises or agent; liability
   
110.29   Licensee; liability for acts of officer, agent, or employee
   
110.30   Citizen complaints
Retail Establishments
   
110.45   Location
   
110.46   Access to dwellings
   
110.47   Sanitary conditions
   
110.48   Hours of sale
   
110.49   Credit sales prohibited
   
110.50   Original package required
   
110.51   Minor’s presence restricted
   
110.52   Keg sales; requirements; prohibited acts
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the definitions found in Neb. RS 53-103.01
through 53-103.42 shall be used.
§ 110.02 SALE OR GIFT TO MINOR OR MENTALLY INCOMPETENT PERSON PROHIBITED.
   No person shall sell, furnish, give away, dispose of, exchange, or deliver,
or permit the sale, gift, or procuring of any alcoholic liquors, to or for any
minor or to any person who is mentally incompetent.
(Neb. RS 53-180) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.03 CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES OR PLACES OPEN TO THE PUBLIC;
RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Except when the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission has issued a
license as provided in Neb. RS 53-186(2) or as provided in Neb. RS 60-6,211.08,
it is unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquor upon property owned
or controlled by the state or any governmental subdivision thereof unless
authorized by the governing bodies having jurisdiction over such property.
(Neb. RS 53-186)
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person owning, operating, managing, or
conducting any bottle club, dance hall, restaurant, café, or club or any place
open to the general public to permit or allow any person to consume alcoholic
liquor upon the premises except as permitted by a license issued for such
premises pursuant to the Nebraska Liquor Control Act. It is unlawful for any
person to consume alcoholic liquor in any dance hall, restaurant, café, or club
or any place open to the general public except as permitted by a license issued
for such premises pursuant to the Act. This division does not apply to a retail
licensee while lawfully engaged in the catering of alcoholic beverages or to
limousines or buses operated under Neb. RS 60-6,211.08.
(Neb. RS 53-186.01)
§ 110.04 REMOVAL OF INTOXICATED PERSONS FROM PUBLIC OR QUASI-PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Any law enforcement officer with the power to arrest for traffic
violations may take a person who is intoxicated and in the judgment of the
officer dangerous to himself, herself, or others, or who is otherwise
incapacitated, from any public or quasi-public property. An officer removing an
intoxicated person from public or quasi-public property shall make a reasonable
effort to take the intoxicated person to his or her home or to place the person
in any hospital, clinic, alcoholism center, or with a medical doctor as may be
necessary to preserve life or to prevent injury. The effort at placement shall
be deemed reasonable if the officer contacts such facilities or doctor which
have previously represented a willingness to accept and treat such individuals
and which regularly do accept such individuals. If these efforts are
unsuccessful or are not feasible, the officer may then place the intoxicated
person in civil protective custody, except that civil protective custody shall
be used only as long as is necessary to preserve life or to prevent injury, and
under no circumstances longer than 24 hours.
   (B)   The placement of the person in civil protective custody shall be
recorded at the facility or jail at which he or she is delivered and
communicated to his or her family or next of kin, if they can be located, or to
the person designated by the person taken into civil protective custody.
   (C)   The law enforcement officer who acts in compliance with this section
shall be deemed to be acting in the course of his or her official duty and
shall not be criminally or civilly liable for these actions.
   (D)   The taking of an individual into civil protective custody under this
section shall not be considered an arrest. No entry or other record shall be
made to indicate that the person has been arrested or charged with a crime.
   (E)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, park,
or other state, county, or city-owned property.
      QUASI-PUBLIC PROPERTY. Private or publicly owned property utilized for
proprietary or business uses which invites patronage by the public or which
invites public ingress and egress.
(Neb. RS 53-1,121) Penalty, see §
10.99
LICENSES REQUIRED
§ 110.20 MANUFACTURE, SALE, DELIVERY, AND POSSESSION; GENERAL PROHIBITIONS;
EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall manufacture, bottle, blend, sell, barter, transport,
deliver, furnish, or possess any alcoholic liquor for beverage purposes except
as specifically provided in this chapter and the Nebraska Liquor Control Act.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent:
      (1)   The possession of alcoholic liquor legally obtained as provided in
this chapter or the Act for the personal use of the possessor and his or her
family or guests;
      (2)   The making of wine, cider, or other alcoholic liquor by a person
from fruits, vegetables, or grains, or the product thereof, by simple
fermentation and without distillation, if made solely for the use of the maker
and his or her family and guests;
      (3)   Any duly licensed practicing physician or dentist from possessing
or using alcoholic liquor in the strict practice of his or her profession, any
hospital or other institution caring for the sick and diseased persons from
possessing and using alcoholic liquor for the treatment of bona fide patients
of that hospital or other institution, or any drug store employing a licensed
pharmacist from possessing or using alcoholic liquor in the compounding of
prescriptions of licensed physicians;
      (4)   The possession and dispensation of alcoholic liquor by an
authorized representative of any religion on the premises of a place of
worship, for the purpose of conducting any bona fide religious rite, ritual, or
ceremony;
      (5)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from carrying alcoholic
liquor from licensed establishments when they are accompanied by a person not a
minor;
      (6)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from handling alcoholic
liquor containers and alcoholic liquor in the course of their employment;
      (7)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from removing and disposing
of alcoholic liquor containers for the convenience of the employer and
customers in the course of their employment;
      (8)   Persons who are 16 years old or older from completing a transaction
for the sale of alcoholic liquor in the course of their employment if they are
not handling or serving alcoholic liquor; or
      (9)   Persons who are 19 years old or older from serving or selling
alcoholic liquor in the course of their employment.
(Neb. RS 53-168.06)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.21 ACQUISITION AND POSSESSION; RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, receive, acquire,
accept, or possess any alcoholic liquor acquired from any other person other
than one duly licensed to handle alcoholic liquor under this chapter and the
Nebraska Liquor Control Act unless within specific exemptions or exceptions
provided in this chapter or the Act.
(Neb. RS 53-175)
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be
unlawful for any person to transport, import, bring, ship, or cause to be
transported, imported, brought, or shipped into this state for the personal use
of the possessor, his or her family, or guests a quantity of alcoholic liquor
in excess of nine liters in any one calendar month.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person
importing alcoholic liquor from a holder of a retail direct sales shipping
license or its equivalent, which alcoholic liquor is for personal use or for
use by such person’s family or guests, if the total amount imported by such
person in any one calendar year does not exceed 108 liters.
(Neb. RS 53-194.03)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.22 LICENSEE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No license shall be issued to:
      (1)   A person who is not a resident of this state, except in case of
railroad, airline, or boat licenses;
      (2)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the
community in which he or she resides;
      (3)   A person who is not a resident of this state and legally able to
work in this state;
      (4)   A person who has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty to a
felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the United States;
      (5)   A person who has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty to any
Class I misdemeanor pursuant Neb. RS Chapter 28, art. 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11, or
12, or any similar offense under a prior criminal statute or in another state,
except that any additional requirements imposed by this division on May 18,
1983, shall not prevent any person holding a license on that date from
retaining or renewing that license if the conviction or plea occurred prior to
May 18, 1983;
      (6)   A person whose license issued under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act
has been revoked for cause;
      (7)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued under the Act would not be eligible for that license upon initial
application;
      (8)   A partnership, unless one of the partners is a resident of this
state and unless all the members of that partnership are otherwise qualified to
obtain a license;
      (9)   A limited liability company, unless one of the members is a
resident of this state and unless all the members of that company are otherwise
qualified to obtain a license;
      (10)   A corporation, if any officer or director of the corporation or
any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 25% of the stock of that
corporation would be ineligible to receive a license under this section for any
reason other than the reasons stated in divisions (A)(1) and (A)(3) of this
section, or if a manager of a corporate licensee would be ineligible to receive
a license under this section for any reason. This division shall not apply to
railroad licenses;
      (11)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or
agent, unless that manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required
of the licensee;
      (12)   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is
sought or does not have a lease or combination of leases on the premises for
the full period for which the license is to be issued;
      (13)   Except as provided in this division, an applicant whose spouse is
ineligible under this section to receive and hold a liquor license. Such an
applicant shall become eligible for a liquor license only if the Nebraska
Liquor Control Commission finds from the evidence that the public interest will
not be infringed upon if the license is granted. It shall be prima facie
evidence that when a spouse is ineligible to receive a liquor license, the
applicant is also ineligible to receive a liquor license. This prima facie
evidence shall be overcome if it is shown to the satisfaction of the
Commission:
         (a)   The licensed business will be the sole property of the
applicant; and
         (b) The licensed premises will be properly operated.
      (14)   A person seeking a license for premises which do not meet
standards for fire safety as established by the State Fire Marshal;
      (15)   A law enforcement officer, except that this division shall not
prohibit a law enforcement officer from holding membership in any nonprofit
organization holding a liquor license or from participating in any manner in
the management or administration of a nonprofit organization; or
      (16)   A person less than 21 years of age.
   (B)   When a trustee is the licensee, the beneficiary or beneficiaries of
the trust shall comply with the requirements of this section, but nothing in
this section shall prohibit any such beneficiary from being a minor or person
who is mentally incompetent.
(Neb. RS 53-125)
§ 110.23 LICENSES; CITY POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The City Council is authorized to regulate by ordinance, not
inconsistent with the Nebraska Liquor Control Act, the business of all retail,
bottle club, craft brewery, and microdistillery licensees carried on within the
corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   During the period of 45 days after the date of receipt by mail or
electronic delivery from the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission notice and a
copy of an application for a new license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail, a
craft brewery license, or a microdistillery license, the City Council may make
and submit to the Commission recommendations relative to the granting or
refusal to grant the license to the applicant.
   (C)   The City Council, with respect to licenses within the corporate limits
of the city, has the following powers, functions, and duties with respect to
retail, bottle club, craft brewery, and microdistillery licenses:
      (1)   To cancel or revoke for cause retail, craft brewery, or
microdistillery licenses to sell or dispense alcoholic liquor or bottle club
licenses issued to persons for premises within its jurisdiction, subject to the
right of appeal to the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission;
      (2)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcement officer to enter at
any time upon any premises licensed under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act to
determine whether any provision of the Act, any rule or regulation adopted and
promulgated pursuant to the Act, or any ordinance, resolution, rule, or
regulation adopted by the City Council has been or is being violated, and at
that time examine the premises of the licensee in connection with such
determination. Any law enforcement officer who determines that any provision of
the Act, any rule or regulation adopted and promulgated pursuant to the Act, or
any ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation adopted by the local governing
body has been or is being violated shall report such violation in writing to
the Executive Director of the Commission:
         (a)   Within 30 days after determining that such violation has
occurred;
         (b)   Within 30 days after the conclusion of an ongoing police
investigation; or
         (c)   Within 30 days after the verdict in a prosecution related to
such an ongoing police investigation if the prosecuting attorney determines
that reporting such violation prior to the verdict would jeopardize such
prosecution, whichever is later;
      (3)   To receive a signed complaint from any citizen within its
jurisdiction that any provision of the Act, any rule or regulation adopted and
promulgated pursuant to the Act, or any ordinance, resolution, rule, or
regulation relating to alcoholic liquor has been or is being violated and to
act upon these complaints in the manner provided in the Act;
      (4)   To receive retail, bottle club, craft brewery, and microdistillery
license fees as provided in Neb. RS 53-124 and 53-124.01 and pay the same,
after the license has been delivered to the applicant, to the City Treasurer;
      (5)   To examine or cause to be examined any applicant or any retail,
bottle club, craft brewery, or microdistillery licensee upon whom notice of
cancellation or revocation has been served as provided in the Act, to examine
or cause to be examined the books and records of any applicant or licensee,
except as otherwise provided for bottle club licensees under state law, and to
hear testimony and to take proof for its information in the performance of its
duties. For purposes of obtaining any of the information desired, the City
Council may authorize its agent or attorney to act on its behalf;
      (6)   To cancel or revoke on its own motion any license if, upon the same
notice and hearing as provided in Neb. RS 53-134.04, it determines that the
licensee has violated any of the provisions of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act
or any valid and subsisting ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation duly
enacted, adopted, and promulgated relating to alcoholic liquor. The order of
cancellation or revocation may be appealed to the Commission within 30 days
after the date of the order by filing a notice of appeal with the Commission.
The Commission shall handle the appeal in the manner provided for hearing on an
application in Neb. RS 53-133;
      (7)   Upon receipt from the Commission of the notice and copy of
application provided in Neb. RS 53-131, to fix a time and place for a hearing
at which the City Council shall receive evidence, either orally or by affidavit
from the applicant and any other person, bearing upon the propriety of the
issuance of a license. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be
published in a legal newspaper in or of general circulation in the city, one
time not less than seven and not more than 14 days before the time of the
hearing. The notice shall include, but not be limited to, a statement that all
persons desiring to give evidence before the City Council in support of or in
protest against the issuance of the license may do so at the time of the
hearing. The hearing shall be held not more than 45 days after the date of
receipt of the notice from the Commission, and after the hearing the City
Council shall cause to be recorded in the minute record of its proceedings a
resolution recommending either issuance or refusal of the license. The City
Clerk shall mail to the Commission by first class mail, postage prepaid, a copy
of the resolution which shall state the cost of the published notice, except
that failure to comply with this provision shall not void any license issued by
the Commission. If the Commission refuses to issue such a license, the cost of
publication of notice shall be paid by the Commission from the security for
costs;
      (8)   To review and authorize an application by a retail, bottle club,
craft brewery, farm winery, or microdistillery licensee for a temporary
expansion of its licensed premises within the jurisdiction of the local
governing body to an immediately adjacent area owned or leased by the licensee
or to an immediately adjacent street, parking lot, or alley, not to exceed 50
days for calendar year 2020 and, for each calendar year thereafter, not to
exceed 15 days per calendar year, as provided in Neb. RS 53-123.12 and Neb. RS
53-129; and
      (9)   To review and authorize an application by a craft brewery, farm
winery, or microdistillery licensee that holds a promotional farmers market
special designated license for a permit to use such promotional farmers market
special designated license to sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, which the
holder is licensed to produce, at a farmers market within the jurisdiction of
the local governing body. The local governing body shall electronically notify
the commission within five days after authorization of any permit pursuant to
this subdivision.
   (D)   (1)   When the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission mails or delivers to
the City Clerk a retail, craft brewery, or microdistillery license issued or
renewed by the Commission, the Clerk shall deliver the license to the licensee
upon receipt from the licensee of proof of payment of:
         (a)   The license fee if by the terms of Neb. RS 53-124 the fee is
payable to the City Treasurer;
         (b)   Any fee for publication of notice of bearing before the City
Council upon the application for the license;
         (c)   The fee for publication of notice of renewal, if applicable, as
provided in Neb. RS 53-135.01; and
         (d)   Occupation taxes, if any, imposed by the city, except that Class
J retail licensees shall not be subject to occupation taxes.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any ordinance or charter power to the contrary, the
city shall not impose an occupation tax on the business of any person, firm, or
corporation licensed under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act and doing business
within the corporate limits of the city in any sum which exceeds two times the
amount of the license fee required to be paid under the Act to obtain that
license.
(Ord. 649, passed 3-21-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 53-131, Neb. RS 53-132 and Neb. RS 53-134
§ 110.24 LICENSED PREMISES; INSPECTIONS.
   The City Council shall cause frequent inspection to be made on the premises
of all retail licensees and bottle club licensees. If it is found that any such
licensee is violating any provision of this chapter, the Nebraska Liquor
Control Act, or the rules and regulations of the Nebraska Liquor Control
Commission, or is failing to observe in good faith the purposes of this chapter
or the Act, the license may be suspended, canceled, or revoked after the
licensee is given an opportunity to be heard in his or her defense.
(Neb. RS 53-116.01)
§ 110.25 LICENSE RENEWAL; CITY POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   A retail or bottle club license issued by the Nebraska Liquor Control
Commission and outstanding may be automatically renewed by the Commission in
the absence of a written request by the City Council to require the licensee to
submit an application for renewal. Any licensed retail premises located in an
area which is annexed to the city shall file a formal application for a
license, and while the application is pending, the licensee may continue all
license privileges until the original license expires or is canceled or
revoked. If that license expires within 60 days following the annexation date
of the area, the license may be renewed by order of the Commission for not more
than one year.
(Neb. RS 53-135)
   (B)   The City Clerk shall cause to be published in a legal newspaper in or
of general circulation in the city, one time between January 10 and January 30
of each year, individual notice in the form prescribed by law of the right of
automatic renewal of each retail liquor and beer license within the city,
except that notice of the right of automatic renewal of Class C licenses shall
be published between the dates of July 10 and July 30 of each year. If written
protests to the issuance of automatic renewal of a license are filed in the
office of the City Clerk by three or more residents of the city on or before
February 10, or August 10 for Class C licenses, the City Council shall hold a
hearing to determine whether continuation of the license should be allowed.
Upon the conclusion of any hearing required by this section, the City Council
may request a licensee to submit an application as provided in Neb. RS 53-135.
(Neb. RS 53-135.01)
§ 110.26 CATERING LICENSES.
   (A)   The holder of a license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail issued
under Neb. RS 53-124, a craft brewery license, a microdistillery license, or a
farm winery license may obtain an annual catering license by filing an
application and license fee with the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission.
   (B)   Upon receipt from the Commission of the notice and a copy of the
application as provided in Neb. RS 53-124.12, the City Council shall process
the application in the same manner as provided in §
110.23.
   (C)   The City Council, with respect to catering licensees within its
corporate limits, may cancel a catering license for cause for the remainder of
the period for which that catering license is issued. Any person whose catering
license is canceled may appeal to the District Court.
   (D)   The City Council may impose an occupation tax on the business of a
catering licensee doing business within the liquor license jurisdiction of the
City Council. The tax may not exceed double the license fee for a catering
license.
(Neb. RS 53-124.12)
§ 110.27 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Every licensee under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act shall cause his or her
license to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the
licensed premises.
(Neb. RS 53-148) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.28 OWNER OF PREMISES OR AGENT; LIABILITY.
   If the owner of the licensed premises or any person from whom the licensee
derives the right to possession of the premises, or the agent of that owner or
person, knowingly permits the licensee to use the licensed premises in
violation of the terms of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act or any city
ordinance, that owner, agent, or other person shall be deemed guilty of a
violation of the Act or ordinance to the same extent as the licensee and be
subject to the same punishment.
(Neb. RS 53-1,101) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.29 LICENSEE; LIABILITY FOR ACTS OF OFFICER, AGENT, OR EMPLOYEE.
   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any
of the provisions of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act or any city ordinance by
any officer, director, manager, or other agent or employee of any licensee, if
the act is committed or omission is made with the authorization, knowledge, or
approval of the licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act of the
employer or licensee, and the employer or licensee shall be punishable in the
same manner as if the act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee
personally.
(Neb. RS 53-1,102) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.30 CITIZEN COMPLAINTS.
   Any five residents of the city shall have the right to file a complaint with
the City Council stating that any retail licensee or bottle club licensee
subject to the jurisdiction of the City Council has been or is violating any
provision of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act or the rules or regulations issued
pursuant to the Act. The complaint shall be in writing in the form prescribed
by the City Council and shall be signed and sworn to by the parties
complaining. The complaint shall state the particular provision, rule, or
regulation believed to have been violated and the facts in detail upon which
belief is based. If the City Council is satisfied that the complaint
substantially charges a violation and that from the facts alleged there is
reasonable cause for that belief, it shall set the matter for hearing within
ten days from the date of the filing of the complaint and shall serve notice
upon the licensee of the time and place of the hearing and of the particular
charge in the complaint. The complaint shall in all cases be disposed of by the
City Council within 30 days from the date the complaint was filed by resolution
thereof, which resolution shall be deemed the final order for purposes of
appeal to the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission as provided in Neb. RS 53-
1,115.
(Neb. RS 53-134.04)
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 110.45 LOCATION.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section, no
license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor or for a
bottle club within 150 feet of any church, school, hospital, or home for
indigent persons or for veterans and their wives or children. This prohibition
does not apply to any location within such distance of 150 feet:
      (1)   For which a license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail or for a
bottle club has been granted by the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission for two
years continuously prior to making of application for license;
      (2)   To hotels offering restaurant service, to regularly organized
clubs, or to restaurants, food shops, or other places where sale of alcoholic
liquor is not the principal business carried on, if such place of business so
exempted was established for such purposes prior to May 24, 1935; or
      (3)   To a college or university in the state which is subject to Neb. RS
53-177.01.
   (B)   If a proposed location for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor
or for a bottle club is within 150 feet of any church, a license may be issued
if the commission gives notice to the affected church and holds a hearing as
prescribed in Neb. RS 53-133 if the affected church submits a written request
for a hearing.
(Neb. RS 53-177)
   (C)   No alcoholic liquor, other than beer, shall be sold for consumption on
the premises within 300 feet from the campus of any college or university
within the city, and no bottle club shall be operated within 300 feet from the
campus of any college, except that this section:
      (1)   Does not prohibit a nonpublic college or university from
contracting with an individual or corporation holding a license to sell
alcoholic liquor at retail for the purpose of selling alcoholic liquor at
retail on the campus of such college or university at events sanctioned by such
college or university but does prohibit the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail
by such licensee on the campus of such nonpublic college or university at
student activities or events; and
      (2)   Does not prohibit sales of alcoholic liquor by a community college
culinary education program pursuant to Neb. RS 53-124.15.
(Neb. RS 53-177.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   State commission may waive 300-feet requirement, see Neb. RS 53-177.01
§ 110.46 ACCESS TO DWELLINGS.
   Except in the case of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be
manufactured or sold at retail or wholesale upon any premises which have any
access which leads from the premises to any other portion of the same building
or structure used for dwelling or lodging purposes and permitted to be used or
kept accessible for use by the public. This section does not prevent any
connection between the premises and such other portion of the building or
structure which is used only by the licensee, his or her family, or personal
guests.
(Neb. RS 53-178) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.47 SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to open for public use any retail liquor establishment
that is not in a clean and sanitary condition. Toilet facilities shall be
adequate and convenient for customers and patrons. The licensed premises shall
be subject to any health inspections the City Council or the city police may
make or cause to be made. All applications for liquor licenses shall be viewed
in part from the standpoint of the sanitary conditions, and a report concerning
the sanitary conditions shall be made at all hearings concerning the
application for or renewal of a liquor license.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate licensed premises, see Neb. RS 53-134.03
   State sanitary rules and regulations authorized, see Neb. RS 53-118
§ 110.48 HOURS OF SALE.
   (A)   It shall further be unlawful for any licensed person or persons or
his, her or their agents to sell any alcoholic beverages within the
municipality except during the hours provided herein:
Hours of Sale
Hours of Sale
Alcoholic liquors (except beer and
wine)
   Secular days
   Off sale                     7:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. the following day
   On sale                      7:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. the following day
   Sundays
         Off sale         12:00 noon to 1:00 a.m. the following
                                   day
         On sale          12:00 noon to 1:00 a.m. the following
                                   day
Beer and wine
   Secular days
   Off sale                     7:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. the following day
   On sale                      7:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. the following day
   Sundays
         Off sale         12:00 noon to 1:00 a.m. the following
                                   day
         On sale          12:00 noon to 1:00 a.m. the following
                                   day
 
   (B)   No person or persons shall consume any alcoholic beverages on licensed
premises for a period of time longer than 15 minutes after the time fixed
herein for stopping the sale of alcoholic beverages on the said premises. For
the purposes of this section, ON SALE shall be defined as alcoholic beverages
sold by the drink for consumption on the premises of the licensed
establishment; OFF SALE shall be defined as alcoholic beverages sold at retail
in the original container for consumption off the premises of the licensed
establishment.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit licensed
premises from being open for other business on days and hours during which the
sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by this section.
(2000 Code, § 10-108) (Ord. 574, passed 8-19-2013; Ord. 602, passed 2-20-2018)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.49 CREDIT SALES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at retail to any
person on credit, on a passbook, on an order on a store, in exchange for any
goods, wares, or merchandise, or in payment for any services rendered, and if
any person extends credit for any such purpose, the debt thereby attempted to
be created shall not be recoverable at law.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the following:
      (1)   Any club holding a Class C license from permitting checks or
statements for alcoholic liquor to be signed by members or bona fide guests of
members and charged to the account of such members or guests in accordance with
the bylaws of such club;
      (2)   Any hotel or restaurant holding a retail license from permitting
checks or statements for liquor to be signed by regular guests residing at such
hotel or eating at such restaurant and charged to the accounts of such guests;
or
      (3)   Any licensed retailer engaged in the sale of wine or distilled
spirits from issuing tasting cards to customers.
(Neb. RS 53-183) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.50 ORIGINAL PACKAGE REQUIRED.
   No person, except a manufacturer or wholesaler, shall fill or refill, in
whole or in part, any original package of alcoholic liquor with the same or any
other kind or quality of alcoholic liquor. It shall be unlawful for any person
to have in his or her possession for sale at retail any bottles, casks, or
other containers containing alcoholic liquor except in original packages.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the refilling of original packages of
alcoholic liquor for strictly private use and not for resale.
(Neb. RS 53-184) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.51 MINOR’S PRESENCE RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, or leases an
establishment selling alcoholic beverages at retail to allow any minor under
the age of 18 years of age to frequent or otherwise remain in the establishment
unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian, and
unless the minor remains seated with and under the immediate control of the
parent or legal guardian.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 53-134.03
§ 110.52 KEG SALES; REQUIREMENTS; PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   When any person licensed to sell alcoholic liquor at retail sells
alcohol for consumption off the premises in a container with a liquid capacity
of five or more gallons or 18.92 or more liters, the seller shall record the
date of the sale, the keg identification number, the purchaser’s name and
address, and the number of the purchaser’s motor vehicle operator’s license,
state identification card, tribal enrollment card as defined in Neb. RS 28-
1202.03, or military identification, if the military identification contains a
picture of the purchaser, together with the purchaser’s signature. This record
shall be on a form prescribed by the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission and
shall be kept by the licensee at the retail establishment where the purchase
was made for not less than six months. The records kept pursuant to this
section shall be available for inspection by any law enforcement officer during
normal business hours or at any other reasonable time. Any person violating
this section shall be guilty of an offense.
(Neb. RS 53-167.02)
   (B)   Any person who unlawfully tampers with, alters, or removes the keg
identification number from a container described in division (A) or is in
possession of a container described in division (A) with an altered or removed
keg identification number after the container has been taken from the licensed
premises pursuant to a retail sale and before its return to the licensed
premises or other place where returned kegs are accepted shall be guilty of an
offense.
(Neb. RS 53-167.03) (Ord. 703, passed 4-21-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 111: TOBACCO LICENSES
Section
   
111.01   Generally
   
111.02   License application
   
111.03   Rights of licensee
   
111.04   Reissuance of revoked and forfeited license
§ 111.01 GENERALLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership or corporation to sell,
keep for sale or give away in the course of trade any cigars, tobacco,
cigarettes or cigarette material to anyone without first obtaining a license
from the Municipal Clerk. Said applicant shall file a written application
stating the name of the applicant, exact location of the place of business and
shall deposit with such application a license fee of $10. Said license shall
then be issued by the Clerk and the $10 fee transferred to the local school
district.
(Neb. RS 28-1421 through 28-1429) (2000 Code, § 10-201) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.02 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every person, partnership, limited liability company, or corporation
desiring a license under Neb. RS 28-1420 through 28-1429 shall file with the
City Clerk a written application stating:
      (1)   The name of the person, partnership, limited liability company, or
corporation for whom the license is desired;
      (2)   An email address for contacting such person, partnership, limited
liability company, or corporation; and
      (3)   The exact location of the place of business.
   (B)   Each applicant shall also deposit with the application the amount of
the license fee provided in § 112.03.
   (C)   If the applicant is an individual, the application shall include the
applicant’s Social Security number.
   (D)   Any Clerk or Finance Department that grants such a license shall
notify the Tax Commissioner of such granting and transmit all applicable
application materials received to the Tax Commissioner.
(Neb. RS 28-1422) (Ord. 704, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 111.03 RIGHTS OF LICENSEE.
   (A)   The license provided for in §§
111.01 and
111.02 shall, when issued, authorize the sale of cigars, tobacco, electronic
nicotine delivery systems, cigarettes, and cigarette material by the licensee
and employees to persons 21 years of age or over, at the place of business
described in the license for the term therein authorized, unless the license is
forfeited as a result of court action as provided in Neb. RS 28-1425.
(Neb. RS 28-1424)
   (B)   If the license is revoked and forfeited pursuant to Neb. RS 28-1425,
all rights under the license shall at once cease and terminate and a new
license shall not be issued until the expiration of the period provided for in
Neb. RS 28-1429.
(Neb. RS 28-1425) (Ord. 705, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 111.04 REISSUANCE OF REVOKED AND FORFEITED LICENSE.
   (A)   If a license issued under Neb. RS 28-1420 through 28-1429 is revoked
and forfeited as provided in Neb. RS 28-1425 for a violation of Neb. RS 28-
1429.04 or 28-1429.05, no new license shall be issued to such licensee until
the expiration of five years after the date of such revocation and forfeiture.
   (B)   If a license issued under Neb. RS 28-1420 through 28-1429 is revoked
and forfeited as provided in Neb. RS 28-1425 for any other violation of Neb. RS
28-1418 through 28-1429.03, 28-1429.06, and 28-1429.07, no new license shall be
issued to such licensee until the expiration of one year after the date of such
revocation and forfeiture except as otherwise provided in Neb. RS 28-1423.
(Neb. RS 28-1429) (Ord. 706, passed 4-21-2025)
CHAPTER 112: SALES AND ADVERTISING
Section
   
112.01   Peddlers and hawkers; regulation
§ 112.01 PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS; REGULATION.
   (A)   No peddler or hawker shall be permitted to sell from or do business on
any public street or sidewalk without first having obtained a license therefor.
This license shall be in addition to any and all other licenses otherwise
required of peddlers and hawkers to do business in the municipality. Merchants
who conduct annual or other occasional sidewalk sales in front of their place
of business, not more than five days per year, shall not be required to obtain
a license under this section. Application for a license shall be made to the
Municipal Clerk upon the forms supplied by the municipality and application
shall specify what the peddler or hawker intends to sell and the specific
location from which the peddler or hawker will conduct business. Licenses shall
not be granted for areas that are not zoned commercial or industrial. Further,
a license will only be granted if the application is accompanied by a notarized
statement from the owner of any abutting business consenting to the sales
location requested.
   (B)   The license shall be for a term of three months, but shall be
immediately terminated if consent is retracted by the abutting business owner,
or the license is revoked by the Mayor or by the resolution of the City
Council.
   (C)   The peddler or hawker shall be responsible for the removal of any
litter deposited on or in the vicinity of the area used by the licensee and
shall conduct such activity in an orderly fashion and in such a manner as to
protect the public health and safety. Sales shall be conducted only from the
exact location described on the license. The use permitted by the license is
temporary and the user acquires no right, title or interest in the space
permitted to be used.
   (D)   The fee for the license provided for herein shall be $10.
(2000 Code, § 10-301)
CHAPTER 113: BUSINESS ENTERPRISE
Section
   
113.01   Building moving; regulation
   
113.02   Building moving; deposit
   
113.03   Fireworks vendor; regulation
§ 113.01 BUILDING MOVING; REGULATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to move or
dismantle any building or structure within the municipality without a written
permit to do so. Application may be made to the Municipal Clerk and shall
include the location of the building to be moved, the proposed route, the
equipment to be used and such other information as the governing body may
require. The Municipal Clerk shall refer the said application to the governing
body for approval of the proposed route over which the said building is to be
moved. Upon approval of the governing body, the Municipal Clerk shall then
issue the said permit; provided, that a good and sufficient corporate surety
bond, check or cash in an amount set by motion of the governing body and
conditioned upon moving said building without doing damage to any private or
municipal property is filed with the Municipal Clerk prior to the granting of
any permit. In the event it will be necessary for any licensed building mover
to interfere with the telephone or telegraph poles and wires or a gas line, the
company or companies owning, using or operating the said poles, wires or line
shall, upon proper notice of at least 24 hours, be present and assist by
disconnecting the said poles, wires or line relative to the building moving
operation. All expense of the said disconnection, removal or related work shall
be paid in advance by the licensee unless such disconnection or work is
furnished on different terms as provided in the said company’s franchise.
Whenever the moving of any building necessitates interference with a water
main, sewer main, pipes or wire belonging to the municipality, notice in
writing of the time and route of the said building moving operation shall be
given to the various municipal officials in charge of the municipal utility
departments who shall proceed in behalf of the municipality and at the expense
of the mover to make such disconnections and do such work as is necessary.
(2000 Code, § 10-501) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.02 BUILDING MOVING; DEPOSIT.
   At such time as the building moving has been completed, the municipal police
shall inspect the premise and report to the Municipal Clerk as to the extent of
damages, if any, resulting from the said relocation and whether any municipal
ordinances have been violated during the said operation. Upon a satisfactory
report from the municipal police, the Municipal Clerk shall return the
corporate surety bond, cash or check deposited by the applicant. In the event
the basement, foundation or portion thereof is not properly filled, covered or
in a clean and sanitary condition, the governing body may apply the money
deposited for the purpose of defraying the expense of correcting the said
conditions. If the expense of correcting the hazardous condition is greater
than the amount of the deposit set by resolution of the governing body, as
required herein, the governing body may recover such excess expense by civil
suit or otherwise as prescribed by law.
(2000 Code, § 10-502) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.03 FIREWORKS VENDOR; REGULATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to sell fireworks of any
description whatsoever, except sparklers, Vesuvius fountains, spray fountains,
torches, color fire cones, star and comet type color aerial shells without
explosive charges for the purpose of making a noise, color wheels, toy cap
pistols and permissible caps may be sold at retail at all times; provided, that
all other fireworks named may be sold only between June 24 and July 5 both
inclusive and December 28 and January 1 both inclusive; provided, that
fireworks of any description are permissible for purposes of public exhibitions
or displays as authorized by the governing body; and further provided that said
vendor shall secure a license prior to such sales. Application shall be filed
with the Municipal Clerk upon forms supplied by the municipality and requesting
such information and documents as the governing body may deem necessary as to
whether or not to grant said license. Upon the determination to grant the
license, the governing body shall direct the Municipal Clerk to collect the
appropriate fee and issue said license. Any license so issued may be revoked at
any time by the governing body upon proper notice and hearing if one is
requested by the licensee.
(Neb. RS 17-137, 28-1241 through 28-1252) (2000 Code, § 10-503) (Ord. 557,
passed 11-21-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 114: LOTTERY
Section
   
114.01   Establish and conduct a lottery
   
114.02   Sales outlet locations; approval required; qualification standards
   
114.03   Participation; restrictions
§ 114.01 ESTABLISH AND CONDUCT A LOTTERY.
   The city shall establish and conduct a lottery as permitted under the
Nebraska County and City Lottery Act for the purpose of community betterment as
defined in the Act.
(Ord. 611, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 114.02 SALES OUTLET LOCATIONS; APPROVAL REQUIRED; QUALIFICATION STANDARDS.
   (A)   The lottery operator with whom the governing body contracts to conduct
its lottery shall not operate the lottery at a sales outlet location other than
the location of the lottery operator without prior approval of the sales outlet
location by the governing body. The governing body shall approve or disapprove
each sales outlet location and individual, sole proprietorship, partnership,
limited liability company, or corporation which desires to conduct the lottery
at its sales outlet location solely on the basis of the qualification standards
prescribed in division (B) of this section.
   (B)   Any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, limited liability
company, or corporation which seeks to have its location approved as an
authorized sales outlet location shall:
      (1)   Obtain a retail liquor license for consumption on the premises
pursuant to Neb. RS Chapter 53, Article 1;
      (2)   Not have been convicted of, forfeited bond upon a charge of, or
pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to any offense or crime, whether a felony or
a misdemeanor, involving any gambling activity or fraud, theft, willful failure
to make required payments or reports, or filing false reports with a
governmental agency at any level;
      (3)   Not have been convicted of, forfeited bond upon a charge of, or
pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to any felony other than those described in
division (B)(2) within the 10 years preceding the filing of the application;
      (4)   Not have had a gaming license revoked or canceled under the
Nebraska Bingo Act, the Nebraska County and City Lottery Act, the Nebraska
Lottery and Raffle Act or the Nebraska Pickle Card Lottery Act; and
      (5)   Be fit, willing, and able to properly provide the service proposed
in conformance with all provisions and requirements of the Nebraska County and
City Lottery Act and the rules and regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant
to the act.
   (C)   If the person seeking to have its location approved as an authorized
sales outlet location is a partnership, limited liability company, or
corporation, the qualification standards shall apply to every partner of such
partnership, every member of such limited liability company, every officer of
such corporation, and every stockholder owning more than 10% of the stock of
such corporation.
   (D)   The municipality shall notify the Department of Revenue of all
approved lottery locations within 30 days of approval.
(Ord. 612, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 114.03 PARTICIPATION; RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No person under 19 years of age shall play or participate in any way
in the lottery established and conducted by the municipality.
   (B)   No owner or officer of a lottery operator with whom the municipality
contracts to conduct its lottery shall play the lottery conducted by the
municipality. No employee or agent of the municipality, lottery operator, or
authorized sales outlet location shall play the lottery of the municipality for
which he or she performs work during such time as he or she is actually working
at such lottery or while on duty.
   (C)   Nothing shall prohibit the following persons from playing the lottery
conducted by the municipality as long as such person is 19 years of age or
older:
      (1)   Any member of the governing body, a municipal official or the
immediate family member of official;
      (2)   An owner or officer of an authorized sales outlet location for the
municipality.
   (D)   No person, or employee or agent of any person or municipality, shall
knowingly permit an individual under 19 years of age to play or participate in
any way in the lottery conducted by the municipality.
   (E)   For purposes of this section the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      IMMEDIATE FAMILY OF A MEMBER OF THE GOVERNING BODY OR A MUNICIPAL
OFFICIAL.
      (a)   A person who is related to the member or official by blood,
marriage, or adoption and resides in the same household; or
      (b)   A person who is claimed by the member or official, or the spouse of
the member or official, as a dependent for federal income tax purposes.
(Ord. 613, passed 11-18-2019)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   PROPERTY OFFENSES
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
      
134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
CHAPTER 130: PROPERTY OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Criminal mischief
   
130.02   Criminal trespass
   
130.03   Electrical interference
   
130.04   Injury to trees
   
130.05   Posting
   
130.06   Firecrackers
   
130.07   Removing dirt
   
130.08   Weed removal
§ 130.01 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   (A)   A person commits criminal mischief if he or she:
      (1)   Damages property of another intentionally or recklessly; or
      (2)   Intentionally tampers with property of another so as to endanger
person or property; or
      (3)   Intentionally or maliciously causes another to suffer pecuniary
loss by deception or threat.
   (B)   Criminal mischief is an offense:
      (1)   If the actor intentionally or maliciously causes pecuniary loss of
$500 or more but less than $5,000; or
      (2)   If the actor intentionally, maliciously, or recklessly causes
pecuniary loss in an amount of less than $500 or if his or her action results
in no pecuniary loss.
(Neb. RS 28-519) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.02 CRIMINAL TRESPASS.
   (A)   A person commits first degree criminal trespass if:
      (1)   He or she enters or secretly remains in any building or occupied
structure, or any separately secured or occupied portion thereof, knowing that
he or she is not licensed or privileged to do so; or
      (2)   He or she enters or remains in or on a public power infrastructure
facility knowing that he or she does not have the consent of a person who has
the right to give consent to be in or on the facility.
   (B)   First degree criminal trespass is a Class I misdemeanor.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, PUBLIC POWER INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY
means a power plant, an electrical station or substation, or any other facility
which is used by a public power supplier as defined in Neb. RS 70-2103 to
support the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity and which
is surrounded by a fence or is otherwise enclosed.
   (D)   (1)   A person commits second degree criminal trespass if, knowing
that he or she is not licensed or privileged to do so, to enter or remain in
any place as to which notice against trespass is given by:
         (a)   Actual communication to the actor; or
         (b)   Posting in a manner prescribed by law or reasonably likely to
come to the attention of intruders; or
         (c)   Fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to exclude
intruders, except as otherwise provided in division (C) of this section.
      (2)   A person commits second degree criminal trespass if, knowing that
he or she is not licensed or privileged to do so, he or she intentionally
causes an electronic device, such as an unmanned aircraft, to enter into, upon,
or above the property of another, including such property owned by such person
and leased or rented to another, with the intent to observe another person
without his or her consent in a place of solitude or seclusion.
      (3)   For purposes of this section, unmanned aircraft means an aircraft,
including an aircraft commonly known as a drone, which is operated without the
possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the aircraft.
      (4)   Second degree criminal trespass is a Class III misdemeanor, except
as provided for in division (D)(5) of this section.
      (5)   Second degree criminal trespass is a Class II misdemeanor if the
offender defies an order to leave personally communicated to him or her by the
owner of the premises or other authorized person.
(Ord. 675, passed 11-20-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 28-520 and Neb. RS 28-521
§ 130.03 ELECTRICAL INTERFERENCE.
   Any person operating, or causing to be operated, any motor, sign, or other
electrical apparatus that is connected with the light and power system shall
equip the apparatus with proper filtering attachments to eliminate
interference, provided that the provisions herein shall not apply to the use of
necessary medical equipment or apparatus where electrical interference cannot
be reasonably and safely eliminated. Any person who so operates or causes to be
operated any such electrical apparatus that interferes habitually with radio
and television reception shall be deemed to be guilty of an offense.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Provisions on nuisances, see Neb. RS 18-1720 and 28-1321
§ 130.04 INJURY TO TREES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person purposely or carelessly and without
lawful authority to cut down, carry away, injure, break down, or destroy any
fruit, ornamental, shade, or other tree or trees standing or growing on any
land belonging to another person or persons or on any public land in the
corporate limits. Any public service company desiring to trim or cut down any
tree, except on property owned and controlled by it, shall make an application
to the City Council to do so, and the written permit of the City Council in
accordance with their decision to allow such an action shall constitute the
only lawful authority on the part of the company to do so.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.05 POSTING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use the streets, sidewalks, or public
grounds of the city for signs, signposts, or the posting of handbills or
advertisements without written permission of the City Council.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.06 FIRECRACKERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite or cause to be exploded
fireworks or firecrackers of any description whatsoever except sparklers,
Vesuvius fountains, spray fountains, torches, color fire cones, star and comet
type color aerial shells without explosive charges for the purpose of making a
noise, color wheels, lady fingers not exceeding seven-eighths inch in length or
one-eighth inch in diameter and which do not contain more than one-half grain
each in weight of explosive material. Legal fireworks or firecrackers may only
be ignited and caused to be exploded from June 25 through July 2 between 8:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m., on July 3 and July 4 between 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight,
and between 6:00 p.m. on December 31 through 12:30 a.m. on January 1.
(Neb. RS 28-1241) (2000 Code, § 6-312) (Ord. 557, passed 11-21-2011; Ord. 575,
passed 9-16-2013; Ord. 598, passed 9-18-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.07 REMOVING DIRT.
   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to remove, disturb or take
away from any street, alley or public grounds any dirt, earth, stones or other
material forming a part of such street, alley or public grounds without first
having obtained written permission to do so from the governing body.
(2000 Code, § 6-321) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.08 WEED REMOVAL.
   It shall be the duty of every owner of real estate in the municipality to
cut and clear such real estate together with one-half of the streets and alleys
abutting thereon, of all weeds and worthless vegetation that are noxious,
obstruct travel on public ways or create a fire hazard. Subsequent to the
cutting of the said weeds, all loose vegetation shall be immediately removed.
Upon the failure of the owner, lessee or occupant having control of any such
real estate to cut and clear the said weeds and worthless vegetation, the
Village Marshal or Municipal Clerk shall serve notice on the said owner, lessee
or occupant to do so. In the event that the weeds and vegetation have not been
removed after a period of five days, the governing body may order the same to
be done under the direction of the Utilities Superintendent and the cost
thereof shall be chargeable to the property owner. If the owner fails to
reimburse the municipality after being properly billed, the cost may be
assessed against the real estate and the governing body shall have the
assessment certified to the County Treasurer and the same shall be collected in
the manner provided by law. In the event the property owner is a nonresident of
the county in which the property lies, the municipality shall, before levying
any special assessment against that property, send a copy of any notice
required by law to be published by means of certified mail, return receipt
requested to the last known address of the nonresident owner. The last known
address shall be that address listed on the current tax rolls at the time such
required notice was first published
(Neb. RS 17-563.01, 18-1719) (2000 Code, § 6-322) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
Section
   
131.01   Disorderly conduct
   
131.02   Street games
   
131.03   Obstruction of public ways
   
131.04   Obstructing water flow
   
131.05   Disturbing the peace
   
131.06   Radio interference
   
131.07   Loud noise
§ 131.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in conduct or behavior which
disturbs the peace and good order of the city by clamor or noise, intoxication,
drunkenness, fighting, or using obscene or profane language in the streets or
other public places or otherwise violating the public peace by indecent or
disorderly conduct or lewd or lascivious behavior.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to prevent disorderly conduct, see Neb. RS 17-129
   Authority to regulate noise, riots, and routs, see Neb. RS 17-556
§ 131.02 STREET GAMES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to play catch, bat a ball, or kick or
throw a football, or to engage in any exercise or sport, upon the city streets
and sidewalks. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit or prevent the
City Council from ordering from time to time certain streets and public places
blocked off for the purpose of providing a safe area to engage in such exercise
and sport.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Additional authority, see Neb. RS 17-555 and 17-557
   Authority to regulate excavation and obstruction of streets, see Neb. RS 17-
142
§ 131.03 OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WAYS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, maintain, or suffer to remain
on any street or public sidewalk a stand, wagon, display, or other obstruction
inconvenient to or inconsistent with the public use of the same.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Additional authority, see Neb. RS 17-555 and 17-557
   Authority to regulate excavation and obstruction of streets, see Neb. RS 17-
142
   Penalties for injuring or obstructing roads, see Neb. RS 39-301 and 39-302
§ 131.04 OBSTRUCTING WATER FLOW.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or obstruct the passage of water
in a street gutter, culvert, water pipe, or hydrant.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to abate nuisances, see Neb. RS 17-555
   Authority to prevent water obstruction, see Neb. RS 17-920
§ 131.05 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally to disturb the peace and
quiet of any person, family, or neighborhood.
(Neb. RS 28-1322) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.06 RADIO INTERFERENCE.
   Any person operating or causing to be operated any motor, sign or other
electrical apparatus that is connected with the light and power system shall
equip the apparatus with proper filtering attachments to eliminate
interference; provided, that the provisions herein shall not apply to the use
of necessary medical equipment or apparatus where electrical interference
cannot be reasonably and safely eliminated. Any person who so operates or
causes to be operated any such electrical apparatus that interferes habitually
with radio and television reception shall be deemed to be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Neb. RS 18-1720) (2000 Code, § 6-323) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.07 LOUD NOISE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any radio, tape player,
compact disc player, stereophonic sound system, or similar device which
reproduces or amplifies radio broadcast, or musical recordings, in or upon any
street, alley or other public place in such a manner as to be audible to other
persons more than 50 feet from the source. Persons operating such devices while
participating in licensed or permitted activities such as parades shall not be
deemed in violation of this section.
(2000 Code, § 6-331) (Ord. 496, passed 3-19-2001) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
132.01   Impersonating a public servant
   
132.02   Impersonating a peace officer
   
132.03   Refusing to aid a peace officer
   
132.04   Resisting arrest without the use of a deadly or dangerous weapon
   
132.05   Obstructing a peace officer
   
132.06   Interfering with firefighter
   
132.07   False reporting
§ 132.01 IMPERSONATING A PUBLIC SERVANT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person falsely to pretend to be a public
servant other than a peace officer and perform any act in that pretended
capacity. It is no defense that the office the actor pretended to hold did not
in fact exist.
(Neb. RS 28-609) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.02 IMPERSONATING A PEACE OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely pretend to be a peace officer
and perform any act in that pretended capacity.
(Neb. RS 28-610) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.03 REFUSING TO AID A PEACE OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, upon a request by a person known to him
or her to be a peace officer, unreasonably to refuse or fail to aid the peace
officer in:
   (A)   Apprehending any person charged with or convicted of any offense
against any of the laws of this state or city; or
   (B)   Securing the offender when apprehended; or
   (C)   Conveying the offender to the jail of the county or this city.
(Neb. RS 28-903) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.04 RESISTING ARREST WITHOUT THE USE OF A DEADLY OR DANGEROUS WEAPON.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the use of a deadly or
dangerous weapon, while intentionally preventing or attempting to prevent a
peace officer, acting under color of his or her official authority, from
effecting an arrest of the actor or another, to:
      (1)   Use or threaten to use physical force or violence against the peace
officer or another;
      (2)   Use any other means which creates a substantial risk of causing
physical injury to the peace officer or another; or
      (3)   Employ means requiring substantial force to overcome resistance to
effecting the arrest.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section if the
peace officer involved was out of uniform and did not identify himself or
herself as a peace officer by showing his or her credentials to the person
whose arrest is attempted.
(Neb. RS 28-904) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.05 OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of obstructing a peace officer when, by
using or threatening to use violence, force, physical interference, or
obstacle, he or she intentionally obstructs, impairs, or hinders:
      (1)   The enforcement of the penal law or the preservation of the peace
by a peace officer or judge acting under color of his or her official
authority; or
      (2)   A police animal assisting a peace officer acting pursuant to the
peace officer's official authority.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, POLICE ANIMAL means a horse or dog owned
or controlled by the state or any county, city, or village for the purpose of
assisting a peace officer acting pursuant to his or her official authority.
(Neb. RS 28-906) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.06 INTERFERING WITH FIREFIGHTER.
   A person commits the offense of interfering with a firefighter if at any
time and place where any firefighter is discharging or attempting to discharge
any official duties, the person willfully:
   (A)   Resists or interferes with the lawful efforts of any firefighter in
the discharge or attempt to discharge an official duty;
   (B)   Disobeys the lawful orders given by any firefighter while performing
his or her duties;
   (C)   Engages in any disorderly conduct which delays or prevents a fire from
being extinguished within a reasonable time; or
   (D)   Forbids or prevents others from assisting or extinguishing a fire, or
exhorts another person, as to whom he or she has no legal right or obligation
to protect or control, not to assist in extinguishing a fire.
(Neb. RS 28-908) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.07 FALSE REPORTING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Furnish material information he or she knows to be false to any
peace officer or other official with the intent to instigate an investigation
of an alleged criminal matter or impede the investigation of an actual criminal
matter;
      (2)   Furnish information he or she knows to be false alleging the
existence of the need for the assistance of an emergency medical service or
out-of-hospital emergency care provider or an emergency in which human life or
property are in jeopardy to any hospital, emergency medical service, or other
person or governmental agency;
      (3)   Furnish any information, or cause information to be furnished or
conveyed by electric, electronic, telephonic, or mechanical means, knowing the
same to be false concerning the need for assistance of a fire department or any
personnel or equipment of such a department;
      (4)   Furnish any information he or she knows to be false concerning the
location of any explosive in any building or other property to any person; or
      (5)   Furnish material information he or she knows to be false to any
governmental department or agency with the intent to instigate an investigation
or to impede an ongoing investigation and which actually results in causing or
impeding the investigation.
   (B)   A person who violates this section commits the offense of false
reporting.
(Neb. RS 28-907) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
   
133.01   Maintaining a nuisance
   
133.02   Appliances in yard
   
133.03   Putting carcass or filthy substance into well, spring, brook, or
stream
   
133.04   Prohibited fences
   
133.05   Littering
   
133.06   Raising or producing stagnant water
Substance Offenses
   
133.20   Use of tobacco by minors
   
133.21   Sale of tobacco to minors
   
133.22   Possession of tobacco by minors
   
133.23   Misrepresentation by minor to obtain alcohol
   
133.24   Minors; prohibited acts involving alcoholic liquor
   
133.25   Drinking on public property; open beverage container
Motor Vehicle and Highway Offenses
   
133.40   Abandoned automobiles
   
133.41   Unlicensed or inoperable vehicles
Weapons Offenses
   
133.60   Discharge of firearms
   
133.61   Slingshots, air guns, BB guns
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 133.01 MAINTAINING A NUISANCE.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of maintaining a nuisance if he or she
erects, keeps up or continues, and maintains any nuisance to the injury of any
part of the citizens of this city.
   (B)   The erecting, continuing, using, or maintaining of any building,
structure, or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment,
manufacture, or other business which, by occasioning noxious exhalations,
noisome or offensive smells, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health,
comfort, or property of individuals or the public; the obstructing or impeding,
without legal authority, of the passage of any navigable river, harbor, or
collection of water; or the corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure of
any watercourse, stream, or water; or unlawfully diverting any such watercourse
from its natural course or state to the injury or prejudice of others; and the
obstructing or encumbering by fences, building, structures or otherwise of any
of the public highways or streets or alleys of the city, shall be deemed
nuisances.
   (C)   A person guilty of erecting, continuing, using, maintaining, or
causing any such nuisance shall be guilty of a violation of this section and in
every such case the offense shall be construed and held to have been committed
in any county whose inhabitants are or have been injured or aggrieved thereby.
   (D)   The court, in case of conviction of such offense, shall order every
such nuisance to be abated or removed.
(Neb. RS 28-1321) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.02 APPLIANCES IN YARD.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a refrigerator, icebox,
freezer, or any other dangerous appliance to be in the open and accessible to
children whether on private or public property unless the person first removes
all doors and makes the same reasonably safe.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to prohibit nuisances within zoning jurisdiction, see Neb. RS 18-
1720
§ 133.03 PUTTING CARCASS OR FILTHY SUBSTANCE INTO WELL, SPRING, BROOK, OR
STREAM.
   Whoever shall put any dead animal, carcass or part thereof, or other filthy
substance into any well, or into any spring, brook, or branch of running water,
of which use is made for domestic purposes, shall be guilty of an offense.
(Neb. RS 28-1304) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.04 PROHIBITED FENCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, or cause to be erected, and
maintain any barbed wire or electric fence within the corporate limits, where
the fence abuts a public sidewalk, street, or alley.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Restrictions on barbed wire fences, see Neb. RS 39-307
§ 133.05 LITTERING.
   (A)   Any person who deposits, throws, discards, or otherwise disposes of
any litter on any public or private property or in any waters commits the
offense of littering unless:
      (1)   The property is an area designated by law for the disposal of that
type of material and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to
so use the property; or
      (2)   The litter is placed in a receptacle or container installed on the
property for that purpose.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LITTER. Includes all waste material susceptible of being dropped,
deposited, discarded, or otherwise disposed of by any person upon any property
in the state, but does not include wastes of primary processes of farming or
manufacturing.
      WASTE MATERIAL. Any material appearing in a place or in a context not
associated with that material’s function or origin.
   (C)   Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any
motor vehicle or watercraft in violation of this section, the operator of the
motor vehicle or watercraft commits the offense of littering.
(Neb. RS 28-523) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.06 RAISING OR PRODUCING STAGNANT WATER.
   Whoever shall build, erect, continue, or keep up any dam or other
obstruction in any river or stream of water in the city and thereby raise an
artificial pond, or produce stagnant waters, which shall be manifestly
injurious to the public health and safety shall be guilty of an offense and the
court shall, moreover, order every such nuisance to be abated or removed.
(Neb. RS 28-1303) Penalty, see §
10.99
SUBSTANCE OFFENSES
§ 133.20 USE OF TOBACCO BY MINORS.
   Whoever, being a minor under the age of 18, years shall smoke cigarettes or
cigars, use vapor products or alternative nicotine products, or use tobacco in
any form whatever in this city, shall be guilty of an offense. Any minor
charged with a violation of this section may be free from prosecution if he or
she furnishes evidence for the conviction of the person or persons selling or
giving him or her the cigarettes, cigars, vapor products, alternative nicotine
products, or tobacco.
(Neb. RS 28-1418) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.21 SALE OF TOBACCO TO MINORS.
   Whoever shall sell, give, or furnish in any way any tobacco in any form
whatever, or any cigarettes or cigarette paper, vapor products, or alternative
nicotine products, to any minor under 18 years of age is guilty of an offense.
(Neb. RS 28-1419) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.22 POSSESSION OF TOBACCO BY MINORS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to
possess any tobacco products; provided that the possession by a person under
the age of 18 years under the direct supervision of the parent or guardian of
such person in the privacy of the parent’s or guardian’s home shall not be
prohibited.
   (B)   Exceptions: it shall not be unlawful for any person under the age of
18 years to:
      (1)   Sell or handle any unopened container of tobacco products in the
course of his or her employment; or
      (2)   Carry any unopened container of tobacco products from a licensed
establishment when he or she is accompanied by a person not a minor.
   (C)   TOBACCO PRODUCTS shall be defined to mean any substance containing
tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco,
snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco.
(2000 Code, § 6-326) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.23 MISREPRESENTATION BY MINOR TO OBTAIN ALCOHOL.
   No minor, as defined by Neb. RS 53-103.23, shall obtain, or attempt to
obtain, alcoholic liquor by misrepresentation of age, or by any other method,
in any tavern or other place where alcoholic liquor is sold.
(Neb. RS 53-180.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Penalty for manufacturing false identification intended for minors, see Neb.
RS 53-180.05
§ 133.24 MINORS; PROHIBITED ACTS INVOLVING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, the definitions found in Neb. RS 53-
103.01 through 53-103.42 shall apply, including, but not limited to, the
definitions of the terms “alcoholic liquor,” “consume,” “minor,” “sale,” and
“to sell.”
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in §
110.20, no minor may sell, dispense, consume, or have in his or her possession
or physical control any alcoholic liquor in any tavern or in any other place,
including public streets, alleys, roads, or highways, upon property owned by
the state or any subdivision thereof, or inside any vehicle while in or on any
other place, including, but not limited to, the public streets, alleys, roads,
or highways, or upon property owned by the state or any subdivision thereof,
except that a minor may consume, possess, or have physical control of alcoholic
liquor as a part of a bona fide religious rite, ritual, or ceremony or in his
or her permanent place of residence.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to
transport, consume, or knowingly possess or have under his or her control beer
or other alcoholic liquor in or transported by any motor vehicle.
(Neb. RS 53-180.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Minor Alcoholic Liquor Liability Act, see Neb. RS 53-401 through 53-409
§ 133.25 DRINKING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY; OPEN BEVERAGE CONTAINER.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.
         (a)   Beer, ale, porter, stout, and other similar fermented beverages,
including sake or similar products, of any name or description, containing 0.5%
or more of alcohol by volume, brewed or produced from malt, wholly or in part,
or from any substitute therefor;
         (b)   Wine of not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume; or
         (c)   Distilled spirits, which is that substance known as ethyl
alcohol, ethanol, or spirits of wine in any form, including all dilutions and
mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
         (d)   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE does not include trace amounts not readily
consumable as a beverage.
      HIGHWAY. A road or street including the entire area within the right-of-
way.
      LIMOUSINE. A luxury vehicle used to provide prearranged passenger
transportation on a dedicated basis at a premium fare that has a seating
capacity of at least five and no more than 14 persons behind the driver with a
physical partition separating the driver seat from the passenger compartment.
LIMOUSINE does not include taxicabs, hotel or airport buses or shuttles, or
buses.
      OPEN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTAINER. Except as provided in Neb. RS 53-
123.04(3) and 53-123.11(1)(c), any bottle, can, or other receptacle:
         (a)   That contains any amount of alcoholic beverage; and
         (b)   (i)   That is open or has a broken seal; or
            (ii)   The contents of which are partially removed.
      PASSENGER AREA. The area designed to seat the driver and passengers while
the motor vehicle is in operation and any area that is readily accessible to
the driver or a passenger while in their seating positions, including any
compartments in the area. PASSENGER AREA does not include the area behind the
last upright seat of the motor vehicle if the area is not normally occupied by
the driver or a passenger and the motor vehicle is not equipped with a trunk.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is unlawful for any
person in the passenger area of a motor vehicle to possess an open alcoholic
beverage container while the motor vehicle is located in a public parking area
or on any highway in this city.
   (C)   Except as provided in §
110.03 or division (D) of this section, it is unlawful for any person to
consume an alcoholic beverage:
      (1)   In a public parking area or on any highway in this city; or
      (2)   Inside a motor vehicle while in a public parking area or on any
highway in this city.
   (D)   This section does not apply to persons who are passengers of, but not
drivers of, a limousine or bus being used in a charter or special party service
as defined by rules and regulations adopted and promulgated by the state Public
Service Commission and subject to Neb. Admin. Code, Chapter 75, Article 3. Such
passengers may possess open alcoholic beverage containers and may consume
alcoholic beverages while such limousine or bus is in a public parking area or
on any highway in this city if:
      (1)   The driver of the limousine or bus is prohibited from consuming
alcoholic liquor; and
      (2)   Alcoholic liquor is not present in any area that is readily
accessible to the driver while in the driver’s seat, including any compartments
in such area.
(Neb. RS 60-6,211.08)
Penalty, see §
10.99
MOTOR VEHICLE AND HIGHWAY OFFENSES
§ 133.40 ABANDONED AUTOMOBILES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ABANDONED VEHICLE.
         (a)   A motor vehicle is an ABANDONED VEHICLE:
            (i)   If left unattended, with no license plates or valid In
Transit stickers issued pursuant to the Motor Vehicle Registration Act affixed
thereto, for more than six hours on any public property;
            (ii)   If left unattended for more than 24 hours on any public
property, except a portion thereof on which parking is legally permitted;
            (iii)   If left unattended for more than 48 hours, after the
parking of such vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of any public
property on which parking is legally permitted;
            (iv)   If left unattended for more than seven days on private
property if left initially without permission of the owner, or after permission
of the owner is terminated;
            (v)   If left for more than 30 days in the custody of a city law
enforcement agency after the agency has sent a letter to the last-registered
owner and lienholder under division (D) of this section; or
            (vi)   If removed from private property by the city pursuant to a
city ordinance or this code.
         (b)   An all-terrain vehicle or minibike is an ABANDONED VEHICLE:
            (i)   If left unattended for more than 24 hours on any public
property, except a portion thereof on which parking is legally permitted;
            (ii)   If left unattended for more than 48 hours, after the parking
of such vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of any public property
on which parking is legally permitted;
            (iii)   If left unattended for more than seven days on private
property if left initially without permission of the owner, or after permission
of the owner is terminated;
            (iv)   If left for more than 30 days in the custody of a city law
enforcement agency after the agency has sent a letter to the last-registered
owner and lienholder under division (D) of this section; or
            (v)   If removed from private property by the city pursuant to a
city ordinance or this code.
         (c)   A MOBILE HOME is an abandoned vehicle if left in place on
private property for more than 30 days after a local governmental unit,
pursuant to an ordinance or resolution, has sent a certified letter to each of
the last-registered owners and posted a notice on the mobile home, stating that
the mobile home is subject to sale or auction or vesting of title as set forth
in Neb. RS 60- 1903.
         (d)   No motor vehicle subject to forfeiture under Neb. RS 28-431
shall be an ABANDONED VEHICLE under this section.
      MOBILE HOME. A movable or portable dwelling constructed to be towed on
its own chassis, connected to utilities, and designed with or without a
permanent foundation for year-round living. It may consist of one or more units
that can be telescoped when towed and expanded later for additional capacity,
or of two or more units, separately towable but designed to be joined into one
integral unit, and shall include a manufactured home as defined in Neb. RS 71-
4603. MOBILE HOME does not include a mobile home or manufactured home for which
an affidavit of affixture has been recorded pursuant to Neb. RS 60-169.
      PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any privately owned property which is not included
within the definition of public property.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, or park
or other state, county, or city-owned property.
   (B)   If an abandoned vehicle, at the time of abandonment, has no license
plates of the current year or valid In Transit stickers issued pursuant to Neb.
RS 60-376 affixed and is of a wholesale value, taking into consideration the
condition of the vehicle, of $500 or less, title shall immediately vest in the
city. Any certificate of title issued under this division to the city shall be
issued at no cost to the city.
   (C)   (1)   Except for vehicles governed by division (B) of this section,
the city shall make an inquiry concerning the last-registered owner of such
vehicle as follows:
         (a)   Abandoned vehicle with license plates affixed, to the
jurisdiction which issued such license plates; or
         (b)   Abandoned vehicle with no license plates affixed, to the
Department of Motor Vehicles.
      (2)   The city shall notify the last-registered owner, if any, and any
lienholder, if any, within 15 business days that the vehicle in question has
been determined to be an abandoned vehicle and that, if unclaimed, either:
         (a)   It will be sold or will be offered at public auction after five
days from the date such notice was mailed; or
         (b)   Title will vest in the city 30 days after the date such notice
was mailed.
      (3)   If the agency described in division (C)(1)(a) or (b) of this
section also notifies the city that a lien or mortgage exists, such notice
shall also be sent to the lienholder or mortgagee. Any person claiming such
vehicle shall be required to pay the cost of removal and storage of such
vehicle.
      (4)   Title to an abandoned vehicle, if unclaimed, shall vest in the
city:
         (a)   Five days after the date the notice is mailed if the vehicle
will be sold or offered at public auction under division (C)(2)(a) of this
section;
         (b)   Thirty days after the date the notice is mailed if the city will
retain the vehicle; or
         (c)   If the last-registered owner cannot be ascertained, when notice
of such fact is received.
      (5)   After title to the abandoned vehicle vests pursuant to division (C)
(4) of this section, the city may retain for use, sell, or auction the
abandoned vehicle. If the city has determined that the vehicle should be
retained for use, the city shall, at the same time that the notice, if any, is
mailed, publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction an
announcement that the city intends to retain the abandoned vehicle for its use
and that title will vest in the city 30 days after the publication.
   (D)   (1)   If a city law enforcement agency has custody of a motor vehicle
for investigatory purposes and has no further need to keep it in custody, it
shall send a certified letter to each of the last- registered owners, if any,
and lienholders, if any, within 15 calendar days stating that the vehicle is in
the custody of the law enforcement agency, that the vehicle is no longer needed
for law enforcement purposes, and that after 30 days the agency will dispose of
the vehicle.
      (2)   This division (D) shall not apply to motor vehicles subject to
forfeiture under Neb. RS 28-431.
      (3)   No storage fees shall be assessed against the registered owner of a
motor vehicle held in custody for investigatory purposes under this division
(D) unless the registered owner or the person in possession of the vehicle when
it is taken into custody is charged with a felony or misdemeanor related to the
offense for which the law enforcement agency took the vehicle into custody. If
a registered owner or the person in possession of the vehicle when it is taken
into custody is charged with a felony or misdemeanor but is not convicted, the
registered owner shall be entitled to a refund of the storage fees.
   (E)   (1)   A law enforcement agency is authorized to remove an abandoned or
trespassing vehicle from private property upon the request of the private
property owner on whose property the vehicle is located and upon information
indicating that the vehicle is an abandoned or trespassing vehicle. After
removal, the law enforcement agency with custody of the vehicle shall follow
the procedures in Neb. RS 60-1902 and 60-1903.
      (2)   A law enforcement agency is authorized to contact a private towing
service in order to remove an abandoned or trespassing vehicle from private
property upon the request of the private property owner on whose property the
vehicle is located and upon information indicating that the vehicle is an
abandoned or trespassing vehicle. A vehicle towed away under this division is
subject to Neb. RS 52-601.01 to 52-605 and 60-2410 by the private towing
service which towed the vehicle.
      (3)   A private property owner is authorized to remove or cause the
removal of an abandoned or trespassing vehicle from such property and may
contact a private towing service for such removal. A private towing service
that tows the vehicle shall notify, within 24 hours, the designated law
enforcement agency in the jurisdiction from which the vehicle is removed and
provide the registration plate number, the vehicle identification number, if
available, the make, model, and color of the vehicle, and the name of the
private towing service and the location, if applicable, where the private
towing service is storing the vehicle. A vehicle towed away under this division
(E) is subject to Neb. RS 52-601.01 to 52-605 and 60-2410 by the private towing
service that towed the vehicle.
      (4)   For purposes of this section, a trespassing vehicle is a vehicle
that is parked without permission on private property that is not typically
made available for public parking.
   (F)   If a state agency caused an abandoned vehicle described in division
(A)(a)(v) or (A)(b)(iv) of this section to be removed from public property in
this city, the state agency shall be entitled to custody of the vehicle. If a
state agency caused an abandoned vehicle described in division (A)(a)(i), (ii),
(iii), or (iv) or (A)(b)(i), (ii), or (iii) of this section to be removed from
public property in this city, the state agency shall deliver the vehicle to the
city which shall have custody.
   (G)   Any proceeds from the sale of an abandoned vehicle in the city's
custody less any expenses incurred by the city shall be held by the city
without interest, for the benefit of the owner or lienholders of such vehicle
for a period of two years. If not claimed within such two-year period, the
proceeds shall be paid into the general fund of the city.
   (H)   Neither the owner, owner's agent, owner's employee, lessee, nor
occupant of the premises from which any abandoned vehicle is removed, nor the
city, shall be liable for any loss or damage to such vehicle which occurs
during its removal or while in the possession of the city or its contractual
agent, while in the possession of a private towing service, or as a result of
any subsequent disposition.
   (I)   No person shall cause any vehicle to be an abandoned vehicle as
described in division (A)(a)(i), (ii), (iii), or (iv) or (A)(b)(i), (ii), or
(iii) of this section.
   (J)   No person other than one authorized by the city or appropriate state
agency shall destroy, deface, or remove any part of a vehicle which is left
unattended on a highway or other public place without license plates affixed or
which is abandoned. Anyone violating this division shall be guilty of an
offense.
   (K)   The last-registered owner of an abandoned vehicle shall be liable to
the city for the costs of removal and storage of such vehicle.
   (L)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of
an offense.
(Ord. 641, passed 2-22-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Motor Vehicle Registration Act, see Neb. RS 60-301
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 60-1901 through Neb. RS 60-1903, Neb. RS 60-
1903.01, Neb. RS 60-1903.02, Neb. RS 60-1904 through Neb. RS 60-1909 and Neb.
RS 60-1911
§ 133.41 UNLICENSED OR INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person in charge or control of any property within the city, other
than city property, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise,
shall allow any partially dismantled, inoperable, wrecked, junked, or discarded
vehicle to remain on that property longer than 30 days.
   (B)   No unlicensed vehicle shall be permitted to remain on any private or
public property for any length of time, provided that this section shall not
apply to the following:
      (1)   A vehicle bearing a valid “In Transit” sticker;
      (2)   A vehicle in an enclosed building;
      (3)   A vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a
lawful place and manner when the vehicle is necessary to the lawful operation
of the business; or
      (4)   A vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained
in a lawful place and manner by the city.
   (C)   Any vehicle allowed to remain on property in violation of this section
shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated, and any person violating this
section shall be guilty of an offense.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   “In Transit” stickers, see Neb. RS 60-376
WEAPONS OFFENSES
§ 133.60 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, except an officer of the law in the
discharge of official duty, to fire or discharge any gun, pistol, or other
fowling piece within the city, except that nothing in this section shall be
construed to apply to officially sanctioned public celebrations if the persons
so discharging firearms have written permission from the City Council.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 17-556
§ 133.61 SLINGSHOTS, AIR GUNS, BB GUNS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a slingshot, air gun, BB
gun, or the like loaded with rock or other dangerous missiles at any time or
under any circumstances within the city.
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
Section
   
134.01   Prostitution
   
134.02   Public indecency
   
134.03   Gambling
§ 134.01 PROSTITUTION.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, any person who
performs, offers, or agrees to perform any act of sexual contact or sexual
penetration, as those terms are defined in Neb. RS 28-318, with any person not
his or her spouse, in exchange for money or other thing of value, commits the
offense of prostitution.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that
such person was a trafficking victim as defined in Neb. RS 28-830.
   (C)   If the law enforcement officer determines, after a reasonable
detention for investigative purposes, that a person suspected of or charged
with a violation of division (A) of this section is:
      (1)   A person engaging in those acts as a direct result of being a
trafficking victim as defined in Neb. RS 28-830, such person shall be immune
from prosecution for a prostitution offense; or
      (2)   A person under 18 years of age, such person shall be immune from
prosecution for a prostitution offense under this section and shall be subject
to temporary custody under Neb. RS 43-248 and further disposition under the
Nebraska Juvenile Code. A law enforcement officer who takes a person under 18
years of age into custody under this section shall immediately report an
allegation of a violation of Neb. RS 28-831 to the Department of Health and
Human Services which shall commence an investigation within 24 hours under the
Child Protection and Family Safety Act.
(Neb. RS 28-801) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.02 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   A person, 18 years of age or over, commits the offense of public indecency
if such person performs or procures, or assists any other person to perform, in
a public place and where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by
members of the public:
   (A)   An act of sexual penetration as defined in Neb. RS 28-318;
   (B)   An exposure of the genitals of the body done with intent to affront or
alarm any person; or
   (C)   A lewd fondling or caressing of the body of another person of the same
or opposite sex.
(Neb. RS 28-806) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.03 GAMBLING.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the definitions found in Neb. RS 28-
1101 shall be used.
   (B)   A person commits the offense of promoting gambling if he or she
knowingly:
      (1)   Advances or profits from any unlawful gambling activity by:
         (a)   Engaging in bookmaking;
         (b)   Receiving, in connection with any unlawful gambling scheme or
enterprise, any amount of money played in the scheme or enterprise in any one
day; or
         (c)   Betting something of value in an amount of $500 or more with one
or more persons in one day; or
(Neb. RS 28-1102 and 28-1103)
      (2)   Participates in unlawful gambling as a player by betting less than
$500 in any one day.
(Neb. RS 28-1104)
   (C)   (1)   A person commits the offense of possession of a gambling device
if he or she manufactures, sells, transports, places, possesses, or conducts or
negotiates any transaction affecting or designed to affect ownership, custody,
or use of any gambling device, knowing that it shall be used in the advancement
of unlawful gambling activity.
      (2)   This division shall not apply to any coin-operated mechanical
gaming device, computer gaming device, electronic gaming device, or video
gaming device which has the capability of awarding free games, which is
intended to be played and is in fact played for amusement only, and which may
allow the player the right to replay such gaming device at no additional cost,
which right to replay shall not be considered money or property, except that
such mechanical game:
         (a)   Can be discharged of accumulated free replays only by
reactivating the game for one additional play for each accumulated free replay;
and
         (b)   Makes no permanent record directly or indirectly of free replays
so awarded.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division, any
mechanical game or device classified by the federal government as an illegal
gambling device and requiring a federal Gambling Device Tax Stamp as required
by the Internal Revenue Service in its administration of 26 U.S.C. 4461 and
4462, amended July 1, 1965, by Public Law 89-44, are hereby declared to be
illegal and excluded from the exemption granted in this division.
(Neb. RS 28-1107)
   (D)   In any prosecution under this section, it shall be an affirmative
defense that the writing, paper, instrument, or article possessed by the
defendant was neither used nor intended to be used in the advancement of an
unlawful gambling activity.
(Neb. RS 28-1108)
   (E)   Proof of possession of any gambling device shall be prima facie
evidence of possession thereof with knowledge of its contents and character.
(Neb. RS 28-1109)
   (F)   It shall be no defense to a prosecution under any provision of this
section relating to gambling that the gambling is conducted outside this city
and is not in violation of the laws of the jurisdiction in which it is
conducted.
(Neb. RS 28-1110)
   (G)   In addition to any other penalty, a sentencing court may order that
any money, securities, negotiable instruments, firearms, conveyances, or
electronic communication devices as defined in Neb. RS 28-833 or any equipment,
components, peripherals, software, hardware, or accessories related to
electronic communication devices, or any gambling devices be forfeited as a
part of the sentence imposed if it finds by clear and convincing evidence
adduced at a separate hearing in the same prosecution, conducted pursuant to
Neb. RS 28-1601, that any or all such property was derived from, used, or
intended to be used to facilitate a violation of this section.
(Neb. RS 28-1111)
   (H)   In any prosecution for an offense defined in this section, when the
defendant's status as a player constitutes an excusing condition, the fact that
the defendant was a player shall constitute an affirmative defense.
(Neb. RS 28-1112)
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to:
      (1)   Apply to or prohibit wagering on the results of horseraces by the
parimutuel or certificate method when conducted by licensees within the
racetrack enclosure at licensed horserace meetings; or
      (2)   Prohibit or punish the conducting or participating in any bingo,
lottery by the sale of pickle cards, lottery, raffle, or gift enterprise when
conducted in accordance with the Nebraska Bingo Act, the Nebraska County and
City Lottery Act, the Nebraska Lottery and Raffle Act, the Nebraska Pickle Card
Lottery Act, the Nebraska Small Lottery and Raffle Act, the State Lottery Act,
or Neb. RS 9-701.
(Neb. RS 28-1113)
   (J)   In any prosecution under this section in which it is necessary to
prove the occurrence of a sporting event, a published report of its occurrence
in any daily newspaper, magazine, or other periodically printed publication of
general circulation shall be admissible in evidence and shall constitute prima
facie evidence of the occurrence of the event.
(Neb. RS 28-1117) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
      
152.   SUBDIVISIONS AND ADDITIONS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Building Inspector; power and authority
   
150.02   Building Inspector; right of entry
   
150.03   Building Inspector; building permits
   
150.04   Expiration of building permits
   
150.05   Fees
   
150.06   Contractors
   
150.07   Barricades and lights
   
150.08   Duplicate to County Assessor
Codes Adopted
   
150.20   Building Code
   
150.21   Housing Code
   
150.22   Plumbing Code
   
150.23   Electrical Code
Unsafe Buildings
   
150.35   Definition
   
150.36   Prohibition
   
150.37   Determination and notice
   
150.38   Hearing and appeal
   
150.39   Emergency
   
150.40   Special assessments
   
150.41   Removal of notice or denial of access
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 BUILDING INSPECTOR; POWER AND AUTHORITY.
   The Building Inspector shall be the municipal official who shall have the
duty of enforcing all building and housing regulations as herein prescribed. He
or she shall inspect all buildings repaired, altered, built or moved in the
municipality as often as necessary to insure compliance with all municipal
ordinances. He or she shall have the power and authority to order all work
stopped on any construction, alteration or relocation which violates any
provisions prescribed herein. He or she shall issue permission to continue any
construction, alteration or relocation when he or she is satisfied that no
provision will be violated. If the stop order is an oral one, it shall be
followed by a written stop order within one hour. Such written order may be
served by the Building Inspector or any law enforcement with jurisdiction
within the municipality. In the event that the Planning Commission fails to
appoint a Building Inspector, the Utilities Superintendent shall be the
Building Inspector ex officio.
(2000 Code, § 9-101)
§ 150.02 BUILDING INSPECTOR, RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow the Building
Inspector entry into any building or structure where the work of construction,
alteration, repair or relocation is taking place for the purpose of making
official inspections at any reasonable hour.
(2000 Code, § 9-102) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.03 BUILDING INSPECTOR; BUILDING PERMITS.
   Any person desiring a building permit to commence or proceed to erect,
construct, perform any structural repair or relocate any building or dwelling
or cause the same to be done shall file with the governing body an application
therefor in writing on a form to be furnished by the Municipal Clerk for that
purpose. The application so filed with the governing body shall be checked and
examined and, if they are found to be in conformity with the requirements of
this chapter and all other ordinances applicable thereto, the governing body
shall authorize the Municipal Clerk to issue the said applicant a permit upon
the payment of the permit fee set by resolution of the governing body.
(Neb. RS 17-130 through 17-132) (2000 Code, § 9-103)
§ 150.04 EXPIRATION OF BUILDING PERMITS.
   All building permits shall expire one year after the same are approved by
the City Council, unless work is commenced thereon within said period and
further all work contemplated by a building permit must be completed within two
years after the date it is approved by the City Council or the applicant must
reapply for a new permit.
(2000 Code, § 9-104)
§ 150.05 FEES.
   The following fees shall be paid before consideration of the application
submitted or commencement of the hearing.
   (A)   Application for:
      (1)   Approval of plat (subdivision): $75;
      (2)   Change of zone, rezoning or amendment to zoning map: $25;
      (3)   Building permit: $25;
      (4)   Conditional use permit: $25; and
      (5)   Sign permit: $10.
   (B)   Appeal to Board of Adjustment: $25.
(2000 Code, § 9-105)
§ 150.06 CONTRACTORS.
   All building contractors operating in the jurisdiction of the municipality
shall be registered with the municipality. Each such contractor shall furnish
to the municipality a general liability insurance policy providing for coverage
of at least the following minimums: bodily injury: $100,000 for each person;
$300,000 for each accident for bodily injury; and $100,000 property damage for
each accident. Such policy shall provide that a 30-day written notice shall be
given to the Municipal Clerk in the event of expiration of or proposed
cancellation of such insurance policy. Failure of a contractor to register with
the municipality or keep proof of current insurance on file may result in the
suspension of the contractor’s registration and privilege to operate in the
municipality until such violations have been corrected to the satisfaction of
the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 9-106)
§ 150.07 BARRICADES AND LIGHTS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant or lessee causing the
construction, demolition or moving of any building or improvement within the
municipality to have during such work all excavations, open basements, building
materials and debris protected by suitable guards or barricades by day and by
warning lights at night.
   (B)   The failure, neglect or refusal of said persons to erect such guards
shall constitute a violation of this section and the Utilities Superintendent
shall stop all work until guards are erected and maintained as required.
(2000 Code, § 9-601) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.08 DUPLICATE TO COUNTY ASSESSOR.
   Whenever a building permit is issued for the erection, alteration, or repair
of any building within the city’s corporate limits or extraterritorial zoning
jurisdiction, if the improvement is $2,500 or more, a duplicate of the permit
shall be issued to the County Assessor.
(Ord. 651, passed 3-21-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see Neb. RS 18-1743
CODES ADOPTED
§ 150.20 BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for
safe and stable design, methods of construction and uses of materials in
buildings hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired,
relocated and converted, the International Building Code (IBC), 2000 edition,
the International Residential Code (IRC), 2000 edition, published by the
International Code Council, and the State Building Code adopted pursuant to
Neb. RS 71-6403 as amended, is hereby adopted by the city and are hereby
incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions as though printed
in full herein.
   (B)   One copy of the Building Code is on file at the office of the
Municipal Clerk and is available for public inspection at any reasonable time.
The provisions of the Building Code shall be controlling throughout the
Municipality and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.
(Neb. RS 18-132) (2000 Code, § 9-201) (Ord. 511, passed 11-17-2003)
§ 150.21 HOUSING CODE.
   (A)   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for
safe and stable design, methods of construction and uses of materials in houses
hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, relocated and
converted, the Basic Housing Code, as published by the Building Officials
Conference of America, Inc., printed in book or pamphlet form is hereby
incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions as though printed
in full herein.
   (B)   One copy of the Housing Code is on file at the office of the Municipal
Clerk and is available for public inspection at any reasonable time. The
provisions of the Housing Code shall be controlling throughout the Municipality
and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.
(Neb. RS 18-132, 18-2146) (2000 Code, § 9-301)
§ 150.22 PLUMBING CODE.
   (A)   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for
safe and stable installation, methods of connection and uses of materials in
the installation of plumbing and heating, the Uniform Plumbing Code, published
by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers and printed in book or pamphlet
form is hereby incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions as
though printed in full herein insofar as said code does not conflict with the
statutes of the state.
   (B)   One copy of the Plumbing Code is on file at the office of the
Municipal Clerk and is available for public inspection at any reasonable time.
The provisions of the Plumbing Code shall be controlling throughout the city
and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.
(Neb. RS 17-1001, 18-132) (2000 Code, § 9-401)
§ 150.23 ELECTRICAL CODE.
   (A)   The National Electric Code, as recommended by the National Board of
Fire Underwriters, printed in book or pamphlet form, in addition to all amended
editions as though printed in full herein are adopted to provide certain
minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe and fireproof
installation, methods of construction and uses of materials in the installation
of electrical wiring and appliances.
   (B)   One copy of the Electrical Code is on file at the office of the
Municipal Clerk and is available for public inspection at any reasonable time.
(Neb. RS 18-132) (2000 Code, § 9-501)
UNSAFE BUILDINGS
§ 150.35 DEFINITION.
   (A)   The term UNSAFE BUILDING as used in this subchapter is hereby defined
to mean and include any building, shed, fence or other human-made structure:
      (1)   Which is dangerous to the public health because of its condition
and which may cause or aid in the spread of disease or injury to the health of
the occupants of it or neighboring structures;
      (2)   Which because of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or
any other cause is especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire
hazard; and
      (3)   Which by reason of faulty construction or any other cause is liable
to cause injury or damage by the collapse or fall of all or any part of such
structure.
   (B)   Any such unsafe building in the municipality is hereby declared to be
a nuisance.
(2000 Code, § 9-701)
§ 150.36 PROHIBITION.
   It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any unsafe
building in the municipality and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant
or person in custody of any dangerous building to permit the same to remain in
an unsafe condition or to occupy such building or permit it to be occupied
while it is in an unsafe condition.
(2000 Code, § 9-702) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.37 DETERMINATION AND NOTICE.
   (A)   Whenever the Building Inspector, City Administrator or person
designated by the City Council shall be of the opinion that any building or
structure in the municipality is an unsafe building, he or she shall file a
written statement to this effect with the Municipal Clerk. It is not a defense
to such determination that the building is boarded up or otherwise enclosed so
as to prevent access to the building. The Clerk shall thereupon cause the
property to be posted accordingly and shall file a copy of such determination
in the office of the County Register of Deeds and shall serve written notice
upon the record owner thereof and upon the occupant thereof, if any, by
certified mail or by personal service or by publication.
   (B)   Any publication of notice shall be in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality which is published at least weekly; such notice
shall be for two consecutive weeks; and all time periods shall run from the
date of last publication. Such notice shall state that the building has been
declared to be in an unsafe condition and that such dangerous condition must be
removed or remedied by repairing or altering the building or by demolishing it
and that the condition must be remedied within 60 days from the date of
receipt.
   (C)   Such notice may be in the following terms:
      “To ___________________ (owner-occupant of premises) of the premises
known and described as ____________________; You are hereby notified that
________________________ (describe building) on the premises above mentioned
has been determined to be an unsafe building and a nuisance after inspection by
_________________. The causes for this decision are
______________________________________________ (here insert the facts as to the
dangerous condition).
      You must remedy this condition or demolish the building within 60 days
from the date of receipt of this notice or the municipality will proceed to do
so. Appeal of this determination may be made to the governing body acting as
the Board of Appeals by filing with the Municipal Clerk within ten days from
the date of receipt of this notice a request for a hearing.”
   (D)   If the person receiving the notice has not complied therewith or taken
an appeal from the determination of the officer or employee finding that a
dangerous building exists within ten days from the time when this notice is
served upon such person by personal service or certified mail, or from the date
of the last publication, the Building Inspector or City Administrator may, upon
orders of the governing body, proceed to remedy the condition or demolish the
unsafe building.
(Neb. RS 18-1722) (2000 Code, § 9-703)
§ 150.38 HEARING AND APPEAL.
   Upon receiving the notice to repair or demolish the building, the owner of
the building within the time stipulated may in writing to the Municipal Clerk
request a hearing before the governing body, sitting as the Board of Appeals,
to present reasons why the building should not be repaired or demolished. The
governing body shall grant such hearing at the next regularly scheduled Board
meeting but in no case sooner than 30 days from the date of receiving the
request. A written notice of the governing body’s decision following the
hearing shall be sent to the property owner by certified mail. If the governing
body rejects the appeal, the owner shall have five days from the sending of the
decision to begin repair, or demolition and removal, and complete within a
reasonable time. If, after the five-day period, the owner has not begun work,
the governing body shall proceed to cause such work to be done; provided, the
property owner may appeal such decision to the appropriate court for
adjudication during which proceedings the decision of the governing body shall
be stayed. Where the municipality has not adopted a building code, the statutes
relating to bonded indebtedness and collection of delinquent taxes shall apply.
(2000 Code, § 9-704)
§ 150.39 EMERGENCY.
   Where any unsafe building or structure poses an immediate danger to the
health, safety or general welfare of any person or persons and the owner fails
to remedy the situation in a reasonable time after notice to do so, the
municipality may summarily repair or demolish and remove such building or
structure.
(Neb. RS 18-1722) (2000 Code, § 9-705)
§ 150.40 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   In case the owner of any building or structure shall fail, neglect or refuse
to comply with notice by or on behalf of the municipality to repair,
rehabilitate or demolish and remove a building or structure which is unsafe and
a public nuisance, the municipality may proceed with the work specified in the
notice to the property owner. A statement of the cost of such work shall be
transmitted to the governing body which is authorized to levy the cost as a
special assessment against the land or enforce by civil judgment. Such special
assessment shall be a lien on the real estate and shall be collected in the
manner provided for special assessments.
(Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722, 77-1725) (2000 Code, § 9-706)
§ 150.41 REMOVAL OF NOTICE OR DENIAL OF ACCESS.
   It shall be unlawful to remove or deface any posted notice provided for in
this subchapter or to deny the Building Inspector, City Administrator or other
person designated by the governing body access to the premises to inspect the
same.
(2000 Code, § 9-707) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 151: FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
Section
   
151.01   Adoption of current FIRM/FIS
   
151.02   Permits required
   
151.03   Development permit applications review
   
151.04   All applications review
   
151.05   Subdivision applications
   
151.06   Water and sewage systems
   
151.07   Storage of materials and equipment
   
151.08   Flood-carrying capacity within any watercourse
   
151.09   Variance procedures
   
151.10   Conditions for variances
   
151.11   Nonconforming uses
   
151.12   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.13   Interpretation
   
151.14   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
151.15   Appeal
   
151.16   Definitions
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 ADOPTION OF CURRENT FIRM/FIS.
   In order to comply with the requirements of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency regarding flood insurance, the following are hereby adopted:
   (A)   The Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that will become effective on November 26, 2010;
   (B)   The Food Insurance Study (FIS) report issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency;
   (C)   All of the flood plain management regulations set forth in paragraph
60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations as set forth in the
Code of Federal Regulations (44 C.F.R. § 60.3); and
   (D)   Any future modifications of such map, report and regulations.
(2000 Code, § 9-801) (Ord. 551, passed 11-15-2010)
§ 151.02 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall initiate any floodplain
development or substantial improvement or cause the same to be done without
first obtaining a separate permit for development as defined in this chapter.
   (B)   Within special flood hazard areas on the official map, separate
floodplain development permits are required for all new construction,
substantial improvements and other developments, including the placement of
manufactured homes.
   (C)   To obtain a floodplain development permit, the applicant shall first
file an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose.
   (D)   Every such application shall:
      (1)   Identify and describe the development to be covered by the
floodplain development permit for which application is made;
      (2)   Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be done
by lot, block, tract and house and street address, or similar description, that
will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or
development;
      (3)   Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed development is
intended;
      (4)   Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed
construction;
      (5)   Be signed by the permittee or his or her authorized agent who may
be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority;
      (6)   Within designated floodplain areas, be accompanied by elevations of
the lowest floor, including the basement or, in the case of floodproofed
nonresidential structures, the elevation to which it shall be floodproofed.
Documentation or certificate of such elevations will be maintained by the City
Administrator; and
      (7)   Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the
City Administrator (i.e., require a statement from the applicant that they are
aware that elevating or floodproofing structures above the minimum levels will
result in premium reduction, especially in the case of non-residential,
floodproofing when a minus one foot penalty is assessed at the time of rating
the structure for the policy premium.)
(2000 Code, § 9-802)
§ 151.03 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATIONS REVIEW.
   The City Administrator shall review all development permit applications to
determine if the site of the proposed development is reasonably safe from
flooding and that all necessary permits have been received as required by
federal or state law.
(2000 Code, § 9-803)
§ 151.04 ALL APPLICATIONS REVIEW.
   The City Administrator, in reviewing all applications for new construction,
substantial improvements, prefabricated buildings, placement of manufactured
homes and other development(s) will:
   (A)   Obtain, review and reasonably utilize, if available, any regulatory
flood elevation data and floodway data available from federal, state or other
sources, until such other data is provided by the Federal Insurance
Administration in a flood insurance study and require, within special flood
hazard areas on the official map, that the following performance standards be
met.
      (1)   Until a floodway has been designated, no development or substantial
improvement may be permitted within the identified floodplain unless the
applicant has demonstrated that the proposed development or substantial
improvement, when combined with all other existing and reasonably anticipated,
developments or substantial improvements, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the 100-year flood more than one foot at any location.
      (2)   Residential construction - New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation.
      (3)   Nonresidential construction - New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated at least
one foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below such level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied.
Such certification shall be provided to the City Administrator.
      (4)   Require for all new construction and substantial improvements -
Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area, other than a basement, and
which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and
existence of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria: a minimum of two openings having a total net
area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no
higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
   (B)   Require the use of construction materials that are resistant to flood
damage;
   (C)   Require the use of construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage;
   (D)   Require that new structures be designed (or modified) and adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
   (E)   New structures be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding;
   (F)   Assure that all manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Manufactured homes must be anchored in
accordance with state laws, local building codes and FEMA guidelines. In the
event that over-the-top frame ties to ground anchors are used, the following
specific requirements (or their equivalent) shall be met.
      (1)   Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the
manufactured home with two additional ties per side at the intermediate
locations. Manufactured homes less than 50 feet long shall require only one
additional tie per side.
      (2)   Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home with five
additional ties per side at intermediate points and manufactured homes less
than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side.
      (3)   All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a
force of 4,800 pounds.
      (4)   Any additions to manufactured homes be similarly anchored.
   (G)   Assure that all manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within special flood hazard areas on the community’s official map on
sites:
      (1)   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
      (2)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
      (3)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or
      (4)   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a
manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood,
be elevated on a permanent foundation so that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation
and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in
accordance with the provisions of §
151.07.
   (H)   Assure that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within specific
flood hazard areas on the community’s official map that are not subject to the
provisions of division (G) above be elevated so that either:
      (1)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot
above the base flood elevation; or
      (2)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than
36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of §
151.07.
   (I)   Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within the
identified special flood hazard areas on the community’s official map either:
be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; be fully licensed and ready
for highway use; or meet the permit requirements and the elevation and
anchoring requirements for “manufactured homes” of this chapter. A recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system and
is attached to the site only for quick disconnect type utilities and security
devices and has no permanently attached additions.
(2000 Code, § 9-804)
§ 151.05 SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS.
   The City Council shall review all subdivision applications and other
proposed new developments (including manufactured home parks or subdivisions)
and shall make findings of fact and assure that:
   (A)   All such proposed developments are consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
   (B)   Subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments (including
proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions), greater than five
acres or 50 lots, whichever is less, include within such proposals regulatory
flood elevations data in special flood hazard areas;
   (C)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards; and
   (D)   All public utilities and facilities are located so as to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
(2000 Code, § 9-805)
§ 151.06 WATER AND SEWAGE SYSTEMS.
   New and replacement water and sewage systems shall be constructed to
eliminate or minimize infiltration by, or discharge into, floodwaters.
Moreover, on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed to avoid impairment
or contamination during flooding.
(2000 Code, § 9-806)
§ 151.07 STORAGE OF MATERIAL AND EQUIPMENT.
   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flood, buoyant,
flammable, explosive or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, is
prohibited. Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not
subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or
if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood
warning.
(2000 Code, § 9-807)
§ 151.08 FLOOD-CARRYING CAPACITY WITHIN ANY WATERCOURSE.
   The City Council will insure that the flood-carrying capacity within the
altered or relocated portion of any watercourse, if maintained. The city will
notify, in rivering situations, adjacent communities and the State Coordinating
Office (State Natural Resources Commission) prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of such notifications to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Moreover, the city will work with
appropriate state and federal agencies in every way possible in complying with
the National Flood Insurance Program in accordance with the National Disaster
Protection Act of 1983, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 et seq.
(2000 Code, § 9-808)
§ 151.09 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment as established by the city shall hear and
decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination
made by the Building Inspector in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.
   (C)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustments, or
any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the District Court as provided in
Neb. RS 19-912.
   (D)   In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustments shall
consider all technical evaluation, all relevant factors, and standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept into other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area; and
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles:
         (a)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
         (b)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
(2000 Code, § 9-809)
§ 151.10 CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.
   (A)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing divisions (B) through (E) below have been
fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the
technical justification required by issuing the variance increases.
   (B)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
   (C)   Variances shall only be issued on a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   (D)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
      (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (E)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given a written
notice that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased
risk resulting from the reduced lowest flood elevation.
(2000 Code, § 9-810)
§ 151.11 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of the ordinance but which is not in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to the following
conditions.
      (1)   If such use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future
use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter. The Utility
Department shall notify the City Administrator in writing of instances of
nonconforming uses where utility services have been discontinued for a period
of 12 months.
      (2)   Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
   (B)   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including flood, it shall not be reconstructed, if the cost is more than 50% of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless it is
reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. This
limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing
state or local regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed
on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic
Places.
(2000 Code, § 9-811)
§ 151.12 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All
other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the
extent of the inconsistency only.
(2000 Code, § 9-813)
§ 151.13 INTERPRETATION.
   In this interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of
the City Council and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other
powers granted by state statutes.
(2000 Code, § 9-814)
§ 151.14 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific
methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood height
may be increased by human-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge
openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside
floodplain district boundaries or land uses permitted within such districts
will be free from flooding or flood damage. This ordinance shall not create
liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any
flood damages that may result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(2000 Code, § 9-815)
§ 151.15 APPEAL.
   Where a request for a permit to develop or a variance is denied by the
Building Inspector, the applicant may apply for such permit or variance
directly to the Board of Adjustment.
(2000 Code, § 9-816)
§ 151.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASEMENT.  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level on all sides).
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads, is complete before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION OF EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or pouring
of concrete pads.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow or inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The usual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
the City Administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and
the risk premium applicable to the community.
   FLOODPROOFING. The channel of the river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Place
which is a listing maintained by the Department of Interior or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of the registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including the
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR, provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel, or contiguous parcels, of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For floodplain management purposes, structures for which
the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including at a minimum the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads, is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   100-YEAR FLOOD. The condition of flooding having a 1% chance of an annual
occurrence.
   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND. That at least 51% of the actual cash value of the
structure is above ground.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is: built on a single chassis; 400
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping travel or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION. The water surface elevation of the 100-year
flood.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. No. 970348),
being 16 U.S.C. §§ 3501 et seq., includes substantial improvements and means
the date the building permit was issued and provides the date for the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The
actual START means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of the manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it
include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual START
OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other
structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as
well as a manufactured home, and a gas or liquid storage tank that is
principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  
      (1)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement
of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of
the structure before “start of construction” of the improvement.
      (2)   This includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,”
regardless of the actual repair work performed.
      (3)   The term does not, however, include either: any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or any alteration of the “historic structure,”
provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as an “historic structure.”
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief to a person from the terms of a floodplain
management ordinance.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations.
(2000 Code, § 9-817)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements, including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions, shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than $100 and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved
in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city or other appropriate
authority from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.
(2000 Code, § 9-812)
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISIONS AND ADDITIONS
Section
   
152.01   General provisions
   
152.02   Survey and plat
   
152.03   Surveyor’s certificate
   
152.04   Dedication
   
152.05   Streets and alleys
   
152.06   Approval of plat
   
152.07   Recording plat
   
152.08   Additions
§ 152.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   The owner of any tract of land within the corporate limits of the
municipality may lay out said land into lots, blocks, streets, avenues and
alleys as a suburban development or as an addition to the municipality upon
conformance to and compliance with the conditions herein and with the statutes
of the state.
(Neb. RS 17-405, 17-426, 17-1002, 19-902) (2000 Code, § 11-201)
§ 152.02 SURVEY AND PLAT.
   (A)   The owner or proprietor of any tract or parcel of land within the
corporate limits or within one mile thereof desiring to subdivide or lay out
said tract of land shall cause the same to be accurately surveyed and an
accurate map or plat thereof made with reference to known or permanent
monuments and said map or plat shall explicitly describe the land so laid out.
   (B)   The map or plat shall designate the tract as “____________________
Addition to the City of Gibbon, Nebraska,” or “Subdivision of the City of
Gibbon, Nebraska,” whichever is appropriate.
   (C)   The lots and blocks shall be designated by numbers and the streets and
avenues by names coinciding with the streets and avenues of the municipality of
which they form continuations.
   (D)   The plat shall show the length and depth of the lots and width and
course of all streets, avenues and alleys together with an accurate plat of all
lots, blocks and streets.
(Neb. RS 17-405, 17-1002, 17-1003, 19-902) (2000 Code, § 11-202)
§ 152.03 SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE.
   The map or plat shall be accompanied by a certificate from the surveyor
making said survey and plat that he or she accurately surveyed the said tract
and the lots, blocks, streets, avenues and alleys are accurately shown upon the
said map or plat.
(Neb. RS 17-405, 17-1003, 19-902) (2000 Code, § 11-203)
§ 152.04 DEDICATION.
   Said map or plat shall have written thereon or attached hereto a dedication
to the municipality for the use of the public, of all streets, avenues, alleys,
parks, squares and commons and all land set apart for public use or dedicated
to charitable, religious and educational purposes as therein mentioned and
described. Such dedication shall be signed by the owner of the tract of land
and shall be duly acknowledged as required by law.
(Neb. RS 17-417, 17-1003) (2000 Code, § 11-204)
§ 152.05 STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   Streets and alleys laid out in any addition to or in any suburban
development of the municipality shall be continuous with and correspond in
direction and width to the streets and alleys of the municipality to which they
are an addition.
(Neb. RS 17-418, 17-1003) (2000 Code, § 11-205)
§ 152.06 APPROVAL OF PLAT.
   Before any such map or plat shall have any validity, it must first be
submitted to and be approved and accepted by the governing body of this
municipality and must have such acceptance and approval endorsed thereon;
provided, that before any such map or plat shall be considered, approved or
accepted, the owner or proprietor shall pay or cause to be paid, all taxes,
special taxes and special assessments due thereon and shall produce a
certificate showing that all such taxes and assessments have been paid or
canceled.
(Neb. RS 17-1002, 19-902) (2000 Code, § 11-206)
§ 152.07 RECORDING PLAT.
   (A)   If a majority of all members of the governing body shall vote in favor
of such suburban development or annexation, an ordinance shall be prepared and
passed by the governing body granting such approval or declaring the annexation
of such territory to the corporate limits of this municipality and extending
the limits thereof accordingly, whichever is appropriate.
   (B)   An accurate map or plat of such territory and said dedication as
herein described, certified by the engineer or surveyor and acknowledged and
approved as provided by law in such cases shall at once be filed and recorded
by the owner or proprietor of such land in the office of the Register of Deeds
of the county, together with a certified copy of the ordinance granting
approval or declaring such annexation under the seal of said municipality.
(Neb. RS 19-916) (2000 Code, § 11-207)
§ 152.08 ADDITIONS.
   All additions to this municipality which have heretofore been approved and
accepted or which may hereafter be laid out in accordance with the provisions
herein and accepted and approved shall be and become incorporated in this
municipality for all purposes whatsoever and inhabitants of such additions
shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges and be subject to all the
laws and regulations of said municipality.
(Neb. RS 19-916) (2000 Code, § 11-208)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Grants franchise to Nebraska Central Telephone Company for
–      - -         a telephone system
                     (2000 Code, § 10-601)
                     Contract with Nebraska Public Power District to purchase
–      - -         electrical power for the municipality
                     (2000 Code, § 10-602)
                     Contract with  Black Hills  Energy to purchase natural gas
–      - -         for the municipality
                     (2000 Code, § 10-603)
                     Grants a non-exclusive franchise to build, construct,
–      - -         operate and maintain a cable television system in, under
                     and over public rights-of-way within the municipality
                     (2000 Code, § 10-604)
                     Grants a non-exclusive franchise to Nebraska Public Power
601      11-20-2017  District for 25 years to erect, operate and maintain an
                     electric, light and power system in the city
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Nebraska Revised Statutes
References to 2000 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NEBRASKA REVISED STATUTES
Neb. RS Section Code Section
Neb. RS Section             Code Section
5-108                       34.13
9-701                       134.03
10-101 through 10-143       35.12
10-606 through 10-612       35.12
11-101                      31.081
11-104                      31.080
11-105                      31.080
11-109                      31.080
11-110                      31.080
11-111                      31.080
11-112                      31.080
11-113                      31.080
11-114                      31.080
11-115                      31.080
11-116                      31.080
11-117                      31.080
11-118                      31.080
12-401 through 12-403       33.08
13-310                      94.36
13-311                      94.36
13-312                      94.36
13-313                      94.36
13-314                      94.36
13-403                      94.33
13-503                      35.01
13-504                      35.28
13-505                      35.28
13-506                      35.29
13-507                      35.29
13-508                      35.30,
                            35.30
13-509                      35.30,
                            35.50.01
13-509.01                   35.27
13-509.02                   35.27
13-510                      35.33
13-511                      35.34
13-518 through 13-522       35.34
13-518 to 13-522            35.29,
                            35.30
13-519                      34.04
13-606                      35.02
13-609                      35.14
13-903                      35.05
13-3401 et seq.             35.50,
                            35.50.01
16-230                      51.19 -
                            51.22
16-231                      51.19 -
                            51.22
16-246                      51.19 -
                            51.22
16-318(3)                   32.05
16-691.01                   35.11
16-714 through 16-716       35.10
16-901                      51.19 -
                            51.22
17-1001                     91.21,
                            150.22
                            152.01,
17-1002                     152.02,
                            152.06
17-1003                     152.02 -
                            152.05
17-102                      34.12
17-103                      31.003
17-104                      31.003,
                            31.004
17-105                      31.029;
                            31.048
17-106                      31.029;
                            31.048
                            31.001,
17-107                      31.006,
                            32.01,
                            32.08
17-107.02                   31.004
17-107.02(9)                31.044
17-108                      31.095
17-108.02                   32.03
17-110                      31.001
17-111                      31.001
17-112                      31.001
17-113                      31.001
17-114                      31.001
17-115                      31.006
17-117                      31.001
                            33.04,
17-121                      91.01,
                            91.02
17-129                      131.01
17-130 through 17-132       150.03
17-137                      113.03
17-138                      90.06
17-142                      131.02,
                            131.03
17-147                      33.20
17-148                      31.002
                            53.01,
17-149                      53.03,
                            53.05
17-149.01                   53.05
17-150                      32.08
                            32.08,
17-405                      152.01 -
                            152.03
17-417                      152.04
17-418                      152.05
17-426                      152.01
17-502                      11.01
17-503                      94.30
17-503.01                   94.30
17-503.02                   94.31
17-505                      10.99,
                            31.060
17-506                      35.45
17-507                      35.46
17-508                      94.66
17-509                      94.02
17-509 to 17-521            94.53
17-510 to 17-512            94.02
17-513 to 17-524            94.02
17-522                      94.53
17-524                      94.53
                            90.02,
17-526                      90.08,
                            90.40,
                            90.41
17-531                      52.01
17-534                      52.01
17-536                      52.15
                            52.03 -
                            52.05,
17-537                      52.13,
                            52.15,
                            52.18,
                            52.21
17-538                      52.09,
                            52.11
17-539                      50.04
17-540                      35.11
                            52.06,
17-542                      52.11,
                            52.22
17-547                      90.02,
                            90.08
17-548                      90.08,
                            90.09
17-549                      92.40
17-550                      92.24
                            91.23,
17-555                      94.04,
                            131.02 -
                            131.04
17-556                      131.01,
                            133.60
                            94.05,
17-557                      94.77,
                            131.02,
                            131.03
17-557.01                   94.05
17-558                      94.68,
                            94.69
17-559                      94.68,
                            94.69
17-563                      91.21,
                            91.24
17-563.01                   130.08
17-567                      94.03,
                            94.65
17-568                      32.08
17-568.01                   32.08,
                            35.03
17-568.02                   35.03
17-602                      34.03
                            31.080,
17-604                      31.095,
                            32.01
17-605                      32.04
17-606                      32.05
17-606(2)                   32.05
17-607                      35.09
17-608                      35.11
17-609                      35.11
17-610                      32.06
17-611                      31.095
17-612                      31.095
                            31.063,
17-613                      31.065 -
                            31.067,
                            35.03
                            10.15,
17-614                      31.063,
                            31.064,
                            31.068
17-615                      31.066
17-616                      31.026,
                            31.064
17-701                      35.25
17-702                      35.08,
                            35.49
17-703                      35.06
17-706                      35.31
17-708                      35.04
17-709                      35.04
17-710                      35.07
17-711                      35.04
17-714                      35.05
17-715                      35.05
17-718                      33.20
17-720                      35.10
17-801                      33.06
17-802                      33.06
17-802.01                   33.06
17-803                      35.11
17-805                      33.06
17-806                      33.06
17-807                      33.06
17-808                      33.06
17-810                      33.06
                            54.04,
17-902                      54.10 -
                            54.12,
                            54.16
17-902 through 17-904       54.02
17-906                      54.02
17-909                      54.02
17-919                      32.08
17-920                      131.04
                            53.01,
17-925.01                   53.09,
                            53.11,
                            53.16
17-948 through 17-952       93.01
17-949                      93.02
17-953                      94.32
17-953.01                   94.32
17-953 et seq.              33.20
17-954                      94.32
17-1237 et seq.             35.11
17-1269 et seq.             35.11
18-1001 through 18-1006     94.30
18-1214                     35.51
18-1216                     35.06
18-1303                     51.19 -
                            51.22
18-131                      31.065
                            31.060,
18-132                      92.20,
                            150.20 -
                            150.23
18-1701                     32.04
18-1705                     94.66
18-1719                     130.08
18-1720                     131.06
                            10.99,
                            91.21,
18-1720                     130.03,
                            133.02,
                            150.40
                            10.99,
18-1722                     150.37,
                            150.39,
                            150.40
18-1743                     150.08
18-1748                     53.12,
                            94.72
18-1751                     94.02
18-1752                     91.25
18-1755                     94.34
18-1756                     35.03
18-1801 through 18-1805     35.12
18-2001 through 18-2004     94.67
18-2003                     94.67
18-2005                     94.66
18-2102.01                  33.02
18-2146                     150.21
18-2715                     33.02
18-2803                     35.35
18-2804                     35.02,
                            35.35
18-2805                     35.35
18-2806                     35.35
18-2807                     35.35
18-2808                     35.35
18-305 through 18-312       31.096
18-412.01                   35.03
18-503                      53.11
19-710                      91.22
19-901                      33.03
19-901 et seq.              33.02
19-901 to 19-915            33.03
19-901 to 19-914            33.03
                            92.20,
19-902                      152.01 -
                            152.03,
                            152.06
19-903                      33.02
19-903 to 19-904.01         33.03
19-907                      33.03
19-908                      33.03
19-909                      33.03
19-910                      33.03
19-912                      33.03,
                            151.09
19-912.01                   33.03
19-915                      31.068
19-916                      152.07
19-916                      33.02,
                            152.08
19-922                      31.060
19-924 through 19-933       33.02
19-926                      33.02
19-927                      33.02
19-928                      33.02
19-929                      33.02
19-929(3)                   33.03
19-930 to 19-933            33.02
19-1101                     32.05
19-1102                     32.04
19-1103                     32.04,
                            32.05
19-1301                     35.08
19-1302                     35.08
19-1303                     35.08
19-1304                     35.08
19-1305                     52.01
19-1309                     35.47
19-1310                     35.47
19-1311                     35.47
19-1312                     35.47
19-2101 through 19-2113     51.01
19-2106                     50.04,
                            51.17
19-2401                     94.02
19-2408 to 19-2415          94.02
19-2416                     94.66
19-2417 through 19-2419     94.53
19-2428 through 19-2431     94.02
                            52.03,
19-2701                     52.20,
                            53.03
19-2902                     35.02
19-2903                     35.02
19-2904                     35.02
19-2905                     35.02
19-2906 through 19-2909     35.02
19-3701                     31.067
20-203                      90.42
23-114.02                   33.03
23-122                      32.04
25-505.01                   34.10
25-505.01                   34.10
25-2703                     31.060
28-109                      90.42
Chapter 28, art. 3          110.22
28-318                      134.01,
                            134.02
Chapter 28, art. 4          110.22
28-431                      133.40
28-512                      54.17
28-519                      130.01
28-520                      90.42,
                            130.02
28-521                      90.42,
                            130.02
28-523                      133.05
28-609                      132.01
28-610                      132.02
Chapter 28, art. 7          110.22
Chapter 28, art. 8          110.22
28-801                      134.01
28-806                      134.02
28-830                      134.01
28-831                      134.01
28-833                      134.03
28-903                      132.03
28-904                      132.04
28-906                      132.05
28-907                      132.07
28-907                      92.08
28-908                      132.06
Chapter 28, art. 10         110.22
28-1008                     90.06,
                            90.42
28-1009                     90.06
28-1012                     90.06
28-1013                     90.06
Chapter 28, art. 11         110.22
28-1101                     134.03
28-1102                     134.03
28-1103                     134.03
28-1104                     134.03
28-1107                     134.03
28-1108                     134.03
28-1109                     134.03
28-1110                     134.03
28-1111                     134.03
28-1112                     134.03
28-1113                     134.03
28-1117                     134.03
Chapter 28, art. 12         110.22
28-1202.03                  110.52
28-1213 through 28-1239     92.55
28-1237                     92.55
28-1241                     130.06
28-1241 through 28-1252     113.03
28-1303                     133.06
28-1304                     133.03
                            91.21,
28-1321                     130.03,
                            133.01
28-1322                     131.05
28-1418                     111.04,
                            133.20
28-1418 through 28-1429.03  111.04
28-1419                     133.21
28-1420 through 28-1429     111.02,
                            111.04
28-1421 through 28-1429     111.01
28-1423                     111.04
28-1424                     111.03
28-1425                     111.03,
                            111.04
28-1429                     111.04
28-1429.04                  111.04
28-1429.05                  111.04
28-1429.06                  111.04
28-1429.07                  111.04
28-1601                     134.03
29-422 to 29-429            90.06
Chapter 29, article 8       90.26
29-908                      92.02,
                            92.04
32-101                      Chapter 34
32-101 et seq.              34.01;
                            34.04
32-110                      34.03
32-115                      34.03
32-404                      34.01,
                            34.05
32-405                      34.04;
                            34.10
32-556                      34.01
32-557                      34.06
32-559                      34.04
32-560                      31.005
32-561                      31.005
32-562                      34.10
32-564                      34.04;
                            34.07
32-567 to 32-570            34.10
32-568                      31.005
32-569                      31.005
32-574                      34.10
32-606                      34.07
32-606.01                   34.07,
                            34.10
32-607                      34.07
32-607(2)                   34.07
32-616                      34.09
32-617                      34.09
32-618                      34.09
32-621                      34.09
32-622                      34.07
32-625                      34.07
32-625(2)                   34.09
32-627                      34.07,
                            34.09
32-628                      34.09,
                            94.30
32-628 through 32-631       35.48
32-629                      34.09,
                            34.10
32-630                      34.09,
                            34.10
32-632                      34.10
32-710                      34.09
32-802                      34.02,
                            35.48
32-918                      34.11
32-952 through 32-959       34.04
32-1202                     34.04
32-1301                     34.10
32-1302                     34.10
32-1303                     34.10
32-1304                     34.10
32-1305                     34.10
32-1306                     34.10
32-1307                     34.10
32-1308                     34.10
32-1309                     34.10
32-1525                     34.11
33-139.01                   33.22
33-141                      32.05
35-102                      33.22
35-103                      33.22
35-108                      33.22
Chapter 39                  78.99
39-301                      131.03
39-302                      131.03
39-307                      133.04
39-672                      92.05
39-682                      92.07
43-248                      134.01
45-601 through 45-622       35.13
45-623                      35.13
46-1212                     94.35
48-115                      33.22
48-1503                     35.03
49-801(16)                  10.05
49-1408                     31.096
49-1425                     31.096
49-1499.03                  31.096
49-1499.04                  31.096
49-14,102                   31.096
49-14,103.01                31.096
49-14,103.02                31.096
49-14,103.03                31.096
49-14,103.04                31.096
49-14,103.05                31.096
49-14,103.06                31.096
51-201                      35.48,
                            95.01
51-202                      33.01,
                            95.01
51-205                      95.02
51-209                      95.03
51-211                      95.01
51-214                      95.02
51-215                      35.08
51-216                      35.08
51-501                      35.48
52-601.01 to 52-605         133.40
Ch. 53, Art. 1              114.02
53-103.01 through 53-103.42 110.01,
                            133.24
53-103.23                   133.23
53-1,101                    110.28
53-1,102                    110.29
53-1,115                    110.30
53-1,121                    110.04
53-116.01                   110.24
53-118                      110.47
53-123.04(3)                133.25
53-123.11(1)(c)             133.25
53-123.12                   110.23
53-124                      110.23,
                            110.26
53-124.01                   110.23
53-124.12                   110.26
53-124.15                   110.45
53-125                      110.22
53-129                      110.23
53-131                      110.23
53-132                      110.23
53-133                      110.23,
                            110.45
53-134                      110.23
                            110.23,
53-134.03                   110.47,
                            110.51
53-134.04                   110.23,
                            110.30
53-135                      110.25
53-135.01                   110.23,
                            110.25
53-148                      110.27
53-167.02                   110.51
53-167.03                   110.51
53-168.06                   110.20
53-175                      110.21
53-177                      110.45
53-177.01                   110.45
53-178                      110.46
53-180                      110.02
53-180.01                   133.23
53-180.02                   133.24
53-180.05                   133.23
53-183                      110.47
53-184                      110.50
53-186                      110.03
53-186(2)                   110.03
53-186.01                   110.03
53-194.03                   110.21
53-401 through 53-409       133.24
54-601                      90.40
54-606                      90.40
54-607                      90.02
54-617                      90.42
54-618                      90.42
54-619                      90.42
54-620                      90.42
54-621                      90.42
54-622.01                   90.42
54-623                      90.42
54-907 through 54-912       90.07
54-911                      90.07
54-912                      90.07
55-133                      70.01
56-602                      90.40
Chapter 60                  77.03,
                            78.99
Chapter 60, Article 1       75.04
60-135.01                   78.01
60-169                      133.40
60-2,106                    75.03
Chapter 60, Article 3       75.04
                            35.51,
60-301                      72.09,
                            133.40
60-376                      133.40,
                            133.41
Chapter 60, Article 4       75.04,
                            77.01 
60-4,126                    78.02
60-462                      70.06
60-484                      78.02
Chapter 60, Article 5       75.04
60-533                      78.10
60-601                      Chapter 70
60-606 through 60-676       70.01
60-607                      70.01
60-610                      70.01
60-613                      70.01
60-624                      70.01
60-631                      70.01
60-638                      70.01
60-646                      70.01
60-654                      70.01
60-656                      70.01
60-658.01                   70.01
60-661                      70.01
60-669                      70.01
60-670                      70.01
60-671                      70.01
60-672                      70.01
60-676                      70.01
60-678                      70.02
60-680                      70.03,
                            72.01
60-681                      70.04
60-682                      70.99
60-682.01                   71.99
60-683                      70.06
60-684 through 60-694.01    70.99
60-689                      70.99
60-699                      78.08
60-6,108                    70.05
60-6,110                    70.06
60-6,114                    70.10
60-6,118                    70.01
60-6,119                    70.09
60-6,121                    70.06
60-6,129                    71.03
60-6,130                    71.04
60-6,138                    71.01
60-6,148                    71.02
60-6,164                    72.02
60-6,165                    72.51
60-6,166                    72.03
60-6,167                    72.12
60-6,168                    72.14
60-6,185                    71.20
60-6,186                    71.21
60-6,187                    71.21,
                            71.23
60-6,188                    71.21,
                            71.99
60-6,189                    71.22
60-6,190                    71.23
60-6,211.08                 110.03,
                            133.25
60-6,250                    71.05
60-6,288                    71.05
60-6,288 to 60-6,290        70.10
60-6,294                    70.10
60-6,305                    71.21,
                            71.23
60-6,313                    71.21,
                            71.23
60-6,314                    73.01
60-6,315                    73.01
60-6,316                    73.01
                            76.01,
60-6,335                    76.02,
                            78.01
60-6,337                    76.01,
                            76.02
60-6,347                    75.04
60-6,348                    75.02
60-6,353                    75.01
60-6,356                    78.02
60-6,357                    78.03
60-6,358                    78.03
60-6,359                    78.05
60-6,360                    78.07
60-6,361                    78.08
60-6,362                    78.99
60-1901                     133.40
60-1902                     133.40
60-1903                     133.40
60-1903.01                  133.40
60-1903.02                  133.40
60-1904                     133.40
60-1905                     133.40
60-1906                     133.40
60-1907                     133.40
60-1908                     133.40
60-1909                     133.40
60-1911                     133.40
60-2410                     133.40
70-624.04                   31.096
70-1601 through 70-1615     52.11,
                            53.11
70-1602                     50.05
70-1605                     50.05
70-1606                     50.05
70-1607                     50.05
70-1608 through 70-1614     50.05
70-1615                     50.05
70-2103                     130.02
71-15,104                   33.48
71-15,112                   33.46
71-15,124                   33.49
71-15,133 through 15,134    33.49
71-15,140                   33.49,
                            33.52
71-15,141                   33.47,
                            33.50
                            33.45,
71-1572 to 71-15,168        33.46,
                            33.50
71-1575                     33.50
71-1576                     33.45
71-1594 through 71-15,105   33.47
71-1637                     35.48
71-4401                     90.20
71-4402                     90.21
71-4404                     90.21
71-4405                     90.21
71-4406                     90.22
71-4407                     90.23
71-4408                     90.08,
                            90.24
71-4410                     90.26
71-4411                     90.24
71-4412                     90.26
71-4603                     133.40,
                            150.20
Chapter 72, article 14      94.32
73-101 et seq.              35.03
76-701 through 76-724       30.01
77-23,109 et seq.           35.11
77-27,142 et seq.           35.75
77-1601                     35.50.01
77-1606                     35.48
77-1632                     35.50.01
77-1633                     35.50.01
77-1633                     35.50
77-1702                     35.14
77-1725                     150.40
77-2201                     32.05
77-2201 through 77-2215     32.05
77-2202                     32.05
77-2209                     32.05
77-2210                     32.05
77-2212                     32.05
77-2337                     35.08
77-2341                     35.11
77-2362                     35.09
77-2363                     35.09
77-2364                     35.09
77-2365.01                  35.09,
                            35.10
77-2366                     35.09,
                            35.10
77-2386                     35.09
77-2703.01 to 77-2703.04    35.75
77-3442                     35.48
77-3443                     35.48
77-3444                     34.04,
                            35.48
79-3401 et seq.             35.50,
                            35.50.01
80-202                      35.48
81-145 through 81-162       35.03
81-201                      90.06
81-501.01 to 81-531         33.26
81-502                      92.20
81-506                      33.29
81-512                      33.26
81-520.01                   92.23
81-829.51                   35.34
81-3423                     94.35
81-3445                     94.35
81-3449                     94.35
81-3453                     94.35
84-712(2)                   32.04
84-712 through 84-712.09    32.04,
                            32.05
84-1407 et seq.             31.028,
                            31.047
84-1408                     31.022,
                            31.047
84-1409                     31.022,
                            35.50
84-1409(1)                  31.021
84-1409(2)                  31.020
84-1410                     31.023
                            31.022,
84-1411                     31.024,
                            31.027,
                            31.047
84-1412                     31.025,
                            31.028
                            31.022,
84-1413                     31.025,
                            31.026
                            
 
REFERENCES TO 2000 CODE
2000 Code 2019 Code
2000 Code 2019 Code
1-101     31.001
1-102     31.002
1-103     31.003
1-104     31.004
1-105     31.005
1-205     32.09
1-213     32.10
1-214     32.11
1-215     32.12
1-401     11.01
1-501     31.020
1-502     31.021
1-503     31.022
1-504     31.023
1-505     31.024
1-506     31.025
1-507     31.026
1-508     31.027
1-509     31.028
1-510     31.029
1-511     31.030
1-512     31.031
1-513     31.032
1-514     31.033
1-515     31.034
1-516     31.035
1-517     31.036
1-518     31.037
1-519     31.038
1-520     31.039
1-521     31.040
1-522     31.041
1-523     31.042
1-524     31.043
1-525     31.044
1-526     31.045
1-527     31.046
1-718  �34.12
1-720     34.13
1-801     35.25
1-823     35.75
1-825     35.76
1-1001    30.01
2-201     33.01
2-601     33.05
2-701     33.08
2-801     33.45
2-802     33.46
2-803     33.47
2-804     33.48
2-805     33.49
2-806     33.50
2-807     33.51
2-808     33.52
2-901     33.09
3-101     52.01
3-102     52.02
3-103     52.03
3-104     52.04
3-105     52.05
3-106     52.06
3-107     52.07
3-108     52.08
3-109     52.09
3-110     52.10
3-111     52.11
3-112     52.12
3-113     52.13
3-114     52.14
3-115     52.15
3-116     52.16
3-117     52.17
3-118     52.18
3-119     52.19
3-120     52.20
3-121     52.21
3-122     52.22
3-124     52.23
3-125     52.24
3-126     52.25
3-127     52.26
3-128     52.27
3-129     52.28
3-130     52.33
3-131     52.29
3-132     52.30
3-133     52.31
3-134     52.32
3-135     52.33
3-201     53.01
3-202     53.02
3-203     53.03
3-204     53.04
3-205     53.05
3-206     53.06
3-207     53.07
3-208     53.08
3-209     53.09
3-210     53.10
3-211     53.11
3-212     53.12
3-213     53.13
3-214     53.14
3-215     53.15
3-216     53.16
3-217     53.17
3-218     53.18
3-219     53.19
3-220     53.20
3-221     53.21
3-222     53.22
3-223     53.23
3-224     53.24
3-225     53.25
3-226     53.26
3-227     53.27
3-228     53.28
3-229     53.29
3-230     53.30
3-231     53.31
3-232     53.32
3-233     53.33
3-234     53.34
3-235     53.35
3-236     53.36
3-237     53.37
3-238     53.38
3-239     53.39
3-240     53.40
3-241     53.41
3-242     53.41
3-243     53.42
3-244     53.43
3-245     53.44
3-246     53.45
3-247     53.46
3-301     54.01
3-302     54.02
3-303     54.03
3-304     54.04
3-305     54.05
3-306     54.06
3-307     54.07
3-308     54.08
3-309     54.09
3-310     54.10
3-311     54.11
3-312     54.12
3-313     54.13
3-314     54.14
3-315     54.15
3-316     54.16
3-317     54.17
3-318     54.18
3-319     54.19
3-401     51.01
3-402     51.02
3-403     51.03
3-404     51.04
3-601     93.01
3-602     93.02
3-603     93.03
3-701     95.01
3-702     95.02
3-703     95.03
3-801     50.01
3-802     50.02
3-803     50.03
3-804     50.04
3-805     50.05
3-806     50.06
3-901     35.65
4-201     51.15
4-202     51.16
4-203     51.17
4-204     51.18
4-205     51.19
4-206     51.20
4-207     51.21
4-208     51.22
4-306     91.35
4-307     91.36
4-309     91.37
5-203     Ch. 79, Sch. I
5-322     Ch. 80, Sch. I
5-328     Ch. 80, Sch. I
5-401     73.01
5-402     73.02
5-403     73.03
5-501     74.01
5-601     75.01
5-602     75.02
5-603     75.03
5-604     75.04
5-703     76.03
5-704     76.04
5-705     76.05
5-801     77.01
5-802     77.02
5-803     77.03
5-804     77.04
5-805     77.05
5-806     77.06
5-901     78.01
5-902     78.02
5-903     78.03
5-904     78.04
5-905     78.05
5-906     78.07
5-907     78.08
5-908     78.99
5-909     78.09
5-910     78.10
6-209     90.11
6-312     130.06
6-321     130.07
6-322     130.08
6-323     131.06
6-326     133.22
6-331     131.07
7-101     92.01
7-102     92.02
7-103     92.03
7-104     92.04
7-105     92.05
7-106     92.06
7-107     92.07
7-108     92.08
7-201     92.20
7-202     92.21
7-203     92.22
7-205     92.24
7-206     92.25
7-301     92.40
7-401     92.55
7-402     92.56
7-403     92.57
9-101     150.01
9-102     150.02
9-103     150.03
9-104     150.04
9-105     150.05
9-106     150.06
9-201     150.20
9-301     150.21
9-401     150.22
9-501     150.23
9-601     150.07
9-701     150.35
9-702     150.36
9-703     150.37
9-704     150.38
9-705     150.39
9-706     150.40
9-707     150.41
9-801     151.01
9-802     151.02
9-803     151.03
9-804     151.04
9-805     151.05
9-806     151.06
9-807     151.07
9-808     151.08
9-809     151.09
9-810     151.10
9-811     151.11
9-812     151.99
9-813     151.12
9-814     151.13
9-815     151.14
9-816     151.15
9-817     151.16
10-108    110.47
10-201    111.01
10-301    112.01
10-501    113.01
10-502    113.02
10-503    113.03
10-601    TSO Table I
10-602    TSO Table I
10-603    TSO Table I
10-604    TSO Table I
11-101    30.02
11-102    30.02
11-201    152.01
11-202    152.02
11-203    152.03
11-204    152.04
11-205    152.05
11-206    152.06
11-207    152.07
11-208    152.08
          
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
–      - -         TSO Table I
–      - -         TSO Table I
–      - -         TSO Table I
–      - -         TSO Table I
491      6-19-2000   52.32
494      3-19-2001   33.45 -
                     33.52
495      3-19-2001   52.33
496      3-19-2001   131.07
505      3-17-2003   50.06
511      11-17-2003  150.20
514      2-16-2014   34.12
523      10-18-2004  91.35
533      4-17-2007   50.06
537      9-17-2007   52.10
538      9-17-2007   53.46
                     78.01,
539      1-21-2008   78.02,
                     78.10
540      10-20-2008  53.46
541      11-16-2009  90.11
551      11-15-2010  151.01
553      12-20-2010  31.046
557      11-21-2011  113.03,
                     130.06
                     33.01,
566      4-15-2013   33.05,
                     33.09
572      6-17-2013   51.04
574      8-19-2013   110.47
575      9-16-2013   130.06
584      2-17-2015   Ch. 80, Sch. I
592      11-21-2016  33.05
594      12-19-2016  52.10
595      12-19-2016  51.04
596      1-17-2017   52.10
598      9-18-2017   130.06
599      7-17-2017   31.046
600      9-18-2017   35.65
601      11-20-2017  TSO Table I
604      7-16-2018   31.046
602      2-20-2018   110.47
606      5-20-2019   71.06
611      11-18-2019  114.01
612      11-18-2019  114.02
613      11-18-2019  114.03
620      11-16-2020  35.75
622      4-19-2021   52.10
623      4-19-2021   53.46
624      3-15-2021   Ch. 80, Sch. I
627-2    6-21-2021   35.29
628      6-21-2021   50.05
629      6-21-2021   31.047
630      6-21-2021   31.048
631      6-21-2021   34.04
632      6-21-2021   34.10
633      6-21-2021   32.05
634      6-21-2021   32.04
636      3-21-2022   Ch. 80, Sch. I
638      2-22-2022   31.028
639      2-22-2022   31.065
640      2-22-2022   31.096
641      2-22-2022   133.40
642      2-22-2022   35.50
643      3-21-2022   34.07,
                     34.08
644      3-21-2022   31.064
645      3-21-2022   32.04
646      3-21-2022   35.30
647      3-21-2022   35.35
648      3-21-2022   91.25
649      3-21-2022   110.23
650      3-21-2022   35.50
651      3-21-2022   150.08
652      4-18-2022   52.10
653      4-18-2022   53.46
654      10-17-2022  51.04
655      10-17-2022  71.07
658      4-17-2023   52.10
659      4-17-2023   53.46
660      5-15-2023   33.05
                     78.01 -
661      6-19-2023   78.10,
                     78.99
663      10-16-2023  51.04
665      11-20-2023  31.025
666      11-20-2023  34.04
667      11-20-2023  34.10
668      11-20-2023  35.28
669      11-20-2023  35.29
670      11-20-2023  35.30
671      11-20-2023  35.48
672      11-20-2023  35.50
673      11-20-2023  94.30
674      11-20-2023  90.06
675      11-20-2023  130.02
677      5-20-2024   52.10
678      5-20-2024   53.46
682      11-25-2024  51.04
684      4-21-2025   91.24
685      4-21-2025   52.10
686      4-21-2025   53.46
687      4-21-2025   31.001
688      4-21-2025   31.005
689      4-21-2025   31.028
690      4-21-2025   31.047
691      4-21-2025   31.064
692      4-21-2025   34.01
693      4-21-2025   34.04
694      4-21-2025   34.07
695      4-21-2025   34.09
696      4-21-2025   34.10
697      4-21-2025   34.11
698      4-21-2025   35.11
700      4-21-2025   35.50
701      4-21-2025   35.50.01
702      4-1-2025    92.23
703      4-21-2025   110.52
704      4-21-2025   111.02
705      4-21-2025   111.03
706      4-21-2025   111.04
708      10-20-2025  51.04
                    
 
 
